Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code by City Council
[Adopted 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
Be it ordained and enacted by the City Council of the City of Pleasantville,
County of Atlantic, State of New Jersey, as follows:
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the City of Pleasantville,
including provisions of the 1982 Code, of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the City Council of the City of Pleasantville, as revised, codified
and consolidated into chapters and sections by General Code Publishers
Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 290, together with an
Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the City of Pleasantville," hereinafter known and referred to as the
"Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent
ordinances, including provisions of the 1982 Code, enacted prior to the
enactment of this Code, except such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly
saved from repeal or continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of
Pleasantville by impressing thereon the Seal of the city, as provided by law,
and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the
city, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during
all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Pleasantville" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-5
1:3
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Pleasantville, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of
this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the City Council,
which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of
Pleasantville to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days,
in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, including provisions of the 1982
Code, of a general and permanent nature adopted and in force on the date
of the adoption of this ordinance and not contained in the Code are hereby
repealed as of the effective date of this Adopting Ordinance, except as
hereinafter saved from repeal.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 12-8-1998.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of the city's
indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any legislation relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension
fund for municipal employees.
N. Any ordinance regulating rent control in the city.
O. All currently effective ordinances providing for the administration of
government, including but not limited to:
(1) Chapter 3 of the 1982 Code, Administration of Government, as
amended by Ord. Nos. 8-1985, 19-1985, 7-1987, 8-1987, 25-1987,
17-1992, 10-1995, 20-1995 and 53-1997.
(2) Chapter 11, Article I, of the 1982 Code, Municipal Court.
(3) Chapter 40 of the 1982 Code, Public Works Department, as
amended by Ord. Nos. 14-1986, 3-1996, 9-1997 and 12-1997.
(4) Ordinance No. 7-1991, Ward Commission.
(5) Ordinance No. 3-1994, Public Defender, as amended by Ord. No.
52-1997.
(6) Ordinance No. 16-1998, Department of Revenue and Finance.
P. All currently effective ordinances regulating personnel policies,
including but not limited to Chapter 34 of the 1982 Code, regarding
employee rules and regulations; and Ord. No. 26-1987, regarding
management and staff policies, as amended by Ord. Nos. 7-1995 and
19-1996.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.1 (Chapter
§ 1-13 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 1-14
1:6
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)
C. Nomenclature changes.
(1) Throughout the Code, the following names and terms are changed
as follows:
Former Title New Title
Building Regulations and
Permits Department
Building Department
Bureau of Fire Prevention Fire Subcode Official
Dog Warden Animal Control Officer
Building Inspector Building Subcode Official
Plumbing Inspector Plumbing Subcode Official
Electrical Inspector Electrical Subcode Official
Street Department Public Works Department
Director of Finance Director of Revenue and
Finance
Director of Water Pollution
Control
Superintendent of Public Works
Superintendent of Water
Pollution Control
Superintendent of Public Works
Board of Health Atlantic County Board of Health
(2) The following nomenclature changes are enacted in the specific
chapters cited:
(a) In Chapter 111, Buildings, Unfit, the terms "Public Officer" and
"Housing Division Director" are amended to read "Code
Enforcement Official."
(b) In Chapter 135, Fire Prevention, Article I, Hazardous
Materials, the term "Fire Official" is amended to read "Fire
Subcode Official."
(c) In Chapter 166, Mobile Homes, Article I, Trailer Coaches, the
term "BOCA National Building Code" is amended to read
"State Uniform Construction Code."
(d) In the following chapters, the term "Mercantile Appraiser" is
amended to read "Licensing Officer": Chapter 159, Littering,
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, articles and sections which were
amended, added or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a
footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
city offices.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-15. Gender-neutral language.
In the interpretation of wording in the Code of the City of Pleasantville, it is
the intention of the City Council that all words purporting the male gender
be interpreted to include the female gender as well, unless the context
precludes such interpretation.
Article III, Distribution of Commercial Advertisements;
Chapter 195, Peddling and Soliciting, Article I, Peddlers and
Hawkers, and Article III, Transient Merchants or Itinerant
Vendors; Chapter 203, Pool and Billiard Parlors; and Chapter
223, Sales, Special.
(e) In Chapter 235, Sewers and Sewage Disposal, the term "City
Health Physician" is amended to read "Atlantic County Board
of Health."
§ 1-14 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE II
Ordinances Adopted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new ordinances were
approved by the City Council for inclusion in the Code of the City of
Pleasantville. Such new ordinances are noted in the histories of the
individual chapters/articles as "Adopted by the City Council of the City of
Pleasantville during codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)."
During the course of routine supplementation, specific amendment dates
and ordinance numbers will be inserted where pertinent in the text. The
listing below sets forth each chapter and article affected by any such
legislation adopted during codification. The complete text of such
ordinances is on file in the office of the City Clerk where it may be inspected
during regular office hours.]
Chapter/Article Adoption Date Ordinance No.
Ch. 121, Construction
Contractors
2-17-1999 7-1999
Ch. 281, Art. III, 2-17-1999 8-1999
Recreational Vehicles and
Parks
Ch. 187, Art. II, Park and
Playground Rules and
Regulations
2-17-1999 9-1999
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
Chapter 8
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Minority business enterprise program — See
Ch. 12.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
§ 8-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AAP — Affirmative Action Program.
COMPLAINT — An employee's or applicant's dissatisfaction with any
request for redress from an act or failure to act on the part of management
which has affected an individual personally and adversely; a charge of
general discriminatory practices filed by an organization.
DISCRIMINATION — Acting or failing to act or unduly delaying any action
regarding any employee or applicant for employment because of race,
color, religion, sex, national or ethnic origin, age, physical disability or
membership in lawful organizations, in such a way that a person is
adversely affected in the area of employment with the city government,
except where the person's membership in one of these classes is a bona fide
obstacle to job performance.
EEO — Equal employment opportunity.
EEO COMMITTEE — A broad-based group of city employees and municipal
and public representatives to advise the EEO Officer and render decisions
in formal EEO complaint cases.
EEO OFFICER — The officer who is designated EEO Officer and is
responsible for directing all EEO and affirmative action programs for the
city government. Whenever AAO (Affirmative Action Officer) is used herein,
it shall mean and refer to the Equal Employment Officer (EEO).
ETHNIC ORIGIN — Specifies the cultural, regional or ethnic minority as
defined by the Appalachian Commission.
HEARING —
FORMAL — Any inquiry, forum, investigation or meeting held by the
EEO Committee at which compulsory adopted processes are invoked
A.
§ 1-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 8-1
8:10
MINORITY — Any member of an affected class by virtue of past
discrimination. The term "minority" is, therefore, meant to include those
who have been subject to discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion,
sex, national or ethnic origin, age, physical disability or membership in
lawful organizations. (All persons shall be entitled to redress and relief of
grievances in instances of discrimination, even if such discrimination is not
specifically enumerated above.)
MOBILITY — The provision of opportunities for upward and lateral
movement to comparable or higher classifications. It signifies a
commitment to better utilize employee talents and encompasses such
factors as status, salary and responsibility.
PERSONAL APPEARANCE — The outward appearance of any person,
irrespective of sex, with regard to hair style, beards or manner of dress. It
shall not relate, however, to the requirement of cleanliness, uniforms and
safety consciousness.
§ 8-2. Equal employment opportunity policy reaffirmation.
The City of Pleasantville does hereby reaffirm its policy to ensure equal
opportunity in employment for all persons and to prohibit discrimination
in employment because of color, race, religion, sex and national origin and
to promote the full realization of equal employment opportunity through
a continuing policy of equal opportunity employment practices in each
department of the city and to be an integral part of every aspect of
personnel policy and practice in the recruitment, employment,
advancement and treatment of employees and prospective employees of the
City of Pleasantville to the maximum extent possible, in keeping with the
predetermination settlement.
§ 8-3. Goals.2
The goals of the Affirmative Action Program are to ultimately establish and
maintain an integrated and balanced work force throughout the city to meet
effectively the needs of the citizens of Pleasantville.
§ 8-4. Objectives.
and record is prepared for the purpose of the EEO Committee's final
decision.
INFORMAL — Any inquiry, forum, investigation or meeting conducted
by the EEO Officer at which compulsory processes are not invoked and
a record is not prepared for the purpose of providing the basis of the
EEO Officer's final decision.
B.
A. The objectives of the Affirmative Action Program are as follows:
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 8-1 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § 8-4
8:11
§ 8-5. Enforcing officials' responsibilities.
(1) To establish responsibility for and provide guidelines for
implementation and conduct of the City of Pleasantville's
Affirmative Action Program (AAP).
(2) To establish realistic program goals and a career development
program and to develop and maintain a vigorous recruitment
program for the Affirmative Action Program (AAP).
(3) To obtain statistical information from city departments to evaluate
and analyze their needs.
(4) To evaluate personnel practices and selection processes that are
discriminatory or place artificial barriers to the employment of
minorities and women. Evaluations of all personnel procedures will
include and emphasize the critical and unique employment
problems faced by minorities and women.
(5) To implement and maintain an informational program for city
employees and the general public on the city's Affirmative Action
Program (AAP).
B. The long-range goal of the City of Pleasantville is to achieve equitable
representation of minorities and women at all job levels of city
employment and in specific occupational areas that will be consistent
with both population parity and/or available work force.
A. The City Administrator shall be responsible for the administration of the
city's Affirmative Action Program (AAP).
(1) The Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Officer
Specialist shall be recommended by a five-person committee
consisting of two persons designated by the President of City
Council, the President of the Mainland NAACP or his or her
designated representative, the President of the Concerned Parents
of Pleasantville3 or his or her designated representative and a fifth
party designated by a state or federal agency with responsibilities
in the area of community relations or equal employment
opportunity. The recommendation of the committee shall be subject
to the approval of Council.
(a) The Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Officer
Specialist shall be selected on the basis of his/her knowledge,
experience and abilities in the area of equal employment
opportunity.
(b) The Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Officer
Specialist shall serve at the pleasure of Council and receive
such salary and compensation as the Council shall from time to
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Parental Responsibility.
§ 8-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 8-5
8:12
time prescribe, which salary shall be payable from and out of
federal funding applicable thereto.
(c) The EEO/AAO Specialist shall perform such other duties as the
Council shall direct and as are needed and required in the City
Clerk's office.
(d) If the EEO/AAO Specialist should feel that such added duties
and responsibilities hamper his/her ability to properly carry
out and perform his/her primary responsibilities as EEO/AAO
Specialist, he/she may appeal the order of Council to the EEOA
Committee as stated in § 8-5C of this chapter.
(e) Prior to the dismissal of the EEO/AAO Specialist, he/she shall
be entitled to a public hearing and a statement for the reason
of his dismissal.
(2) The City Administrator will assure that department heads comply
with the goals and objectives of the AAP.
(3) The City Administrator will solicit support of the various employee
organizations and associations for the AAP.
(4) The City Administrator will submit an annual report to the Council
on the status of the AAP.
(5) The City Administrator shall, within budgetary limitations, provide
necessary administrative support for the AAO to effectively carry
out the AAP, which support shall include assistance in recruitment
programs, selection procedures, job classification and
restructuring, test validations, coordinating the development of
cultural awareness training programs and the development of a
reporting system to determine the results of actions on applications
from minorities and women in the selection process.
B. The Affirmative Action Officer shall be responsible for the
implementation of the AAP and shall serve as the advisor to the City
Administrator in planning and carrying out the plan for the city, as
officially adopted by the City Council.
(1) He shall maintain statistics on the equal employment opportunity
effort of the city and establish a periodic reporting system to
measure the implementation and progress of the AAP.
(2) He shall preview for the City Administrator the city's personnel
management practices at regular intervals to ensure their
conformity with national, state and local EEO laws and policies.
(3) He shall review and evaluate municipal direction and supervisory
performance with respect to the position, application and vigorous
enforcement of the policy of EEO.
§ 8-5 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § 8-5
8:13
(4) He shall develop and monitor the upward and lateral mobility
program for city employees.
(5) He shall coordinate and approve all training relative to the AAP.
(6) He shall serve as advisor to the Equal Employment Opportunity
Advisory Committee and attend their meetings.
(7) He shall establish contact with community groups, organizations
and individuals for involvement in programs of EEO.
(8) He shall assist city and department heads in establishing realistic
goals and guidelines essential to attainment of the objectives of the
city AAP.
(9) He shall confer with department heads to determine basis for
underutilization of women and minorities and, if such exists,
request and recommend corrective action.
(10)He shall review recruitment, selection, testing and promotional
practices and identify actions needed to eliminate discrimination
and artificial barriers.
(11)He shall conduct recruitment efforts in schools both at the
academic and vocational levels.
(12)He shall evaluate the effectiveness of departmental affirmative
action efforts periodically and make quarterly written reports to
the City Administrator and to City Council.
(13)He shall continuously inform all agencies who refer applicants to
the city service that the city is an equal opportunity employer and
that their referrals must not demonstrate bias.
(14)He shall develop a referral system whereby minority applicants
unable to obtain employment with the city may be directed to other
specific agencies where suitable vacancies may exist.
(15)He shall prepare a brochure for external distribution which
highlights the key features of the AAP. When representation of
employees is featured on brochures or similar publications, they
shall include both minority and nonminority men and women.
(16) The EEO Officer shall have the full resources of the City
Administrator's office available to him in the fulfillment of his
mission.
(17)He shall monitor the progress and effectiveness of the AAP, using
collected data to make periodic corrections of errant trends.
C. There shall be an Equal Employment Opportunity Advisory (EEOA)
Committee, being a broad-based group of city employees and municipal
and public representatives, to serve as advisory body to the Equal
§ 8-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 8-5
8:14
Employment Opportunity Officer and the City Administrator, and it shall
exercise such other powers as delegated by the City Council.
(1) The EEOA Committee's objective is to facilitate equal opportunity
for all employees in the city government. In actual function, the
Committee will seek to develop active steps to improve
opportunities for all minority groups. To carry out the work of the
Committee efficiently, at least the following four subcommittees,
and any other subcommittee deemed necessary, shall be
established:
(a) Recruitment and hiring.
(b) Promotion and training.
(c) Communications and counseling.
(d) Public contract administrations.
(2) The members of the EEOA Committee shall be nominated by the
City Administrator and approved by City Council and shall serve
during the pleasure of City Council and shall consist of:
(a) The Chairman of the Atlantic County Human Relations
Commission or his/her designee.
(b) Two members representing the minority work force, and two
members representing the nonminority work force.
(c) The EEO Officer (Chairman).
(d) One representative of the City Solicitor's office.
(e) Three representatives of line management.
(f) Three members of the minority general public.
(3) As minimum steps in the discharge of its responsibilities, the EEOA
Committee will:
(a) Ensure that the AAP is distributed to all current and future city
employees.
(b) Ensure that EEO related information is published in each issue
of the employee bulletin, if any.
(c) Identify and publicize opportunities for city employees to be
involved in EEO activities.
(d) Conduct regular review of the AAP (quarter-yearly) to improve
its effectiveness.
(e) Hold open committee meetings at least once a month.
§ 8-5 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § 8-5
8:15
§ 8-6. Establishment of departmental plans.
(f) Recommend appropriate action to the EEO Officer to meet
problems associated with supervisory and management
practices found to be in need of improvements.
(g) Participate in the evaluation of the AAP and all aspects of the
EEO Program.
(h) Advise on other special EEO programs.
(i) Recommend methods by which the city could take a more
specific and innovative approach to the employment,
promotion, training and utilization of minorities and women.
(j) Develop and certify all necessary procedures for conducting a
hearing.
(4) The EEOA Committee shall render an advisory opinion to the City
Administrator as to corrective action to be taken to remedy a
formal complaint of alleged discrimination. This exercise of
administrative prerogative in no way precludes parties from
pursuing relief from state or federal agencies or commissions, nor
shall any action taken by the EEO Committee have any binding
effect upon said state or federal agencies or commissions, except to
the extent that said agencies or commissions choose to adopt such
actions.
(5) The City Administrator shall determine the operating guidelines for
the EEOA Committee, subject to the approval of Council.
(6) The EEO Committee shall as, Phase 1 of the City of Pleasantville
AAP, collect and analyze raw statistics on the status of minority
employment in city government, it being essential that this survey
be taken so that an accurate, up-to-date data base is established for
future evaluation purposes. Such statistical survey/analysis will
also highlight those agencies of government most in need of
assistance in eradicating employment imbalances. The City
Administrator and the City Solicitor shall provide the format for
making the statistical employment survey, in accordance with the
federal and state requirements.
(7) The City Administrator and the Affirmative Action Officer shall
assure that all contractors, subcontractors and suppliers of goods
and services to the city certify that they are equal opportunity
employers of minorities and females and meet all state and federal
laws, regulations and guidelines.
A. Department affirmative action will identify obstacles which have barred
members of minority and women's groups from employment or
advancement at the departmental level and will include both yearly and
§ 8-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 8-6
8:16
§ 8-7. Recruitment.
long-range goals and timetables for achieving appropriate
representation of women and minorities within their department.
B. Departmental goals should be significant, measurable and attainable
and be designated to correct identifiable deficiencies.
(1) Goals should provide for specific planned results with timetables
for completion.
(2) Goals should take into consideration plans for expansion and
turnover of the work force with the presumption that qualified or
qualifiable minorities and women are in the area work force.
(3) Goals should reflect desired levels of achievement based upon an
analysis to resolve imbalances in its work force.
(4) Goals should be coupled with adoption of genuine and effective
internal techniques and procedures to locate qualified members of
women and minorities.
C. Department plans should be submitted within 90 days after the
adoption of the city's Affirmative Action Plan.
(1) The city's AAP is predicated on a five-year goal. After determining
employee turnover for the past five years, all departments shall
make a projection of their anticipated hiring activity for the next
five years. If a department hired 10 people in the category of
craftsmen since June 1, 1972, then that department shall anticipate
that it will hire 10 craftsmen in the next five years. It is realized
that precisely the numbers projected may not be hired; however,
this kind of projection is necessary in order to determine an
appropriate hiring goal for minority employees in each job
category.
(2) Once a projection of overall hiring activity has been made, each
department shall then establish goals for the number of minority
and women employees it intends to add to its work force in each
category where there is presently an underutilization. To be
acceptable, goals shall be based on the number of hires anticipated
in each job category, and in departments where it is found that the
existing percentage of minority and women employees is below the
level consistent with parity on the basis of population and/or
available work force, the sum total of all future hiring shall never
include a number of minority and/or women employees that is less
than 50% of the total future hiring until the goal is achieved.
A. Establishment of an aggressive recruitment program to attract
minorities and women is primarily the responsibility of the City
Administrator. The City Affirmative Action Officer and departments will
support this effort as it relates to their individual needs.
§ 8-6 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § 8-7
8:17
§ 8-8. Testing and selection process.
§ 8-9. Training programs and career education.
B. Methods utilized in carrying out recruiting efforts shall be expanded to
include but not be limited to the following:
(1) Dissemination of notices of city job openings to minority group
organizations serving the minority community.
(2) Maintaining of a mailing list with minority organizations, women's
groups, governmental agencies, educational institutions and other
related agencies that direct themselves to the employment of
minorities and women.
(3) Developing and maintaining a list of prominent locations in the
minority community for the posting of job announcements.
(4) Establishing cooperative working relationships with Manpower
programs operating within the community.
(5) Establishing communication and cooperative working relationships
between the AAO and leaders of women's and minority
organizations in the community.
(6) Soliciting and obtaining recruiting assistance from women's and
minority organizations in the community.
(7) Establishing and maintaining continuing recruitment programs
with high schools and colleges and vocational and technical schools
that have a substantial number of minority and female students.
(8) Utilizing radio and television public service time as a form of
communications in areas where there are large minority audiences.
A. Preemployment written and performance tests, when utilized, will be
reviewed to assure that they are job-related and culturally unbiased.
B. Employment standards. All hiring standards used in the selection
process, such as height, weight, education levels, previous work
experience or other standards will be realistically related to job
requirements and will be reduced to writing. City employment
standards shall not be higher than needed to perform the duties and
responsibilities of the job to be performed.
C. Consideration will be given to use of innovative selection procedures
for such positions as require work-related special skills and ability.
D. Employees will be encouraged to participate in developmental
programs sponsored by the city or other governmental or community
agencies to qualify for upward job mobility.
§ 8-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 8-9
8:18
§ 8-10. Discrimination complaints.
A. The city shall develop training programs and support career education
programs which provide academic and job skills to their permanent
employees. This training will include upward job mobility from the
entry level to the paraprofessional positions.
B. Employee training should be related to the job class or duties to which
assigned.
C. Subject to budget limitations and department head approval, efforts
will be made to afford employees time off from work to attend related
training and education classes.
D. There shall be cooperation with agencies to develop meaningful
training curriculum relevant to employment with the city.
E. Subject to budget limitations and department head approval and
consistent with present city policy, financial reimbursement, including
tuition and books, shall be considered for personnel in entry level and
paraprofessional positions for approved relevant programs at colleges
and training institutions.
F. Supervisors and training officers shall provide career counseling to
minority and women employees and shall recommend and encourage
their attendance at relevant in-service training and educational
programs which will prepare and assist them in securing job
advancement.
A. Protection from adverse actions. All employees shall be free from any
and all restraint, interference, coercion or reprisal on the part of their
associates, supervisors and department heads in making any complaint
or appeal, in serving as representatives of a complainant, in appearing
as witnesses or in seeking information. The above principles apply with
equal force after a complaint has been adjudicated. Should those
principles be violated, the facts shall be brought to the attention of the
EEO Officer and/or appropriate state or federal agencies or
commissions by the aggrieved party, his representatives or any person
affected so that appropriate action may be taken, up to and including
dismissal of the wrongful party.
B. Resolution of complaints. Complaints of discriminatory actions and
practices shall be resolved through either an informal process under
the guidance of the EEO Officer, a formal process conducted by the EEO
Committee or a combination of both, or by federal or state appellate
process.
(1) Informal. The EEO Officer is designated to act in an effort to
mediate or conciliate informal complaints. However, informal
complaints should be resolved generally at the department or
supervisory level through the City Administrator with concurrence
from the EEO Officer.
§ 8-9 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § 8-10
8:19
(a) When an informal complaint is received by the EEO Officer, a
memorandum shall be prepared by the EEO Officer to the City
Administrator advising him of the complaint and the
circumstances of such complaint.
(b) The EEO Officer shall ensure prompt consideration of each
complaint filed with his office. If, after the investigation of the
complaint, the EEO Officer concludes that the complaint is not
valid or no discriminatory act has occurred, he may dismiss the
charge. Any complainant adversely affected by the dismissal of
the charge retains all other administrative and legal remedies.
(c) If, after a consideration of the complaint, the EEO Officer
believes that an act of discrimination may have occurred,
within 15 work days after said determination is made, the EEO
Officer shall personally attempt to conciliate the matter. If the
parties to the complaint agree on a resolution by way of
conciliation, the terms of such resolution shall be set forth in a
written enforceable consent agreement, which shall not
constitute an admission of committing a discriminatory act.
(d) If either the respondent or the complainant fails to comply with
any obligation or requirement which forms part of any such
decision, said decision may be enforced by executive order
from the office of the City Administrator.
(2) Formal. Any informal complaint not adjudicated to the satisfaction
of either or both parties by the EEO Officer may thereafter be
handled through formal complaint procedures, as well as other
administrative and legal remedies.
(a) Formal hearings may be convened in cases in which
conciliation or mediation has failed or where either party so
requests. A formal complaint shall be submitted in writing,
shall be signed and shall state the basis for the complaint.
However, a statement from the complainant describing the
conduct and/or conditions complained of with greater
particularity may be required by the EEO Officer or the EEO
Committee.
(b) Formal hearing procedure.
[1] Step 1. A complaint of discrimination shall initially be
referred to the EEO Committee through the EEO Officer.
The EEO Officer shall consult with committee members to
ascertain the date, time and place for the hearing. All
hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the
administrative hearing procedures as set up by the EEO
Committee. Written notification of the hearing shall be
given to both the complainant and the respondent and
shall include the date, time and place of the hearing. The
hearing shall be recorded and the complainant and
§ 8-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 8-10
8:20
respondent shall be permitted to have access to the
record, but any transcription requested by either party
shall be at its expense. Both parties or their
representatives and members of the EEO Committee shall
be permitted to question all witnesses and to present all
relevant evidence. After hearing all of the evidence and
arguments, the Committee will have prepared a written
decision based solely on the evidence presented at the
hearing.
[2] Step 2. The EEO Officer shall certify the decision of the
Committee and dispose of it within 10 days by notifying
the complainant and respondent in writing of the decision.
[3] Step 3. Within five days of notification of the decision made
by the Committee, the complainant, if having determined
that the decision has not rendered satisfactory judgment,
shall be advised in writing by the EEO Officer of his further
rights of appeal to state and federal agencies.
Transcriptions of record shall be made at city expense for
the appeal.
(c) A complaint may be filed by any employee or applicant related
to employment in the city government who believes that
discrimination related to employment has been practiced
against him/her or that an employment practice in the city
government has or will result in discrimination in employment
against him/her. A complaint of general discriminatory
employment may also be filed by an employee or applicant for
employment or by an organization; provided, however, that
upon request of the EEO Officer, the complainant shall furnish
to the EEO Officer names of individuals whom the complainant
suspects are adversely affected by those practices, and such
names shall be held confidential by the EEO Officer upon
request of such individuals.
(d) All complaints shall be submitted within 180 calendar days of
the alleged discriminatory act giving rise to the complaint, and
the EEO Officer is charged to notify the accused party of the
particulars of such complaint within three working days from
the time of its submission.
(e) A complainant may request in writing an individual or an
organization to represent him in the processing of his
complaint and is entitled to the advice of a representative at all
stages in the proceeding. If the representative designated by
the complainant is an employee of the city government, such
employee, as well as an employee-complainant, shall have a
reasonable amount of administrative leave with pay, if he is in
pay status, for the purpose of appearing at any hearing on the
complaint or conciliation effort. The rights and privileges set
§ 8-10 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § 8-10
8:21
§ 8-11. Additional remedies.
Any person aggrieved by a violation of this chapter who has exhausted the
remedies herein provided may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction
for appropriate relief, including but not limited to:
§ 8-12. Applicability.
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the
application of the provision to other persons not similarly situated or to
other circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
Chapter 9
AMBULANCE SERVICE
§ 9-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of the chapter to establish a professional ambulance
service in the City of Pleasantville which will provide competent, responsive
and safe medical transportation services for the residents and visitors of
the city. Such services are to be provided on an emergency basis as well
as a general medical transportation basis. This chapter establishes the
Pleasantville EMS within the Pleasantville Fire Department.
§ 9-2. Establishment of Pleasantville EMS.
There is hereby established in the City of Pleasantville the Pleasantville
EMS, which shall be administered and managed through and be a part of
the Pleasantville Fire Department under the direction of the Chief of the
Pleasantville Fire Department. The operation of the ambulance services
provided by the Pleasantville EMS will be by the personnel of the
Pleasantville Fire Department. The establishment of the Pleasantville EMS
shall be pursuant to and in accordance with the regulations of the New
Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services and shall be licensed
forth in this subsection shall also be available to any person
whose alleged conduct is the cause of the complaint. Any
person or organization requested to serve in a representative
capacity retains the right to deny such a request.
(f) The provisions of this section shall be published and made
available to all city employees.
A. An injunction, including an order compelling compliance with this
chapter.
B. Such other and further relief as may seem appropriate to the court for
the enforcement of this chapter and the elimination of violations
thereof.
§ 8-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 9-2
8:22
in Department of Health and Senior Services and shall be licensed in
accordance with such regulations as administered by the Office of
Emergency Medical Services for licensure of mobility assistance vehicle
services and ambulance services.
§ 9-3. Billing procedures.
The Pleasantville EMS will provide for paid ambulance services in
accordance with the provisions of its licensure from the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services. Billing for services provided
by the Pleasantville EMS may be conducted through an independent third
party billing contractor as may be retained from time to time by the City
Council by resolution. Funds received from such billing services shall be
paid into the general account of the City of Pleasantville. The collection
of such fees and the coordination between the city and any third-party
independent billing contractor shall be overseen and monitored jointly by
the Chief Financial Officer of the City of Pleasantville and the Fire Chief.
§ 9-4. Fees. [Added 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 13-2007; amended
4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 10-2009]
The fee schedule for ambulance services as provided here within by the City
of Pleasantville Fire Department/EMS is as follows:
A. Basic EMS for treatment on scene and while en route to hospital: $625.
B. Mileage fee per mile for transportation to hospital: $14.
C. "Light rescue" is defined as maintaining battery issues, fluid cleanup,
stabilization of vehicles, use of hand tools, hazard control, and other
scene-related light rescue operations: $200.
D. "Medium rescue" is defined as operations that include the use of power
tools and hydraulic rescue tools to perform activities such as opening or
removing doors to provide access to patients as well as stabilizing
vehicles and performing hazardous assessments: $450.
E. "Heavy rescue" is defined as operations that include any technical
rescue procedures, including but not, limited to water and ice rescue,
rope rescue, confined space rescue, high angle rescue, trench rescue or
structural collapse rescue. Heavy rescue also includes motor vehicle
rescue that includes the use of power tools and hydraulic tools to
perform operations such as partial or full roof removal, front/dash
displacement, third door access, and separating vehicles from one
another: $800.
§ 9-2 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION § 9-4
8:23
Chapter 12
BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM, MINORITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affirmative action — See Ch. 8.
§ 12-1. Scope.
These provisions concerning minority business participation shall apply to
all construction contracts awarded by the city in an amount exceeding
$75,000.
§ 12-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION OFFICER — The official in charge of affirmative
action for the city.
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT — Any prime contract to be performed for or
on behalf of the city for construction, alteration or repair of any building.
CONTRACTOR — Any party performing or offering to perform a
construction contract with the city.
MINORITY BUSINESS — Any business enterprise that is owned and
controlled by one or more minority persons.
MINORITY PERSON — An individual who is black, Hispanic, Asian,
American Indian, Alaskan native or female.
OWNED AND CONTROLLED — A business which is:
PROJECT — The geographical location where the contract or subcontract
work is performed.
SUBCONTRACT — A binding legal relationship involving performance of a
contract that is part of a construction contract.
A sole proprietorship legitimately owned and managed by an individual
who is a minority person.
A.
A partnership or joint venture controlled and managed by minority
persons in which at least 51% of the beneficial ownership interest
legitimately is held by minority persons.
B.
A corporation or other entity actually controlled and managed by
minority persons and in which at least 51% of the beneficial ownership
interest is held by minority persons.
C.
§ 9-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 12-2
12:24
SUBCONTRACTOR — A third party that is engaged by the contractor to
perform, under a subcontract, all or part of the work included in an original
contract.
§ 12-3. Obligation of bidders.
A. Bidders shall seek to achieve a goal of not less than thirty-percent
overall involvement of minority business firms. The percentage of work
being performed by a minority business should be calculated on the
basis of the proportion of total dollar value of work subcontracted,
including materials supplied by the minority subcontractor. They shall
also seek employment goals, to include participation of a minimum of
50% of minorities and/or residents of the City of Pleasantville.
[Amended 9-7-1994 by Ord. No. 11-1994]
B. The contractor's commitment to the goal of 30% for minority business
utilization shall constitute a commitment to make every good faith
effort to meet such a goal by subcontracting with minority business
firms. These efforts may include the following: [Amended 9-7-1994 by
Ord. No. 11-1994]
(1) Notification to community organizations that the bidder has
subcontractor opportunities available and maintenance of records
of the organizations' responses.
(2) Maintenance by the bidder of a file of the name and address of each
minority business subcontractor referred to it and action taken
with respect to each such referred subcontractor.
(3) Dissemination of the bidder's minority business policy externally by
informing and discussing it with all and technical assistance
sources; by advertising in news media; and by notifying and
discussing it with all subcontractor and suppliers.
(4) The bidder's engagement in specific and continuing personal (both
written and oral) recruitment efforts directed at minority business
contractor organizations and minority business assistance
organizations.
(5) Subdivision by the bidder of as many trade items as prudently
possible into small contractual work elements to provide for a scale
of trade activities which will enable small minority business
subcontractors to complete successfully with large trade
subcontractors.
(6) Where reasonable, development by the bidder of on-the-job
technical assistance and participation, where appropriate, in
technical assistance programs relevant to the bidder's needs.
(7) Where reasonable, the bidder may provide for the relaxation of
bond requirements, particularly for small firms providing labor
only.
§ 12-2 BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM, § 12-3
12:25
§ 12-4. Assistance of Affirmative Action Officer.
§ 12-5. Violations and penalties; notice; debarment.
C. The bidder shall keep records of all its efforts to meet its obligation
under these provisions, and such records shall be available to the
Affirmative Action Officer on request.
D. Bidders shall be required to submit with their bids a minority business
enterprise (MBE) utilization report on a form to be supplied by the city.
Bidders shall submit a revised MBE utilization report after contract
award and before receiving their notice to proceed.
E. The Affirmative Action Officer shall investigate all proposed MBE's to
ascertain whether they meet the definition of a minority business
contained herein. Contractors shall be advised of the results of this
investigation, and any proposed minority business not complying with
the definition of a minority business contained herein shall not be
credited to the contractor's ten-percent goal.
A. The Affirmative Action Officer shall maintain a list of minority business
enterprises (MBE's) in the area and shall make such list available to all
bidders on city contracts.
B. The Affirmative Action Officer shall, on request, meet with bidders to
advise them on methods of obtaining the largest feasible MBE
participation in their contracts.
C. The Affirmative Action Officer shall develop an outreach program to
contact MBE's in the area and advise them on methods of participating
in contracts with the city as contractors or subcontractors.
A. If the contractor fails to make every good faith effort to award at least
30% of the total contract amount to MBE's or fails substantially to make
sch awards, the Affirmative Action Officer shall issue a written alert
notice to the contractor. The alert notice shall explain in sufficient detail
the facts of the alleged violation. [Amended 9-7-1994 by Ord. No.
11-1994]
B. If the alleged violation explained in the alert notice is not corrected or
justified to the satisfaction of the city within five days after it is received
by the contractor, a notice of violation shall be issued by the
Administrator to the contractor. The notice of violation shall explain in
sufficient detail the facts of the alleged continuing violation. On issuing
a notice of violation, the Administrator shall notify the alleged violator
that it shall submit, within four days after it has received the issuance, a
written statement explaining why it is not in violation of these
provisions or any explanation of how it will correct any such violation.
C. After the contractor has made a timely submission of the written
explanation required pursuant to Subsection B above, the contractor
may, within two days, request a meeting with Affirmative Action Officer
§ 12-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 12-5
12:26
Chapter 13
BUSINESS ENTERPRISE SET-ASIDE PROGRAM, VETERAN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affirmative action — See Ch. 8. Minority Business Enterprise Program — See
Ch. 12.
and Administrator. Prior to or at such meeting, the Administrator or
Affirmative Action Officer may conduct interviews and require from
appropriate parties the submission of additional information as they
deem necessary to determine whether the alleged violation has
occurred.
D. Corrective measures.
(1) No later than 30 days after a violation notice has been issued, the
Administrator shall issue a determination of whether the contractor
is in violation of these provisions, and if the Administrator
determines that there is a current violation he/she shall
recommend to the Council, where appropriate, corrective
measures which may include the following:
(a) Debarment of the contractor from all contracts with the city for
a period of up to five years or until the contractor complies
with the required obligation or agrees to adhere to a
compliance schedule approved by the Affirmative Action
Officer; provided, however, that a debarment may only be
ordered after the Council holds a hearing for the contractor
and determines that a debarment would be appropriate.
(b) Termination or suspension of the contract; provided, however,
that a contract termination or suspension may only be ordered
after the Council holds a hearing for the contractor and
determines that a debarment would be appropriate.
(c) Referring the record of the violation determination proceeding
to the appropriate official for enforcement actions under the
Law Against Discrimination.4
(d) Commencing an action as a beneficiary or third party
beneficiary of the contract.
(2) Such recommendations shall be made to the Council, which shall
determine the appropriate corrective measure to be applied.
4. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq.
§ 12-5 BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM, § 13-1
12:27
§ 13-1. Purpose.
The purpose of implementing the provisions of the City's qualified Veteran
Business Enterprise's "VBE" Set-Aside Program is to provide preference to
VBEs for the opportunity to bid and be awarded selected City contracts
in an amount up to 1% of the City's purchases, services and construction
contracts for qualified veterans' business enterprise.
§ 13-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
CITY — The City of Pleasantville.
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT — Any agreement for the erection, repair or
alteration of any building, structure, bridge, roadway or other improvement
to real property.
COUNTY — The County of Atlantic.
QUALIFIED VETERAN BUSINESS ENTERPRISE — The meaning set forth
at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-41(i), namely a business which has its principal place
of business in this state, is independently owned and operated, is at least
25% owned and controlled by a veteran or that wherein at least 25%
of the required workforce for the contract are veterans, and 25% of the
labor hours charged to the contract are accrued by employees who are
veterans including new hires if additional workers are required to perform
the contract, and is qualified pursuant to section 25 of P.L.1971, c. 198
(N.J.S.A. 40A:11-25).
SET-ASIDE CONTRACTS —
TOTAL PROCUREMENTS — All purchases, contracts or acquisitions of the
City, whether by competitive bidding, single-source contracting, or other
method of procurement, as prescribed or permitted by law.
VETERAN — The meaning set forth at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-41(h), namely the
same meaning as set forth in Subsection b. of N.J.S.A. 11A:5-1, except that
the veteran shall present to the Adjutant General of the Department of
Military and Veterans' Affairs sufficient evidence of a record of service and
receive a determination of status no later than the date established for the
submission of bids.
§ 13-3. Goals; revisions.
A contract for goods, equipment, construction or services, which is
designated as a contract for which bids are invited and accepted only
from a qualified veteran business enterprise;
A.
B. A portion of a contract when that has been so designated; or
C. Any other purchase or procurement so designated.
§ 13-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 13-3
12:28
§ 13-4. Effect on provisions.
If a City contract, construction, service or procurement, which would
otherwise be subject to the provisions of this chapter, is or becomes subject
to federal or state laws which conflict with this program or actions thereof,
federal or state law shall apply, and the contract shall be interpreted and
enforced accordingly.
§ 13-5. Implementation.
In the implementation of the City's qualified veteran-owned business setaside
program and pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-43:
A. All fiscal year beginning January 1, 2014, and for every year thereafter,
the goal for the qualified veteran business enterprise set-aside program
shall be 1% of the City's purchases, services and construction contracts.
B. The City Council may revise the goals established herein by subsequent
ordinance.
C. The above-stated percentages relate to the total dollar value of all City
contracting departments to be set aside for qualified veteran business
enterprises as goals for the City to achieve by the end of each fiscal
year.
A. The City may advertise the qualified veteran business enterprise setaside
program on its electronic sign, on the City television station, on
its website, and in any other media it deems appropriate in an attempt
to identify qualified veteran business enterprises.
B. The Administrator shall recommend to the City Council a contract,
subcontract or other means of procurement as a set-aside contract if it
is likely to receive bids from at least two VBEs at a fair and reasonable
price.
C. If it is determined by the Finance/Purchasing Department that two bids
cannot be obtained or that acceptance of the low responsible bid will
result in the payment of an unreasonable price, the Finance/Purchasing
Department may recommend to the City Council that the bids be
resolicited on an unrestricted basis.
D. Upon recommendation from the Administrator designation(s) of
contracts and/or subcontracts as set-aside contracts shall be made by
the City Council prior to advertisement, and notice of such designation
shall be included in the advertisement.
E. The City Auditor shall include in the audit a report at the end of each
fiscal year identifying each contract awarded as a result of its qualified
veteran business enterprise set-aside program.
F. Set-aside designation, as described in Subsection B, shall be made prior
to any advertisement for bids (if required). Notice of such designation
§ 13-3 BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM, § 13-5
12:29
§ 13-6. Finance/Purchasing Department.
With respect to all contracts and procurements, it shall be the Finance/
Purchasing Department's authority and responsibility to:
§ 13-7. Certification.
shall be included in the advertisement not less than 10 days prior to the
date fixed for receiving bids.
A. Ensure, through the certification procedure herein provided, that
qualified businesses taking advantage of this set-aside program are
legitimate VBEs.
B. Maintain a listing of known VBE businesses in the proximate area for
referral by the City.
C. Have access to all City records and files which relate to construction,
service and procurement contracts in order to monitor and review
compliance.
A. To ensure that only qualified businesses which meet the veteran
ownership or employment requirements set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:11-41(i) in both form and substance are courted towards the goals'
requirements set forth in this chapter, any veteran-owned business,
including a joint venture, desiring to participate in City set-aside
program must be certified by the Finance/Purchasing Department as a
legitimate VBE.
B. Any business wishing to be certified as a VBE business shall apply to the
Finance/Purchasing Department for such certification and shall
complete all forms and supply all documentation required by the
Finance/Purchasing Department for such application.
C. The Finance/Purchasing Department will evaluate the submitted
information to determine whether the applicant meets the criteria for
qualified veteran business enterprises. Prior to making a certification,
the Finance/Purchasing Department may, in their discretion, request an
interview with the applicant. Failure of an applicant to comply with
requests for information or documentation may result in a
determination of certification status based on the information supplied
or a suspension of the application for certification.
D. Following certification, the Finance/Purchasing Department may
require the business to furnish additional information from time to time
in order to establish its continued eligibility for certification.
E. Upon becoming certified, a business shall immediately notify the
Finance/Purchasing Department if there is a change in the business
that affects its status as a VBE, including changes in ownership, percent
of veterans on contract staffing, control or management.
§ 13-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 13-7
12:30
§ 13-8. Decertification.
F. If a business is denied certification, the Finance/Purchasing
Department shall notify the business, in writing (notice shall be sent by
regular mail and return receipt requested to the address provided by
the business), of the reasons for its determination. The business may
appeal the denial to the City Administrator or his designee, who shall
conduct a hearing at which the business shall have the opportunity to
present witnesses and documents in support of its application for
certification. No appeals will be considered if filed later than 15 days
from the date of the delivery or attempted delivery by the post office of
the return receipt requested notice and/or 20 days after the date of the
notice sent by regular mail. Businesses that are denied certification
may not reapply for certification for a period of six months from the
date of denial.
G. The right of the City to evaluate a bidder or contractor's ability to
satisfy financial, technical or other criteria separate and apart from the
certification process provided for in this program is not altered by this
chapter.
H. The certification granted pursuant to this section shall entitle a
business to participate in any category of contract or procurement for
which it qualifies. The certification shall not be considered contract- or
project-specific. The City may, but shall not be required to, delay the
award of any contract pending the appeal of the Finance/Purchasing
Department decision to deny certification.
A. A VBE may be decertified for failure to meet the certification standards
set forth in § 13-10 and for the following reasons:
(1) For providing false or misleading information to the Finance/
Purchasing Department during the certification process.
(2) If the VBE is no longer an ongoing business entity.
(3) If the business entity has changed to the extent that it is no longer
owned and controlled by veterans or does not employ a sufficient
number of veterans pursuant to the requirements of this program.
(4) For failure to report to the City, within 10 days, any determination
of the federal government or any state government, municipality or
school board, or any department, subdivision, agency or authority
of the federal government or any state government, municipality or
school board denying or revoking the certification of the business
as a veteran's-business enterprise.
B. Upon review of the documentation concerning decertification, the
Finance/Purchasing Department shall promptly decide the issue and
notify the business of the decision in writing. The business may appeal
the decision to the City Administrator or his designee in accordance
with the provisions of § 13-9F. Reasons for decertifying a business shall
§ 13-7 BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM, § 13-8
12:31
§ 13-9. Recertification.
A certified VBE shall submit any information requested by the Finance/
Purchasing Department annually to ascertain whether such business is still
a qualified VBE pursuant to this program. If it is determined that the annual
submission of information has changed to such an extent that the VBE
status has changed, affecting the certified status, the Finance/Purchasing
Department may recommend that the business be required to reapply for
certification pursuant to this program.
§ 13-10. Certification standards.
To determine whether a business shall be recommended by the Finance/
Purchasing Department to be certified as a legitimate VBE, the following, in
conjunction with information submitted by the applicant, shall be used:
be expressed by certified mail. The decertified business may not
reapply for certification for a period of time to be determined by the
City Administrator and/or his designee, but in no event longer than a
period of one year.
A. Eligible VBEs under this program shall be independent businesses.
There shall be conclusive evidence that the ownership and control of
such business is real, substantial and continuing and shall go beyond
the pro forma ownership of the business as reflected in its ownership
documents. The VBE owners shall enjoy the customary interests of
ownership. They shall share in the risks and profits commensurate with
their interest of ownership. Recognition of the business as separate
entity for tax or corporate purposes is not necessarily sufficient for
recognition as a VBE. To determine the legitimacy of an independent
VBE, the Finance/Purchasing Department shall consider all relevant
factors concerning ownership and control of business assets, including
but not limited to the date the business was established, whether its
resources for the work of the contract are adequate and the degree to
which financial, equipment-leasing and other relationships with non-
VBE firms vary from industry practice.
B. The VBE's owners shall have the power to direct or cause management
and policy directions of the firm/business as well as make major
decisions on matters of management, policy and operations. The firm
shall not be subject to any restrictions limiting the customary
discretions of the veteran owners. This shall include provisions in
bylaws, partnership agreements or charter requirements for
cumulative voting rights or otherwise that prevent the veteran owners,
without the cooperation or vote of any owner who is not a veteran, from
making a business decision of the firm.
C. Where non-veteran owners of the firm are disproportionately
responsible for the firm's operation, then, by the standards of this
program, the firm is not controlled by veterans and shall not be
§ 13-8 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 13-10
12:32
§ 13-11. Violations and penalties.
considered a VBE business within the program's meaning on the basis
of veteran ownership.
D. In establishing a status of a legitimate VBE, all securities which
constitute qualifying ownership and/or control of a corporation shall be
held directly by veterans. Securities held in trust or by any guardian for
a minor shall not be considered as held by a veteran in determining the
ownership and/or control of a corporation.
E. Capital or expertise contributed by veteran owners to acquire their
interest in the firm shall be real and substantial. A promise to
contribute capital, a note payable to the firm or its owners who are not
veterans or the mere participation as an employee, rather than as a
manager, shall be examples of insufficient contributions.
F. In determining eligibility as a VBE, in addition to the above standards,
the Finance/Purchasing department shall give special consideration to
the following circumstances:
(1) VBEs which are newly formed and whose ownership and/or control
have changed since the date and/or time of the advertisement of
the contract shall be closely monitored to determine the reasons
and the relationship between the timing, formation and/or change
in the firm.
(2) Careful scrutiny and review of previous and/or continuing and/or
time of the relationships between or among present owners shall
be conducted to ensure that the employer/owner has the
management responsibilities pursuant to this program.
(3) Any relationship between a VBE and a non-veteran-owned business
having interest in the VBE shall be carefully monitored to
determine if the interest of the VBE conflicts with the ownership
and control requirements of this program.
G. Joint ventures may be eligible to compete as VBEs under this program,
provided that the VBE partner of the joint venture meets the eligibility
standards of a VBE set forth herein and the VBE partner shares in the
ownership, control and management responsibilities, the risks and
profits of the joint venture and the VBE partner is responsible for a
clearly defined portion of the work to be performed.
A. When the City determines, after hearing, that a business has been
classified as a VBE on the basis of false information knowingly supplied
by the business and has been awarded a contract to which it would not
otherwise have been entitled under this chapter, the City may:
(1) Assess against the business any difference between the contract
and what the City's cost would have been if the contract had not
been awarded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 13-10 BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM, § 13-11
12:33
§ 13-12. Report.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-48, the City Administrator and/or Chief
Financial Officer shall submit a report to Council describing the City's
efforts in attaining the set-aside goals and the percentage of the dollar value
of total procurements awarded to VBE. Council shall publish a list of the
City's attainments in the immediately preceding fiscal year, including the
municipal or county average, in a newspaper circulate in the municipality
by March 1 of each year.
§ 13-13. Severability.
Should any portion of this chapter be declared unconstitutional or
impermissible by a court of competent jurisdiction, said declaration shall
not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which shall continue in full
force and effect.
Chapter 16
CLAIMS APPROVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61. Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 147.
(2) Assess against the business a penalty in an amount of not more
than 10% of the amount of the contract involved.
(3) Bar the business from transacting business with the City for a
period of one year.
B. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the violator from facing
criminal sanctions for false swearing and other crimes that may be
applicable under the New Jersey Criminal Code.
§ 13-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 13-13
16:34
ARTICLE I
Claims Approval and Payment
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 9 of the 1982
Code]
§ 16-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BLANKET PURCHASE ORDER — A purchase order for goods or services to
be delivered or provided at periodic intervals in cases where more favorable
terms can be obtained by entering into such an arrangement with a given
customer or vendor.
CITY — The City of Pleasantville.
CITY ADMINISTRATOR — The duly appointed City Administrator of the City
of Pleasantville.
CLAIMS — Invoices, bills or vouchers of other persons seeking payment for
materials supplied or services rendered to the city.
CONFIRMING PURCHASE ORDER — A purchase order originated
subsequent to the selection or delivery of goods and services in cases where
a purchase order in advance could not be obtained due to emergency need.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — An employee of the city designated by the City
Council as being in charge of a department.
PURCHASE ORDER — A document authorizing a vendor or other person to
furnish goods or services to the city and setting forth details as to quantity,
type, condition, price and terms of sale, etc.
PURCHASING AGENT — An employee appointed by the City Council under
the supervision of the City Administrator to determine the most economical
sources of supply, the most favorable prices and the most economical
ordering quantities, to issue purchase orders, and to discharge such other
duties as are normally assigned to a Purchasing Agent.
RECEIVING REPORT — A written record usually submitted by a vendor
or transportation company itemizing materials or services furnished to the
city, which, when signed and dated by a duly authorized employee of the
city, constitutes evidence of the receipt of goods or services.
TREASURER — The duly appointed Treasurer of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 16-2. Purchase orders.
A. There is hereby established a system of purchase orders. Purchase
orders shall be on forms determined and approved by the City
Treasurer and shall be in quadruplicate. A purchase order must state
the department and line item of the budget to be charged. A copy shall
be forwarded by the originator to the City Administrator. Three copies
shall be delivered to the vendor, one of which the vendor utilizes as his
§ 16-1 CLAIMS APPROVAL § 16-2
16:35
§ 16-3. Duties of Purchasing Agent.
The Purchasing Agent shall:
voucher. The vendor must attach to the voucher his claim or invoice,
and the other copy will serve as a receiving report. The final copies will
be retained by the Purchasing Agent and the originating department
head for his records, for the period required by statute.
B. Insofar as possible, it is intended that all orders for the purchase of
material, equipment or supplies or for the furnishing of labor or
services, other than professional, shall be placed only after a properly
prepared written purchase order has been originated by the Purchasing
Agent. In addition, where purchases of materials or services do not lend
to the giving of specific orders prior to delivery, or where, due to the
need for obtaining the items or services quickly, it is not possible to
issue the purchase order in the normal manner, such purchase will be
exempt from the requirements for written purchase orders in advance.
In such instances, confirming purchase orders will be prepared
subsequent to delivery. Copies of confirming purchase orders are to be
routed in the same manner as regular purchase orders. Within 24 hours
a statement must be submitted in writing to the City Administrator
specifying the reason for the purchase.
C. No purchase order will or shall be issued unless the department head or
his/her designee making the purchase shall verify that the purchase is
proper, has been authorized and the funds are available, unexpended,
in the budget for such purpose and the amount to be paid is fair and
reasonable.
A. Purchase or contract for all supplies and contractual services required
by any using agency in accordance with the provisions of this article or
other ordinance of the city or of the state law.
B. Act to procure for the city the highest quality in supplies and
contractual services at least expense, upon approval and authorization
of City Council.
C. Establish, and when necessary amend, rules and regulations setting
forth procedures and forms to be used in the purchase of all supplies
and contractual services by any agency of the city.
D. Maintain a vendor's catalog file according to materials containing
descriptions of vendor's commodities.
E. Discourage collusive bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open
competition as possible in all purchase and rules.
F. Procure for the city all allowable exemptions, discounts and price
reductions.
§ 16-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 16-3
16:36
§ 16-4. Requisitions and estimates.
The head of every using agency operating under this purchasing system
shall file detailed descriptions and estimates of their requirements for
supplies and contractual services as required by the Purchasing Agent.
§ 16-5. Conflicts of interest; gifts.5
§ 16-6. Competitive bidding.
All purchases of and contracts for supplies and contractual services and
all sales of personal property of the city which has become obsolete or
unusable shall be based on competitive bidding, either through formal bids
or informal quotations, as required by law, except those purchases of and
contracts for supplies and contractual services over $2,500 which are or
may be specifically exempted by New Jersey statutes.
G. Prepare and secure with the cooperation and assistance of the using
agencies standardized specifications for supplies to be purchased or
placed under contract agreement.
H. Sell or otherwise dispose of all obsolete or unusable personal property
of the city in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey and
the regulations of the city, upon authorization of City Council.
A. Any using agency may file at any time a request for any supplies or
contractual services, the need for which was not foreseen when the
detailed estimate was submitted.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall examine such request and shall have the
authority to revise it as to quantity, quality or estimated cost.
A. Any purchase order or contract issued by the Purchasing Agent or any
officer or employee of the city in which the Agent, officer or employee is
financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that
before the execution of a purchase order or contract the Council of the
city shall have the authority to waive compliance with this subsection
when it finds such action to be in the best interest of the city.
B. The Purchasing Agent and every officer and employee of the city and its
agencies are expressly prohibited from soliciting or accepting, directly
or indirectly, from any person, company, firm or corporation to which
any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded any rebate, gift,
money or anything of value whatsoever, except where given for the use
and benefit of the city.
5. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 27, Ethics.
§ 16-3 CLAIMS APPROVAL § 16-7
16:37
§ 16-7. Compliance with statute and established procedures.
All purchases of supplies and contractual services shall be made in
accordance with New Jersey statutes and the purchasing procedures
established by the Purchasing Agent as authorized by City Council.
§ 16-8. Emergency purchases.
Emergency purchases shall be limited to conditions specified in the Local
Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of said law. All emergency purchases must
be approved by the City Administrator.
§ 16-9. Unauthorized purchases.
Except as provided by the purchasing regulations of the city, it shall be
unlawful for any officer or employee of the city to purchase supplies or
contractual services other than through the Purchasing Agent, and any
purchase ordered or contract made contrary to the provisions thereof shall
not be approved by the city, and the city shall not be bound thereby.
§ 16-10. Testing and inspections.
§ 16-11. Cooperative purchasing.
The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to join with other units of
government in cooperative purchasing plans when in the best interests of
the city, when authorized by the City Administrator.
§ 16-12. Disability or absence.
If the Purchasing Agent becomes ill or needs to be absent from the city, the
Administrator shall designate a substitute employee who shall perform the
duties of the Purchasing Agent during such absence or disability.
§ 16-13. Responsibilities of department heads.
A. The Purchasing Agent or his designee shall inspect or supervise the
inspection of all deliveries of supplies or contractual services to
determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the
order or contract.
B. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to require chemical and
physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries
which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with
the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the Purchasing
Agent shall have the authority to make use of facilities of any agency of
the city or of any outside laboratory, subject to approval of the City
Administrator.
§ 16-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 16-13
16:38
§ 16-14. Responsibility for and forwarding of supporting
documentation by City Administrator.6
The City Administrator shall maintain a file of open purchase orders and,
upon receipt of claims from vendors and associated receiving reports duly
certified by an authorized employee of Pleasantville, shall determine
whether the claims are correct by verifying totals, checking extensions,
computing discounts allowed, deleting sales tax and verifying receipt of
goods or services. Each correct claim, along with a properly certified
voucher from the vendor, the copy of the purchase order, the receiving
report and other supporting documents shall be signed by the City
Administrator and forwarded to the Treasurer for payment. Any voucher not
supported by all of the above shall not be forwarded to the Treasurer for
payment.
§ 16-15. Preparation of monthly voucher list by Treasurer.
A. It shall be the responsibility of the department head to advise the
Purchasing Agent of any materials or services required in sufficient
time for the Purchasing Agent to be able to place orders in the most
economical and reasonable manner. Repetitive purchases of the same
item at frequent intervals should be covered by a blanket purchase
order.
B. When materials or services have been received, the department head
shall forward the receiving report to the City Administrator and shall
indicate by signature and date that the materials or services have been
received in a satisfactory condition or manner. If goods or services
received are not satisfactory, the department head shall also note the
receiving report accordingly.
C. All vouchers to be paid in any given month must be in the office of the
City Administrator by 12:00 noon of the first day of the month unless
the same is a holiday or the office is closed, in which case, by 12:00
noon of the following day that the office is open.
A. After the receipt of a properly authorized voucher and associated
supporting documents, the Treasurer shall list all vouchers to be
approved each month for payment by the City Council. The Treasurer
shall not list for payment any vouchers for which the funds have not
been provided in the budget. The Treasurer shall list voucher by budget
category with totals for Salaries and Wages (S-W) and Other Expenses
(O-E), and a total amount for all vouchers on the list.
B. The Treasurer shall provide the lists of vouchers to the City Council at
such time prior to the regular monthly meeting that the City Council
shall direct by resolution.
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 16-13 CLAIMS APPROVAL § 16-15
16:39
§ 16-16. Resolution and payment; checking accounts. [Amended
10-5-1992 by Ord. No. 12-1992]
C. The Treasurer will be responsible for the preparation of the monthly
resolution authorizing the vouchers listed on the monthly voucher list
be paid, to be presented for adoption by the City Council at the public
meeting.
D. The monthly itemized list of all vouchers shall be included in the
minutes of the City Council by resolution, and vouchers shall not be
paid until after the City Council approves the resolution.
A. The resolution of the City Council approving payment of vouchers listed
on the monthly list shall be presented to the City Treasurer for the
preparation and issuance of checks. In the event that any voucher is
disapproved by the City Council, it shall be marked "disapproved," and
the proper totals on the list of vouchers and the resolution shall be
changed accordingly.
B. Checking accounts.
(1) All checking accounts shall include three signatures: City
Treasurer, City Administrator and the Mayor, except that Public
Assistance Trust Fund Account Nos. 1 and 2 shall also include the
signature of the Welfare Director.
(2) Individual checks will require two of the above listed signatures.
(3) Facsimile signatures can be utilized only by a mechanical checksigning
machine which includes a permanent check counter.
Rubber stamps can be used when accompanied by one original
signature and a manual check log is maintained.
(4) Wire transfers shall be authorized for by the City Treasurer and
City Administrator.
§ 16-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 16-16
16:40
ARTICLE II
Payroll
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II of Ch. 9 of the
1982 Code]
§ 16-17. Payroll account.
The payroll account heretofore established in the city is hereby continued.
§ 16-18. Payment of city employees.
The Council shall make payment of salaries, wages and compensation of the
respective employees of this city every two weeks from and after April 1,
1970.
§ 16-19. Preparation, certification and presentation for payment.
All payrolls of the city shall be prepared by the Payroll Clerk for all city
employees, certified by the respective department heads or the persons
authorized to certify that the services have been rendered and that the
amounts specified are in fact due and owing the employee or employees
mentioned therein and thereupon presented to the City Treasurer and paid
by him in due course.
§ 16-17 CLAIMS APPROVAL § 16-19
16:41
Chapter 19
COURT, MUNICIPAL
§ 16-19 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 16-19
16:42
ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 11 of the
1982 Code]
§ 19-1. Court established.
There is hereby established a Municipal Court, to be known as the
"Municipal Court of Pleasantville."
§ 19-2. Official Seal.
The Municipal Court of the City shall have an Official Seal, which shall bear
the impress of the name of the court, "Municipal Court of Pleasantville."
§ 19-3. Qualifications of Judge.
The Municipal Court of the City shall have a Judge, who shall be known as
the "Municipal Judge." He shall have the qualifications required by law.7
§ 19-4. Appointment and term of Judge.
The Municipal Judge of the City shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council. He shall serve for a term of three years
from the date of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and
qualified.
§ 19-5. Compensation of Judge.
The Municipal Judge shall be compensated by an annual salary as fixed by
ordinance adopted by the Council. The compensation so paid shall be in lieu
of any and all other fees.
§ 19-6. Jurisdiction.
The Municipal Court of the City and the Municipal Judge shall have, possess
and exercise all the jurisdiction, powers, functions and duties which are or
may be conferred by law8 and the applicable rules of the Supreme Court of
New Jersey.
7. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:12-7.
8. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:12-16 et seq.
§ 19-1 CLAIMS APPROVAL § 19-6
16:43

ARTICLE II
Public Defender Services
[Adopted 4-2-2012 by Ord. No. 4-20129]
§ 19-7. Application fee; waiver; deposit in dedicated fund; excess
money in fund.
A. All persons applying for representation by the Pleasantville Municipal
Public Defender must pay an application fee of not more than $200, but
only in an amount necessary to pay the costs of Municipal Public
Defender services. The Pleasantville Municipal Court may waive any
required application fee, in whole or in part, if the Court determines, in
its discretion, upon a clear and convincing showing by the applicant,
that the application fee represents an unreasonable burden on the
person seeking representation. The Pleasantville Municipal Court may
permit a person to pay the application fee over a specific period of time
not to exceed four months.
B. Funds collected pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall be
deposited in a dedicated fund administered by the Chief Financial
Officer of the City of Pleasantville. Such funds shall be used exclusively
to meet the costs incurred in providing the services of a Municipal
Public Defender, including, when required, expert and lay investigation
and testimony.
C. In the event that it is determined by the Division of Local Government
Services during its annual review of the municipal budget that the
amount of money in a dedicated fund established pursuant to this
section exceeds by more than 25% the amount which the municipality
expended during the prior year providing the services of a Municipal
Public Defender, the amount in excess of the amount expended shall be
forwarded to the Criminal Disposition and Review Collection Fund
administered by Victims of Crime Compensation Board.
9. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Municipal Public Defender,
adopted 2-23-1994 by Ord. No. 3-1994, as amended.
§ 19-7 CLAIMS APPROVAL § 19-7
16:45
Chapter 20
DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of Government — See Ch. 4. Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
§ 20-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYEE — This term is defined to mean the same as the term is used in
the City of Pleasantville Personnel Policies and Procedure Ordinance.
§ 20-2. Notice requirement.
Any employee who receives notice of a lawsuit or threat of lawsuit or
incident that could give rise to legal action must immediately notify their
department head and the City Administrator, verbally and in writing, and
follow the procedure outlined in Section 8.6 of the city's Personnel Manual.
The notice shall contain the date, time, people involved, nature of injuries
(if any) and a detailed description of the occurrence.
§ 20-3. Options.
The city shall have the option to:
§ 20-4. Punitive damages.
The city shall not indemnify, reimburse or in any way be responsible for the
payment of punitive damages under this section.
A. Immediately provide for, at the city's expense, the defense and any
indemnification for any monetary liability incurred.
B. Provide reimbursement to the employee for defense costs incurred if
the defense is successful.
C. The city shall not pay for any punitive damage award or provide a
defense or indemnification for liability resulting from any act
committed by an employee if:
(1) The act is determined to be a willful, wanton or malicious act/
omission or an act/omission constituting actual fraud.
(2) If the act/omission committed by the employee is a crime.
(3) If the act/omission is not within the scope of employment.
§ 19-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 20-4
20:46
Chapter 22
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, TOURISM AND SPECIAL
EVENTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 22-1. Committee established.
The City Council of the City of Pleasantville (herein after the "City"), Atlantic
County, New Jersey, hereby establishes the Pleasantville Economic
Development, Tourism and Special Events Advisory Committee (hereinafter
the "Committee").
§ 22-2. Purpose and goals.
§ 22-3. Membership; terms; appointments; privileges; duties.
A. The primary functions, purposes and goals of the Committee include
the following:
(1) To discuss, investigate, study and give written advice and
recommendations to City Council as determined by the Committee
and/or as may be requested by City Council regarding economic
and business conditions and circumstances best suited for the City,
and the manner and methods by which development of business
conditions and circumstances best suited for the City may evolve
and be encouraged;
(2) To market and promote the City's economic and business strengths;
(3) To recommend, in writing, to City Council the means by which
stability and growth can best take place for existing business;
(4) To work together cooperatively with the County of Atlantic and
other local regional and state organizations, divisions, or
departments having similar goals, in order to be able to
recommend to the City Council the best and most desirable
planning implementation, and courses of action by which the
primary functions, purposes and goals of the City's economic and
business interests can be most effectively and efficiently merged
and coordinated with those other organizations, divisions, or
departments having similar goals.
B. The Committee shall have such additional functions, purposes and
goals as the Committee may request that the City Council establish
subject to the approval of City Council.
A. The Committee shall consist of nine regular members, all appointed by
the Mayor with the consent of City Council, and all members shall have
a term of office of three calendar years, or such lesser period of time as
may be caused by the date of appointment, with terms expiring at 11:59
p.m., December 31, of each calendar year. Appointments shall be
§ 20-4 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION § 22-3
20:47
§ 22-4. Initial meeting.
The Committee is authorized to meet within 30 days of the appointment of
the members.
§ 22-5. Organization and administration.
staggered such that three appointments expire each year, and each
year three members are appointed to full three-year terms.
B. The members of the Committee shall be residents or taxpayers of the
City. The Mayor and one member of City Council shall be members of
the Committee. The City Administrator shall be an ex officio member of
the Committee, and City Department Heads may from time to time
attend the meetings of the Committee as directed by the City
Administrator.
C. All regular members of the Committee shall have full voting privileges.
D. The appointments of regular and ex officio members of the Committee
shall be made by the Mayor and consented to by City Council by
resolution as soon as practicable after the establishment of the
Committee by this chapter in this calendar year of its establishment,
and in succeeding years practicable after the establishment of the
Committee by this chapter in this calendar year of its establishment,
and in succeeding years at the annual City Council reorganization
meeting or any subsequent regular meeting of City Council in January
of each calendar year.
E. No appointment of any member of the Committee may be rescinded or
terminated except for good cause.
F. Any vacancy created by any registration of any member of the
Committee during any calendar year may be filled by appointment of
the Mayor and consented to by City Council by resolution for the
remainder of that member's term of office.
A. At the first meeting in each calendar year the Committee shall:
(1) Elect a Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and a Secretary;
(2) Establish a schedule of meeting dates for the remainder of the
calendar year.
(3) Establish a list of primary and lesser goals and a mission statement
for the calendar year;
(4) Establish a schedule of performance due dates for reports of any
investigation or study to be undertaken by the Committee during
the calendar year.
§ 22-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 22-5
20:48
Chapter 24
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 30. Police Department — See Ch. 48.
B. The Secretary shall prepare accurate written minutes of each
Committee meeting, which minutes shall be approved by the
Committee and forwarded to the Mayor and City Council.
C. The Committee may organize and appoint subcommittees which shall
perform certain tasks for the Committee and make reports and
recommendations to the Committee. Subcommittee reports and actions
shall not be deemed reports or actions of the full Committee unless
adopted by a majority vote of the Committee.
D. The Committee shall be an advisory committee to the Mayor and City
Council, and any reports or actions recommended by the Committee
shall not be effective until approved by City Council. The Committee
shall conduct its activities and meetings in accordance with all
applicable state laws which shall include the Open Public Meetings
Act10 and the Open Public Records Act.11
10.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
§ 22-5 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS § 22-5
24:49

ARTICLE I
Emergency Communications Plan
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 14 of the
1982 Code]
§ 24-1. Adoption of plan.
The Emergency Communications Planning Report and plan bond therein, as
recommended by the Mayor, be and the same is hereby officially adopted as
the official Pleasantville Emergency Communications Plan, a copy thereof
being annexed hereto and herein incorporated by reference, without
inclusion of the text thereof therein.
§ 24-2. Copies of plan on file.
Copies of said plan have been placed on file in the office of the City Clerk
and will remain on file there for the use and examination of the public.
§ 24-3. Declaration of emergency; enforcement of plan.12
In the event of a natural disaster or a local disaster emergency or a war
emergency, when declared by the Emergency Management Coordinator
of the City of Pleasantville, in accordance with federal and state laws
pertaining thereto, the provisions of the emergency operational plan shall
come into force.
§ 24-4. Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used in this article shall have the
meanings indicated:
DISASTER — Any unusual incident resulting from natural or unnatural
causes which endangers the health, safety or resources of the residents of
the City of Pleasantville and which is or may become too large in scope or
unusual in type to be handled in its entirety by regular municipal operating
services.
LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCY — Includes any disaster or the imminence
thereof resulting from natural or unnatural causes other than enemy attack
and limited to the extent that action by the Governor under state laws
pertaining thereto is not required.
WAR EMERGENCY — Includes any disaster occurring any where within the
state as a result of enemy attack or the imminent danger thereof.
§ 24-5. Cooperation of city employees.13
Whenever the City of Pleasantville Emergency Communications Plan shall
come into force under the terms of this article, all employees of the city
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 24-1 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS § 24-5
24:51
shall give full cooperation to the Emergency Management Coordinator
and his staff in the planning, activating, coordinating and the conduct of
disaster control operations within the municipality. Prior to the occurring
of a disaster, local disaster emergency or war emergency, for test or drill
purposes, all employees of the City of Pleasantville shall give every possible
and reasonable cooperation to the Emergency .
§ 24-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 24-5
24:52
ARTICLE II
Emergency Management Organization
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II of Ch. 14 of the
1982 Code]
§ 24-6. Creation of Emergency Management Agency and plan.
Because of the existing and increasing possibility of the occurrence of
disasters of unprecedented size and destruction from fire, flood, hurricane,
tropical storm or other natural causes and in order to ensure that
preparations of this city will be adequate to deal with such disasters and
generally to provide for the common defense and to protect the public
peace, health and safety and to preserve the lives and property of the
residents of this city, it is hereby found and declared to be necessary to
create a Municipal Emergency Management Agency; to provide for the
rendering of mutual aid to other cities within the State of New Jersey and
adjoining states and to cooperate with the state government with respect
to carrying out emergency functions; and to create and test an emergency
operations plan for all division of city government in the event of one of the
aforementioned disasters.
§ 24-7. Purpose.
It is further declared to be the purpose of this article and the policy of
this city that all emergency functions of the state government, including
its various departments and agencies of other municipalities and private
agencies of every type, coordinate its activities so that a comprehensive
plan may make the best use of this city's manpower, resources and facilities
in the event that a disaster does occur.
§ 24-8. Emergency Management Agency.14
It is further declared to be the purpose of this article and the policy of
this city to organize an emergency management organization, in conformity
with the Civil Defense Act, as directed by Public Law 1942, Chapter 251, as
amended.15 The name of this organization shall be Emergency Management
Agency.
§ 24-9. Duties of Mayor, Coordinator and staff.16
The Mayor of this community shall be responsible for the appointment of
a qualified Coordinator pursuant to state and federal guidelines as of the
date of his appointment. It shall be the responsibility of the Coordinator
to appoint a Deputy Coordinator and staff as may be needed to effectively
operate this organization. It is the responsibility of the staff, under the
direction of the Coordinator and Deputy Coordinator, to create and test
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. App. A:9-33 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 24-6 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS § 24-9
24:53
the emergency operations plan and to be prepared to activate it whenever
necessary.
§ 24-10. Rules and regulations; enforcement.
It shall be the responsibility of this organization to carry out and enforce
such orders, rules and regulations as issued by the Mayor or the chain
of command as outlined by the emergency operations plan, under the
authority of this article. The organization shall have available for inspection
all such orders and rules and regulations made by the Mayor or the chain of
command or under their authority.
§ 24-11. Operations center.
The organization shall have a fully equipped emergency operations center
which shall be ready to coordinate all city functions in the event of a
disaster. It shall also have an alternative operations center planned in the
event that the first shall be damaged or unusable.
§ 24-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 24-11
24:54
Chapter 27
ETHICS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 41. Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
§ 27-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPOINTED — Chosen either by an individual having authority to appoint
to public office, position or employment or by the Council of the City of
Pleasantville.
BOARD — The Pleasantville Ethics Board established by this chapter.
ELECTED — Chosen by the general electorate of the City of Pleasantville or
of a ward or other electoral subdivision thereof.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Any employment, investment or other association
or activity which yields or may yield to a public officer or employee, directly
or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit other than the duly
authorized salary or compensation of his public office, position or
employment, except that no financial interest within the meaning of this
definition shall be created by an interest amounting to not more than 3%
of the shares of a corporation or the right upon liquidation or dissolution to
not more than 3% of the assets of an unincorporated business entity.
OFFICIAL ACT OR ACTION — Any legislative, administrative, quasi-judicial,
appointive or discretionary act of the City of Pleasantville City Council or
public officer or employee.
PERSONAL INTEREST — Any association or connection with other persons
arising from blood or marriage relationships or from direct business
relationship, which may reasonably be expected to influence a public officer
or employee to favor the interests of such persons, whether or not any
financial interest is involved.
PUBLIC OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE — Any person holding an office, position
or employment in the City of Pleasantville, whether by election or
appointment and whether or not any compensation is provided for such
office, position or employment; and any person who is a member of any
board, bureau, office, commission or other instrumentality within or created
by the City of Pleasantville; and any independent authority, commission,
agency or instrumentality of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 24-11 ETHICS § 27-2
27:55
§ 27-2. Applicability.
Whenever applicable, all New Jersey statutes relating to bribery of public
officers and employees, private interest in public contracts and misconduct
in public office are hereby made a part of this Code of Ethics and shall apply
to all public officers and public employees of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 27-3. Code of Ethics.
The requirements herein set forth shall constitute a Code of Ethics
establishing reasonable standards and guidelines for the ethical conduct of
all public officers and employees of the City of Pleasantville.
A. No public officer or employee of the City of Pleasantville shall accept
from any person, directly or indirectly, by himself or through his spouse
or any member of his family or through any partner or associate, any
gift, favor, service, employment or offer of employment or any other
thing of value which he knows or has reason to believe is offered to him
with intent to influence him in the performance of his public duties and
responsibilities.
B. No public officer or employee of the City of Pleasantville, either by
himself or through any partnership, firm or corporation in which he has
a financial interest or by any partner, officer or employee of any such
partnership, firm or corporation, shall represent, appear for or
negotiate on behalf of, or agree to represent, appear for or negotiate on
behalf of, any person or party other than the City of Pleasantville or an
agency or instrumentality thereof in any negotiation for the acquisition
or sale by the city or any agency or instrumentality thereof of any
interest in real or tangible or intangible personal property or in any
proceedings relative to such acquisition or sale before a condemnation
commission or court, provided that nothing in this section shall be
deemed to prohibit any person from representing himself in
negotiations or proceedings concerning his own interest in real
property.
C. No public officer or employee of the City of Pleasantville nor any
partnership, firm or corporation in which he has a financial interest, nor
any partner, officer or employee of any such partnership, firm or
corporation, shall represent, appear for or negotiate on behalf of any
person or party other than such city or an agency or instrumentality
thereof in connection with any cause, proceeding, application or other
matter pending before the Council of the City of Pleasantville or of any
autonomous or semiautonomous agency established by the City of
Pleasantville or in which said city is a participant; provided, however,
that this subsection shall not be deemed to prohibit any elected official
from making an inquiry for information on behalf of a constituent if no
fee, reward or other thing of value is promised to, given to or accepted
by such elected official, whether directly or indirectly.
§ 27-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 27-3
27:56
D. No former public officer or employee of the City of Pleasantville, nor
any partnership, firm or corporation in which he has a financial interest,
nor any partner, officer or employee of any such partnership, firm or
corporation, may, during two years next following the last date on which
he held such public office or employment, represent, appear for or
negotiate on behalf of, or agree to represent, appear for or negotiate on
behalf of, any person or party other than the city or City Council in
connection with any cause, proceeding, application or other matter
pending before said city or Council or any autonomous or
semiautonomous agency established by said City of Pleasantville in
which he personally participated during the period of his service or
employment or which was under his active consideration.
E. Notwithstanding the provisions hereinabove set forth, a public officer
or employee may appear on behalf of himself, his spouse or minor
children before any city agency or Municipal Court. A member of
Council may appear before city agencies on behalf of his constituents in
the course of his duties as a representative of the electorate or in the
performance of public or civic obligations.
F. Interest in contract or transaction. No public officer or employee having
the power or duty to perform an official act or action related to a
contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act
or action of the city shall:
(1) Have or thereafter acquire an interest in such contract or
transaction.
(2) Have an interest in any business entity representing, advising or
appearing on behalf of, whether paid or unpaid, any person
involved in such contract or transaction.
(3) Have solicited or accepted present or future employment with a
person or business entity involved in such contract or transaction.
(4) Have solicited, accepted or granted a present or future gift, favor,
service or thing of value from or to a person involved in such
contract or transaction.
(5) Have encouraged, made or accepted any ex parte or unilateral
application or communication where a determination is to be made
after a public hearing and such public employee fails to make the
contents of the communication a part of the record.
G. Preacquisition of interest. No public officer or employee, with respect
to any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an
official act or action of the city, shall acquire an interest in or be
affected by such contract or transaction at a time when the public
employee believes or has reason to believe that it will directly or
indirectly be affected by an official act or action of the city.
§ 27-3 ETHICS § 27-3
27:57
§ 27-4. Ministerial acts not involving judgment of public officer.
Notwithstanding any provisions hereinbefore set forth prohibiting any
public officer or employee from taking or participating in any official action
otherwise within the scope of his duties, powers and functions if he has a
personal or financial interest in said action, said prohibitions shall not apply
to any purely ministerial act not involving the judgment or discretion of such
public officer or employee.
H. Disclosure of information. No public officer or employee, with respect
to any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an
official act or action of the city, shall, without proper legal
authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the
property, government or affairs of the city or use such information to
advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others.
I. Incompatible service. No public officer or employee shall engage in or
accept private employment or render service for private interest when
such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge
of his official duties or would tend to impair his independence of
judgment or action in the performance of his official duties, unless
otherwise permitted by law and unless disclosure is made as provided
in this Code.
J. Public contracts. No public officer or employee of the City of
Pleasantville shall knowingly have a financial interest with respect to
any contract, agreement, sale or purchase made, entered into, awarded
or granted by such city or City Council thereof during the time while he
holds such position, whether or not such contract, agreement, purchase
or sale was made or let after public notice and competitive bidding.
K. Public property. No public officer or employee shall request or permit
the unauthorized use of city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials or
property for personal convenience or profit.
L. Special treatment. No public officer or employee shall grant any special
consideration, treatment or advantage to any citizen beyond that which
is available to every other citizen.
M. No public employee of the City of Pleasantville shall act as officer or
agent for such city or City Council for the transaction of any business
with himself or with a business entity in which he has a financial
interest.
N. No public officer or employee of the City of Pleasantville shall solicit,
receive or agree to receive, directly or indirectly, any compensation,
reward, employment, gift or other thing of value from any source other
than the City of Pleasantville in which he is employed for any services,
advice, assistance or other matter related to his official duties, unless
authorized or required to do so by enactment of the local governing
body.
§ 27-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 27-5
27:58
§ 27-5. Public officials' participation in official actions.
Nothing herein shall prevent or prohibit a public official, officer or employee
from taking or participating in an official action in all cases where such
action or participation is permitted under the principles of the common law
doctrine of necessity as heretofore recognized in the law of this state.
§ 27-6. Advisory opinion; inquiry.
§ 27-7. Disclosure of interest in legislative action.
§ 27-8. Violations and penalties.
A. Any public officer or employee who is uncertain as to permissibility
under this chapter of his taking or participating in a particular official
action may initiate an inquiry under the provisions of §§ 27-13 and
27-14 of this chapter.
B. The advisory opinion of the Board in such a case shall be in the form of a
final judgment as to the permissibility of the proposed action or
participation and shall be appealable directly to the Appellate Division
of the Superior Court.
A. Any member of the Council who has a financial interest or personal
interest in any proposed legislation before the Council shall disclose on
the record of the Council the nature and extent of such interest.
B. Any other official or employee who has a financial or personal interest
in any proposed legislative action of the Council and who participates in
discussion with or gives an official opinion or recommendation to the
Council shall disclose on the record of the Council the nature and extent
of such interest.
A. Whoever knowingly and willfully and with intent to use or procure the
use of the powers of a public office or position for the promotion of a
private financial or personal interest violates or solicits or abets the
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of the Code of Ethics
promulgated pursuant to § 27-3 of this chapter shall be adjudged a
disorderly person and, upon conviction thereof before the Municipal
Court, shall be subject to pay a fine of not less than $100 or not more
than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days.17
B. Any public officer or employee or former public officer or employee who
violates the provisions of this chapter or of the Code of Ethics
promulgated pursuant to § 27-3 of this chapter, and any person other
than a public officer or employee who shall procure, solicit or abet any
such violation, shall, in addition to any other penalty prescribed by law
for the conduct constituting such violation, be subject to appropriate
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 27-5 ETHICS § 27-8
27:59
§ 27-9. Ethics Board.
§ 27-10. Organization of Board.
disciplinary proceedings and penalties in accordance with the terms of
this chapter.
C. In the event that the Board of Ethics shall, under the provisions of this
chapter, make a determination that the conduct of any official or
employee was improper, the Council, based upon the written findings,
conclusions and determinations of the Board of Ethics, may institute
appropriate action for censure, suspension or removal from office of
said official or employee, affording such official or employee a public
hearing therein.
A. There is hereby created the Pleasantville Ethics Board, which is hereby
allocated in the Legal Division of the City of Pleasantville, but,
notwithstanding said allocation, the Board shall be independent of any
supervision or control by the Department or by any board or office
thereof unless otherwise provided by law and ordinance of the city, it
being the intent of this chapter that the assignment, direction,
discipline and supervision of all the officers and employees shall be, so
far as possible and except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
determined by the Board, as set forth herein.18
B. The Board shall consist of three members who shall be citizens and
residents of Pleasantville, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of Council for a term of one year. The City Solicitor shall be an
ex officio member of the Board. Vacancies in the membership of the
Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments,
for the unexpired term only.
C. No person holding any other office, position or employment under this
state, county or city or under the government of the United States,
except the City Solicitor as hereinbefore provided, shall be eligible to
qualify as a member of the Board; and if any member of the Board shall
accept any such other office, position or employment, his office as such
member shall thereupon become vacant.
D. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
A. Upon making the original appointments, and during the month of
January of each year thereafter, the Mayor shall designate one of the
members of the Board to be the Chairman thereof; and within 10 days
of such designation, the Chairman shall convene the Board for the
purposes of organization. The Board shall be in continuous session and
shall, by its rules and regulations, set formal meeting dates. The Board
may meet and hold hearings at such times and places as it may deem
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 27-8 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 27-10
27:60
§ 27-11. Board hearings and investigations.
§ 27-12. Liability; civil action for damages.
Whenever a contract or transaction entered into by the City of Pleasantville
or City Council has been found to involve the holding of a prohibited interest
or the taking of an official action by a public officer or employee in violation
of the provisions of this chapter, such public officer or employee and any
other person who has procured, solicited or abetted such violation shall be
liable to a civil action for damages in the amount of twice the amount of any
profit or gain realized from the contract or transaction. Such action shall be
necessary or convenient for the proper discharge of its duties and
functions.
B. The Board shall appoint a Secretary, who shall serve at the pleasure of
the Board and shall not have tenure by virtue of the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 38:16-1 et seq. and the Board may, with the approval of Council,
appoint such other employees as are necessary to carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
C. The Board shall promulgate such rules and regulations and official
forms and perform such duties as are necessary to provide for the
proper functioning of the Board and to implement the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The concurring vote of at least two members of the Board and the City
Solicitor shall be necessary to the issuance of any ruling or opinion or to
the taking of any official action or making of any official determination
by the Board under the powers conferred by this chapter.
A. It shall be the duty of the Board to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, to conduct hearings with regard to possible violations and to
impose penalties; and for the effectual carrying out of its enforcement
responsibilities, the Board shall have the authority to initiate a civil
action in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of
enforcing compliance with the provisions of this chapter or enjoining
violations thereof or recovering any penalty prescribed by this chapter.
B. The Board, in order to perform its duties pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, shall have the power to conduct investigations, hold
hearings, compel the attendance of witnesses and the production
before it of such books and papers as it may deem necessary, proper
and relevant to the matter under investigation and to administer oaths
and examine witnesses under oath.
C. The Board shall have jurisdiction to initiate, receive, hear and review
complaints regarding violations by any public employee or former
public employee of any local government unit of the provisions of this
chapter or of the Code of Ethics promulgated pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 27-10 ETHICS § 27-12
27:61
brought in the name of the City of Pleasantville, and the City Council or the
Board shall, jointly and severally, have the power to institute such an action.
§ 27-13. Inquiries concerning proper conduct.
§ 27-14. Publication and issuance of Board opinions.
§ 27-15. Police Department procedures.19
Procedures regarding the Police Department shall be in accordance with
relevant state statutes and shall be referred to the Police Department for
departmental hearings.
§ 27-16. Distribution of Code of Ethics.
A. It shall be the duty of the Board to furnish opinions and guidance to
public officers and employees of the local government units relative to
inquiries concerning proper conduct or activities for such officer or
employee.
B. Every inquiry shall be in writing, signed by the inquirer and in such
form and detail as the Board may require. It shall set forth with
particularity the factual situation concerning which the opinion of the
Board is sought and shall contain a certificate that any opinion of the
Board rendered thereon will not be used for any purpose other than set
forth in the inquiry.
A. Opinions rendered by the Board upon inquiry or in connection with the
issuance of a ruling or decision shall be in writing and shall be filed with
the Secretary, who shall keep a copy as a permanent record. In the case
of any advisory opinion, the Secretary shall transmit a copy,
authenticating the same by his certificate attached thereto, to the
person originating the inquiry and to such other person or persons as
the Board may direct.
B. The Secretary shall make suitable arrangements for the prompt
publication of all opinions rendered by the Board, together with an
accurate and complete index thereof.
A. The City Clerk shall cause a copy of this Code of Ethics to be distributed
to every public officer and employee of the City of Pleasantville within
30 days after enactment of this code. Each public officer and employee
elected, appointed or engaged thereafter shall be furnished a copy
before entering upon the duties of his office or employment.
B. Each public officer, the President of the Common Council, the Chairman
of each board, commission or agency and the head of each department
shall, between January 1 and January 31 each year, review the
provisions of this code himself and with his fellow council, board,
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 48, Police Department.
§ 27-12 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 27-16
27:62
§ 27-17. Provisions relative to state law.
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be in addition to any other
existing provision of state law or local ordinance and shall in no way or
manner create any privilege nor any immunity from any statutory or case
law of the State of New Jersey but shall be considered regulation in addition
to such law.
Chapter 30
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency operations — See Ch. 24.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
Alarms — See Ch. 80.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 147.
commission or agency members or subordinates, as the case may be,
and certify to the City Clerk by February 15 that such annual review
had been undertaken. A copy of this code shall be continuously posted
on each department bulletin board wherever situated.
§ 27-16 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 27-17
30:63

ARTICLE I
Organization
§ 30-1. Compensation; fire headquarters.
§ 30-2. Control by Council; rules and regulations.
The Fire Department shall be under the direction and control of the Council
of the city as herein provided in accordance with any rules and regulations
promulgated by the Council from time to time as it may be necessary and
expedient. It shall be operated by the officers and members of the Paid Fire
Department.
§ 30-3. Powers and duties of Chief.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall:
§ 30-4. Police powers delegated to commanding fire officers.
The Chief of the Fire Department and his assistants or officers in command
at any fire are hereby clothed with complete police authority in the
performance of their duties in accordance with the statutes of the State
of New Jersey, subject to the authority and direction of the local and state
police in the direction of traffic.
§ 30-5. Command hierarchy.
A. The Fire Department of the city shall consist of fully paid officers and
members.
B. The headquarters of the Pleasantville Fire Department shall be in the
firehouse situate on First Street and Washington Avenue.
A. Have general supervision and control over the Fire Department of the
city, subject only to the City Administrator. [Amended 11-17-2003 by
Ord. No. 37-2003]
B. Be responsible for the maintenance, care and proper condition of all fire
apparatus and equipment belonging to the city and used by the Fire
Department.
C. Keep fire equipment in the best possible condition for immediate use
and to its full efficiency.
D. Make a written report of the condition of the apparatus and equipment
of the general fire conditions in the city to the President and members
of the Council at least once each month.
E. Make such suggestions and recommendations as he may deem proper
or necessary to the City Administrator. [Amended 11-17-2003 by
Ord. No. 37-2003]
§ 30-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 30-5
30:65
§ 30-6. Equipment maintenance.
The firemen shall, subject to the Chief of the Fire Department, be vested
with the care and maintenance of the fire station and the fire apparatus
and equipment therein situate, now and hereafter owned by the city for fire
purposes, subject to the rules and regulations established by the Council
aforesaid; provided, however, that the title and ownership of any such fire
apparatus or fire equipment for fire purposes shall remain and be vested in
the City of Pleasantville.
§ 30-7. Member qualifications.
No person shall become a member of the Fire Department unless he
possesses the following qualifications:
§ 30-8. Grounds for suspension, fine or dismissal.
Any officer or member of the Fire Department who shall be found guilty of
any one or more of the following offenses shall be subject to suspension,
fine or dismissal from service:
A. In all cases of fire or fire calls or emergencies, the Chief of the Fire
Department or, in his absence, a Deputy Chief shall have full power and
absolute control and command and shall cause the several pieces of fire
apparatus and equipment to be worked in the most advantageous
manner.
B. In the absence of the Chief and Deputy Chief, the Shift Commander of
the Fire Department designated by the Fire Chief shall be in full
command until the arrival of the Chief or Deputy Chief.
C. In the absence of the Chief, Deputy Chief or the Shift Commander, the
Lieutenant of the Fire Department on duty shall be in full command
until the arrival of the Chief or Deputy Chief.
A. Citizen of the United States.
B. The ability to read, write and speak the English language and is of good
moral character.
C. Good health and sound body, certified as such by a reputable physician.
D. Not less than 18 years of age nor more than 35 years of age.
A. Neglect of duty.
B. Absence without leave.
C. Incompetency or inefficiency in the service.
D. Violation of any lawful and reasonable official regulation or order or
failure to obey any lawful or reasonable direction made and given to
him by his superior officer.
§ 30-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 30-8
30:66
§ 30-9. Chief's suspension powers. [Amended 11-17-2003 by Ord.
No. 37-2003]
The Chief of the Fire Department is hereby given authority to suspend
any member of the Fire Department for any violation of the rules and
regulations prescribed by this article or otherwise provided and ordered by
the Council (without compensation) for a period not exceeding five days.
The Fire Chief shall report all suspensions and other disciplinary actions
imposed by him to the City Administrator/Personnel Officer immediately.
§ 30-10. Charges; hearing; decision.
E. Intoxication while on duty.
F. Conduct unbecoming an officer or employee in the public service.
G. Insubordination.
H. Wantonly offensive conduct or language toward the public or other
officers or employees.
I. Disorderly or immoral conduct.
J. Commitment of any criminal act.
K. Neglect of or willful damage to public property or waste of public
supplies and equipment.
L. Intentionally making a false official report.
M. Driving, hauling or handling any apparatus of the Fire Department
carelessly, wantonly, willfully or maliciously in such manner as to cause
injury and damage to person or property.
A. No officer or member of the Fire Department shall be suspended,
removed, dismissed or reduced in rank or fined for any cause provided
for by § 30-8 of this article until a written charge or charges of the
cause or causes of the complaint shall have been preferred against said
officer or member.
(1) The complaint shall be signed by the person making such charge or
charges and filed in the office of the City Clerk and with the Chief of
the Department, unless the complaint is made by the Chief, in
which event the complaint shall be filed only with the City Clerk.
(2) A copy of the complaint shall be served upon the officer or member
charged within 15 days after the filing thereof.
B. The Public Safety Committee of the City Council of the City of
Pleasantville shall be the hearing tribunal (referred to as "hearing
officer" or "proper authorities") for the Fire Department with
jurisdiction to conduct all disciplinary hearings and authority to impose
disciplinary action, as provided for in the Fire Department Rules and
§ 30-8 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 30-10
30:67
Regulations, New Jersey Statutes and as authorized by law, including
but not limited to suspension, removal, fines and reduction in rank. The
charge or charges shall be examined by the Public Safety Committee
upon reasonable notice to the person charged. The examination shall
be commenced not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the
copy of such charge or charges shall has been served upon the accused.
[Amended 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 23-1997]
C. Any officer or member of the Fire Department may be suspended
pending trial on charges by the Public Safety Committee or by the Chief
of the Fire Department if, in the judgment of the Public Safety
Committee or the Chief, the offense charged warrants such suspension.
[Amended 7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 23-1997]
D. In the event that the officer or member so charged shall, after such
hearing, be found guilty of the charges preferred, the person so
charged may be suspended, removed, dismissed, reduced in rank or
fined as may be determined by the Fire Chief and Public Safety
Committee. If such officer or member is adjudged not guilty of the
charge or charges made against him and he shall have been suspended
pending the trial, he shall be restored to duty forthwith. [Amended
7-7-1997 by Ord. No. 23-1997]
E. Use of subpoenas. N.J.S.A. 40A:14-20 provides the authority to issue
subpoenas to the hearing officer, which in this case, is the Public Safety
Committee for the City of Pleasantville. The following procedure shall
be used with regard to the issuing of subpoenas: [Added 10-20-2003
by Ord. No. 33-2003]
(1) Any Fire Department member or his attorney prosecuting the
charges on behalf of the City who requires a subpoena to compel
the attendance of a witness at a disciplinary hearing shall provide
the following information in writing to Counsel for the Committee
at least 20 days prior to the scheduled hearing date:
(a) The name and address of the witness(s).
(b) A short statement of the reason that testimony of the
witness(s) is needed and the expected subject matter of his
testimony
(c) Any special needs of the witness.
(2) Issuance of subpoena.
(a) The request shall be transmitted by Counsel for the Committee
to the individual committee members who shall:
[1] Immediately arrange for the issuance of a subpoena; or
[2] Deny the request, in writing, with reasons stated for the
denial.
§ 30-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 30-10
30:68
§ 30-11. Composition; general provisions.
§ 30-12. Appointment; recommendation and approval.
In the event of any vacancy occurring or if City Council determines to
increase the number of firemen in excess of the number employed at that
time, the appointment of the same, exclusive of the Chief, Deputy Chiefs,
Captains and Lieutenants, shall be made by the Council pursuant to the
provisions of the testing procedure in Article III of this chapter.
(b) When a subpoena is issued, the Committee shall instruct the
City Clerk to actually issue the subpoena.
(3) The Committee may deny to issue subpoenas if, in their discretion:
(a) The witness' testimony will solely be duplicative of previous
witness testimony or other evidence already introduced.
(b) The subpoena request appears to be for the purpose of delay,
harassment or is requested in bad faith.
(4) The denial of any subpoena may be brought to the Superior Court,
Law Division, for enforcement pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-20.
A. The Fire Department shall consist of the Chief, Deputy Chiefs, Captains,
Lieutenants and such number of firemen as shall be determined and
appointed by the Council from time to time.
B. Each appointee named in Subsection A of this section shall be
appointed by the Council and receive such compensation and perform
fire duties as shall be assigned by the Fire Chief.
§ 30-10 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 30-12
30:69

ARTICLE II
Fire Reports and Copy Fees
§ 30-13. Certified copies; imposition of fee.
The Pleasantville Fire Department shall, at the request of any citizen and
subject to administration rules and regulations therefor prescribed, make
and furnish a certified copy of a fire report or statement as filed in said
Department upon the payment of the sum of $15 for each such certified
copy. Said fees are imposed for regulating purposes in the matters of
operations in the Department.
§ 30-13 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 30-13
30:71

ARTICLE III
Testing Procedure
§ 30-14. Appointment of members.
The City Council shall, in the manner provided by law, appoint members and
employees of the Fire Department.
§ 30-15. Hiring and testing rules and regulations.
In addition to such other requirements as may be established by law, the
following procedure shall be utilized in making appointments:
A. Notification of test. An advisory notice shall be placed in the official
newspapers of the city at least 30 days prior to a written examination,
said notice to specify that all persons interested in the position or
positions shall obtain applications at the Fire Department, Monday
through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
B. Application. The applicant shall file a written application on the form
prescribed by the City Council, which must be complete and have
attached thereto all supporting documents as requested.
C. Written test. All applicants must pass a written test to be administered
by the Fire Department of the City of Pleasantville at a time, date and
location designated by and in a form prescribed by the Fire Chief.
D. Qualification.
(1) After the scoring of the written examination, a list will be submitted
of those qualified in the following classes:
(a) Residents of the City of Pleasantville.
(b) Residents of Atlantic County.
(c) Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
(d) All other qualified applicants.
(2) Those residents of the City of Pleasantville in Class I will be hired
first, according to their qualifications and test results, before going
on to other classes in order.
E. Physical agility test. Applicants who successfully pass the written test
shall be notified in writing of the time, date and location of the agility
test. Prior to participating in the agility test, applicants must have a
physician of their own choice certify, in writing, that they are in good
physical health and able to perform the prescribed agility tests, which
certification must be in writing and presented at the time of the
physical testing. Copies of the mode of agility test shall be mailed in
advance to such applicants to ensure that each applicant is prepared for
the examination.
§ 30-14 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 30-15
30:73
§ 30-16. Testing procedure for promotions.
Testing procedures for promotions in the Fire Department shall be in
accordance with the current IAFF contract.
F. Oral interview. Applicants who successfully complete the phases of
testing as set forth above will be notified to appear for an oral interview
with the Fire Hiring Committee; consisting of the Mayor, the President
of City Council, the Chairman of Public Safety Committee or his
designee, the City Administrator, the Fire Chief and the Affirmative
Action officer (a nonvoting member). [Amended 12-6-1999 by Ord.
No. 47-1999]
G. Background investigation. Background investigations will be made by
the Police Department of all applicants who have completed the phases
of these examinations. The application will give written consent for the
investigation.
H. Psychological evaluation. Applicants who successfully complete the
above screening shall undergo a psychological evaluation administered
by the clinical psychologist designated by the City Administrator. The
results of the evaluation shall be forwarded to the City Administrator
who shall share the same with the Fire Chief and appointing authority
as provided by law. [Amended 11-17-2003 by Ord. No. 37-2003]
§ 30-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 30-16
30:74
ARTICLE IV
Arson Investigation Unit
§ 30-17. Unit established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7.1, there is hereby established within the Fire
Department of the City of Pleasantville an Arson Investigation Unit which
shall be responsible for conducting investigations of arson, suspicious fires
and explosions within the City of Pleasantville.
§ 30-18. Qualifications. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
Before any member of the Fire Department shall be assigned to the Arson
Investigation Unit, he shall have successfully completed a course of training
approved by the Police Training Commission and an arson investigation
training course approved by the New Jersey Department of Law and Public
Safety.
§ 30-19. Powers and authority.
Members of the Arson Investigation Unit shall have the same powers and
authority as police officers within the City of Pleasantville while engaged in
the actual performance of arson investigation duties.
§ 30-20. Compensation.
Members of the Arson Investigation Unit shall receive no additional pay for
these duties. Any member of the Fire Department appointed to this unit
shall be classified as a fire journeyman and also perform journeyman duties
as prescribed by the Fire Chief.
§ 30-17 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 30-20
30:75

ARTICLE V
Exempt Firemen Certificates
§ 30-21. Issuance.
Exempt firemen certificates shall be issued to those members of the Fire
Department who have served the time prescribed by law and who have
performed the percentage of fire duty required by law and shall have met
the qualifications required for the office of fireman by the statutes. The
exempt firemen certificates shall be issued by resolution of the Council,
signed by the Mayor and the Chief of the Fire Department and attested by
the City Clerk.
§ 30-21 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 30-21
30:77

ARTICLE VI
General Provisions
§ 30-22. Word usage and gender.
All nouns and pronouns in the masculine gender utilized in this chapter
shall be construed to include the female gender.
§ 30-23. Violations and penalties.
A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon a finding of unlawful
discrimination, subject the violator to the remedies and orders provided in
the Law Against Discrimination, P.L. 1945, c. 169, as amended,20 and the
summary proceedings by the Attorney General of the State of New Jersey,
in the Superior Court, to compel compliance with the provisions of said law.
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq.
§ 30-22 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 30-23
30:79
Chapter 41
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Ethics — See Ch. 27.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
§ 30-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 30-23
30:80
ARTICLE I
Residency Requirements
[Adopted 3-20-1995 by Ord. No. 2-1995; amended in its entirety
11-16-2015 by Ord. No. 21-2015]
§ 41-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BONA FIDE RESIDENT — A person having a permanent domicile within the
City of Pleasantville and one which has not been adopted with the intention
of again taking up or claiming a previous residence acquired outside of the
City of Pleasantville.
§ 41-2. Residency in City as condition of employment.
All full-time, permanent and part-time officers and employees hired for
employment by the City of Pleasantville, subsequent to the effective date
of this article, hereinafter to be employed by the City of Pleasantville, are
hereby required, subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-1.1 et seq.,
and specifically N.J.S.A 40A:9-1.5, to be bona fide residents of the City of
Pleasantville, and as a condition of their employment, continue to be bona
fide residents, except as otherwise provided by law. Any person currently
employed by the City of Pleasantville who resides outside of the City as of
the date of the adoption of this article is specifically exempted from the
provisions and terms of this article, except for those provided and set forth
at § 41-8, Limitation of grandfathering.
§ 41-3. Appointment of nonresidents.
All nonresidents appointed to positions or employments after the effective
date of this article shall become bona fide residents of the City of
Pleasantville within one year of their employment, except as otherwise
provided in § 41-5 herein.
§ 41-4. Maintaining residency required; exemption.
A. Any person not otherwise exempted, who is hereafter appointed to a
position or employed by the City of Pleasantville, shall remain a bona
fide resident of the City while employed. Failure of such employee to
maintain residency in Pleasantville shall be a cause for removal or
discharge from service. In the event that such employee does not
maintain bona fide residency, the City Council shall notify said
employee that failure to again take up bona fide residency in the City
within six months of the notification will result in removal or discharge
from service. Such removal or discharge shall take effect on the date in
such notice, but any employee so removed or discharged shall have the
right to such appeals as are available pursuant to law.
§ 41-1 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 41-4
30:81
§ 41-5. Filling of certain positions without preference to residency.
Whenever the City Council shall determine that there are certain specific
positions and employments, requiring special talents or skills which are
necessary for the operations of the City and which are not likely to be
found among the residents of the City, such positions and employments
so determined shall be filled without preference to residency, and the
provisions of §§ 41-2, 41-3, 41-4, 41-6 and 41-9 herein shall not apply.
The City Council shall set forth the formal criteria pursuant to which
such positions and employment shall be determined. Such positions and
employments shall include but not be limited to the following professionals,
officials and employees, who shall be exempt from the residency
requirements specified herein: Municipal Court Judge, City Solicitor,
Prosecutor, Public Defender, Zoning Board Attorney, Planning Board
Attorney and Court Administrator.
§ 41-6. Unavailability of qualified residents.
B. As of December 1, 2015, all employees shall be subject to the residency
requirement. Any employee with five years of satisfactory service shall
be exempt from the residency requirement. Any employee with less
than five years of satisfactory service is subject to the residency
requirement. [Amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 1-2019]
A. In the event that the City Council shall determine that there cannot be
recruited a sufficient number of qualified residents for available specific
positions or employments, the City shall advertise for other qualified
applicants. The City shall thereupon classify all qualified applicants for
such positions or employments in the following manner:
(1) Residents of Atlantic County.
(2) Other residents of counties contiguous to Atlantic County.
(3) Other residents of the state.
(4) All other applicants.
B. The City Council shall first appoint all those in Class A and then those in
each succeeding class in the order above established and shall appoint
a person or persons in any such class only to a position or positions, or
employment or employments, remaining after all qualified applicants in
the proceeding class or classes have been appointed or have declined
an offer of employment or appointment. The preference established in
this section shall in no way diminish, reduce or affect the preferences
granted pursuant to any other provisions of the law. The City Council
may require such officers and employees who are hired under this
section to become bona fide residents of the City of Pleasantville within
one year of their appointment or employment as a condition of their
continued employment.
§ 41-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 41-7
30:82
§ 41-7. Preference in promotion.
When promotions of officers and employees are based upon merit, as
determined by suitable promotion tests or other objective criteria, a bona
fide resident of the City shall be given preference over a nonresident in
any instance when all other measurable criteria are equal. The preference
granted by this section shall in no way diminish, reduce or affect the
preference granted pursuant to any other provision of law.
§ 41-8. Limitation of grandfathering.
Any person employed by the City of Pleasantville who resides outside of the
City as of the date of the adoption of this article who subsequently makes
his residence within the City shall not be exempt from the requirements of
this article. Any person employed by the City who is a bona fide resident of
the City of Pleasantville as of the date of adoption of this article shall not be
exempt from the requirements of this article.
§ 41-9. Compliance.
A. Failure of any officer or employee of the City of Pleasantville, who is not
expressly exempt herein or excluded by statute or otherwise from the
residency requirements herein, to comply with this article shall be
deemed, regardless of tenure, sufficient cause for removal and/or
discharge from the service of the City, subject to said employee's right
to appeal in accordance with law.
B. The City Council of the City, or its duly authorized agent, is hereby
authorized to investigate to ensure that all employees hired after the
effective date of this article, subject to the exclusions herein, become
and/or remain bona fide residents within the City.
C. After investigation, if it is discovered that an employee, not exempt
from the provisions of the residency requirement, is living outside the
City of Pleasantville:
(1) They will be issued a notice advising them of the discovery of their
residency outside the City. The notice will also state that the
employee must move back into the City within six months and that
their failure to do so will result in the termination of employment
with the City at the end of the six-month period.
(2) Upon receipt of the notice, the employee shall submit a written
response about their residency and the reason for their living
outside of the City.
(3) Request for waiver.
(a) An employee who receives a notice of residency violation shall
have an opportunity to request a waiver from the residency
provision. A request for a waiver shall be submitted to the City
Administrator within 30 days from the date that the employee
§ 41-7 FIRE DEPARTMENT § 41-9
30:83
received the notice of residency violation. The request for
a waiver does not need to be on any special form, but the
request shall state the reasons the employee feels the waiver
requirement should apply to him and there should be attached
any documentation or other proof in support of his request.
(b) The employee shall indicate in the request whether he wishes
to have his request heard during an executive session of a
regularly scheduled Council meeting or whether he would have
his application heard as part of the open public session.
(c) The City shall terminate all employees who have moved outside
of the City and who are not exempt from the residency
requirement provisions. The article shall be strictly construed,
and exceptions shall not be granted barring extraordinary
circumstances. Any request for a waiver must address, at a
minimum, the following factors:
[1] Length of employment.
[2] Difficulty City will have replacing the employee.
[3] Reason for living outside of the City.
[4] Attempts to find housing in Pleasantville.
(d) As of December 1, 2015, only employees with three years of
satisfactory service with the City of Pleasantville shall be
eligible to request a waiver.
(4) The Council for the City of Pleasantville shall render an answer
immediately after the presentation of the request by the employee.
The decision of Council shall be final.
§ 41-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 41-9
30:84
Chapter 43
PERSONNEL OFFICER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 20.
Ethics — See Ch. 27.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 41.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
§ 43-1. Position created.
The position of the Personnel Officer is hereby created in and for the City of
Pleasantville.
§ 43-2. Appointment; reporting responsibilities
The Personnel Officer shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve
at the pleasure of City Council. Once appointed, the Personnel Officer shall
report and be responsible to the City Administrator.
§ 43-3. Duties.
The Personnel Officer shall be responsible for the following duties and
shall perform such duties in accordance with the direction of the City
Administrator:
A. Study, recommend arid enforce the personnel organization of the City
of Pleasantville.
B. Recommend personnel policy for the City of Pleasantville to the City
Council through the City Administrator;
C. Update the Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual of the City of
Pleasantville on an annual basis;
D. Consult with the department heads in the City to determine personnel
needs within the individual departments and make appropriate
recommendations to the City Council;
E. Maintain the personnel records of all City employees;
F. Disseminate policy and procedural information to appropriate City
staff;
G. Recruit personnel to fill employee vacancies in the City:
H. Assist the City Administrator and department heads in performing
employee evaluations;
§ 41-9 PERSONNEL OFFICER § 43-3
43:85
§ 43-4. Qualifications.
The Personnel Officer shall, at a minimum, have the following qualifications:
§ 43-5. Salary.
The Personnel Officer shall receive a salary as is fixed and adopted by the
City Council of the City of Pleasantville in its annual salary ordinance.
Chapter 44
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 27. Officers and employees — See Ch. 41.
Chapter 48
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 30.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 278.
I. Assist in the preparation of ordinances and resolutions for the creation
of new positions and other personnel matters;
J. Assist the City Administrator, department heads and the appropriate
committees of City Council in the investigation of personnel problems
and the conduct of disciplinary hearings as per the rules and
regulations of the Department of Personnel;
K. Supervise and participate in all labor negotiations; and
L. Perform all other duties and tasks assigned by the City Administrator.
A. A bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university;
B. Applicants who do not meet the above education requirement may
substitute additional experience as described below on a year-for-year
basis, with 30 semester hour credits being equal to one year of
experience;
C. Three years' supervisory personnel experience for a governmental
entity or comparable experience in the private sector.
§ 43-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 48-1
44:86
§ 48-1. Department and personnel continued.
Except as hereinafter provided, the Police Department of the City of
Pleasantville, as heretofore established, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118, and the officers, members and employees thereof are hereby
continued.
§ 48-2. Headquarters.
The headquarters of the Pleasantville Police Department heretofore
established in the Police Station, situated on First Street, Pleasantville, New
Jersey, is hereby continued. It shall be open for the transaction of business
at all hours of the day and night, including Sundays and holidays.
§ 48-3. Rules and regulations.
The appropriate authority shall, from time to time as may be necessary,
adopt and amend the rules and regulations for the government and
discipline of the Police Department and employees thereof. Said rules and
regulations may fix and provide for the enforcement of such rules and
regulations and the enforcement of penalties for the violation of such rules
and regulations, and all employees of the Police Department shall be subject
to such rules and regulations and penalties.
§ 48-4. Council's right to amend or revoke rules and regulations.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the right is hereby reserved by the
Council of the City of Pleasantville to amend or to revoke any of the rules
and regulations or to add to or amend thereto as the circumstances require.
This will be done after consultation with the Mayor and Chief of Police.
§ 48-5. Contrary rules and procedures revoked.
All rules, regulations, procedures and orders previously issued contrary to
those embodied in the Police Department Manual as provided for herein
are hereby revoked. All other rules, regulations, orders and procedures not
in conflict with those contained in the manual as provided for herein shall
remain in force.
§ 48-6. Police Directive Management System.
A Police Directive Management System is established herein. The Directive
Management System shall include the rules and regulations as promulgated
and amended from time to time by the appropriate authority as well as
all general orders of the Police Department. The Directive Management
System will be maintained both electronically and in hard copy in the Police
Department and an electronic copy of the Directive Management System
shall be provided to each officer.
§ 48-1 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 48-7
44:87
§ 48-7. Care of Directive Management System; familiarization.
All members and employees of the Police Department who are assigned
a copy of the Directive Management System shall be responsible for its
maintenance and care. All copies of the Directive Management System shall
be kept current, and supplementary additions, revisions and amendments
shall be properly and promptly maintained. Each police officer and each
civilian employee is duty-bound to thoroughly familiarize himself/herself
with the provisions of the Directive Management System. Failure to comply
with the terms of this section shall be considered neglect of duty.
§ 48-8. Neglect of duty.
In the event that neglect of duty is charged against a member of the Police
Department for failure to observe the rules and regulations, general orders
or other procedures of the Department, ignorance of any provision of the
Directive Management System or any Department procedure or order shall
not be accepted as a defense.
§ 48-9. Definitions.
All terms utilized in this chapter and which are utilized in all aspects of
the Directive Management System shall have the meaning provided for and
defined in the rules and regulations.
§ 48-10. Responsibilities of Chief of Police.
The position of Chief of Police is established as provided for in N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the police force and he
shall be directly responsible to the appropriate authority for the efficiency
and routine day-to-day operations thereof and he shall pursue policies
established by the appropriate authority, including:
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Police
Department and any special emergency directives for the disposition
and discipline of the Department and its officers and personnel.
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Police Department.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
D. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Department to be exercised under his
direction and supervision.
E. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by the governing body on the operation of the force
during the preceding month, and make such other reports as may be
requested by the governing body.
§ 48-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 48-11
44:88
§ 48-11. (Reserved)
§ 48-12. Responsibilities of Patrol Division.
The Patrol Division is responsible for the performance of the following
functions:
§ 48-13. Responsibilities of Investigation Division.
The Investigation Division is responsible for the following functions:
§ 48-14. Hiring and promotions.
The City of Pleasantville is a civil service employer. All hiring for Police
Department positions and all promotions within the Police Department
shall be in accordance with Title 11 of New Jersey Statutes and any
Administrative Code provisions promulgated thereunder.
§ 48-15. Rank structure and chain of command. [Amended
6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 9-2018]
A. Preventive patrol activities.
B. Protection of life and property, preservation of the peace, enforcement
of the law and suppression of crime.
C. Investigation of police incidents and minor crimes and preliminary
investigation of serious crimes.
D. Traffic law enforcement, traffic control and traffic accident
investigation.
E. Assignment, control and supervision of reserve police and school
crossing guards.
A. Follow-up investigations of serious crimes, vice crimes and fatal motor
vehicle accidents.
B. Preparation of cases for prosecution.
C. Recovery of stolen property.
D. Performance of all identification functions.
E. Prevention and control of juvenile delinquency.
F. Maintaining liaison with the juvenile courts.
A. The Police Department Rank and the chain of command will consist of
the following:
(1) Chief of Police.
(2) Deputy Police Chief.
§ 48-11 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 48-15
44:89
§ 48-16. Rank and seniority.
When officers are of the same grade, they shall rank according to their
seniority determined by time to rank. When two or more officers are
appointed to the same grade on the same day, each shall rank according to
his respective position on the eligibility list which determined the order of
his appointment to that grade.
§ 48-17. Public Safety Committee established.
There shall be a permanent committee of the City Council of the City
of Pleasantville called the "Public Safety Committee." The Public Safety
Committee shall consist of three members of City Council, who shall be
appointed by the President of City Council, who may appoint himself as one
member.
§ 48-18. (Reserved)
§ 48-19. Committee's purpose and function. [Amended 6-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 9-2018]
The Public Safety Committee shall assist the Mayor, upon request, in the
supervision of the Police Department and shall render such advice and
aid to the Mayor or his/her designee, as may be necessary from time to
time to ensure proper and efficient functioning of the Pleasantville Police
Department.
§ 48-20. Authority to control Department; Mayor's duties.
(3) Captain.
(4) Lieutenant.
(5) Sergeant.
(6) Patrolman.
(7) SLEO.
B. The Police Department of the City shall consist of the following: There
shall be one Chief of Police, one Deputy Police Chief, as many as four
Captains, as many as four Lieutenants and as many Sergeants,
patrolmen and SLEO as deemed necessary by the City Council from
time to time.
A. The Mayor of the City of Pleasantville shall be the appropriate authority
for the Police Department vested with the functions and regulatory
power established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and by law.
B. The Chief of Police shall be the head of the police force and shall be
directly responsible to the Mayor or his/her designee as appropriate
authority for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operation thereof,
§ 48-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 48-20
44:90
§ 48-21. Confirmation of appointments.
The appointment of any officers, members or employees of the Pleasantville
Police Department shall not take effect until confirmation by a majority vote
of the entire membership of City Council.
§ 48-22. Establishment.
There is hereby established within the organization of the Police
Department of the City of Pleasantville a Traffic Safety Unit.
§ 48-23. Chief of Police to assign.
The Chief of Police shall assign as many police officers to the Traffic Safety
Unit as he may, from time to time, determine to be necessary.
§ 48-24. Responsibilities.
The Chief of Police shall determine the functions and responsibilities of the
Traffic Safety Unit. These will be in accordance with directives, laws, rules
and regulations and ordinances of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 48-25. Fees. [Added 2-17-2016 by Ord. No. 1-2016]
The police rate of $80 per hour will be charged by the City of Pleasantville
for any police detail work.
and the Chief shall, pursuant to policies established by the Mayor as the
appropriate authority, administer duties as detailed in § 48-10 above.
[Amended 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 9-2018]
C. The Public Safety Committee of the City Council of the City of
Pleasantville shall be the hearing tribunal (referred to as "hearing
officer") with jurisdiction to conduct all disciplinary action as provided
for in the Police Department Rules and Regulations and the New Jersey
statutes and as authorized by law.
D. The Pleasantville Police Department rules and regulations shall be and
hereby are established, adopted, enacted and reaffirmed as the rules
and regulations for the government of the police force and for the
discipline of its members.
E. (Reserved)
§ 48-20 PERSONNEL POLICIES § 48-25
44:91
Chapter 52
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 61.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 235.
Solid waste — See Ch. 247.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 255.
§ 52-1. Department created; membership.
There is hereby created the Department of Public Works of the City of
Pleasantville. It shall consist of a Superintendent of Public Works, who shall
be the head of the Department, and all officers and employees assigned
thereto. All such officers and employees shall perform their duties subject
to the supervision and direction of the Superintendent.
§ 52-2. Street construction and maintenance supervision.
The Department of Public Works shall have charge of and supervision over
the care, maintenance and construction of all streets, roads, sidewalks,
alleys and public ways and the construction, operation and maintenance
of all streets, gutters and drains and the appurtenances thereto. Further,
the Department of Public Works shall have charge of and supervision over
the care, maintenance and construction of all public buildings and public
property, including all components of the sanitary sewer system, including
but not limited to pump stations and sewer laterals. Further, the
Department of Public Works shall have charge of and responsibility for the
maintenance of all city motor vehicles.
§ 52-3. Superintendent's responsibilities.
The Superintendent's responsibilities shall be to:
A. Provide, operate and maintain facilities for the collection and disposal
of refuse and garbage at such times and in such manner as may be
authorized by ordinance and supervise the performance of public
contracts for such purposes.
B. Supervise the work done in the city garage or by contract for the
storage, repair, servicing and maintenance of city-owned motor
vehicles.
C. Operate the city garage for the storage, servicing, repair and
maintenance of all city-owned motor vehicles.
D. Control the use of motor vehicles owned by the city by maintaining
individual vehicle records of mileage, costs of operation and
§ 48-25 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 52-3
52:92
§ 52-4. Divisions within Department created.
Within the Department of Public Works there are created two divisions:
maintenance and replacement schedules, charging the cost to the using
department under appropriate rules and regulations prescribed by the
City Administrator.
E. Inspect and maintain all public buildings and public property.
F. Report to the Mayor and the City Administrator, at such times as they
may require, any information concerning the Department and its work,
and shall, on a monthly basis, render a full report of the activities and
the operations of the Department for the preceding month to City
Council.
G. Maintain and be responsible for the property, custody and preservation
of the books, papers and records of the Department under his control.
H. Inspect and conduct studies of the city's public buildings and properties
for the purpose of developing and establishing immediate and longrange
plans for the upkeep and maintenance of those facilities.
I. Prepare budget estimates in conjunction with the Mayor and the City
Administrator and supervise the maintaining of complete financial
records for the Department.
J. Attend regular Council meetings and meetings of Council committees
when so directed by the Mayor, Council or the Administrator.
K. Perform such other duties or functions as shall be directed by the
Mayor and the City Administrator from time to time.
L. Supervise the inspection and maintenance of all element ii of the
sanitary sewer system, including but not limited to pump stations and
laterals, and provide for timely response to complaints from users of the
system in regard to any difficulties associated with the system.
A. The Division of Streets and Sanitary Sewer shall be responsible for the
care, maintenance and construction of all streets, roads, sidewalks,
alleys and public ways and the construction, operation and
maintenance of all streets, gutters and drains and the appurtenances
thereto. Further, the Division of Streets and Sanitary Sewer shall be
responsible for the care, maintenance, construction and reconstruction
of all elements of the sanitary sewer service system within the city,
including but not limited to pump stations and laterals.
B. The Division of Public Property, Vehicle Maintenance and Ancillary
Services shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of all public
buildings and public property. Further, the Division of Public Property,
Vehicle Maintenance and Ancillary Services shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all city motor vehicles and provide such other general
services as are necessary.
§ 52-3 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT § 52-5
52:93
§ 52-5. Positions of Assistant Superintendents created.
§ 52-6. Duties of Assistant Superintendent - Streets and Sanitary
Sewer.
The Assistant Superintendent - Streets and Sanitary Sewer shall perform
the duties of assisting the Superintendent as may be prescribed by the
Superintendent in regard to the care, maintenance and construction of
all streets, roads, sidewalks, alleys and public ways, as well as the
construction, operation and maintenance of all streets, gutters and drains
and the appurtenances thereto. Further, the Assistant Superintendent -
Streets and Sanitary Sewer shall perform such duties of assisting the
Superintendent as may be prescribed by the Superintendent in regard
to the care, maintenance and construction of the sanitary sewer service
system, including but not limited to pump stations and laterals. The
Assistant Superintendent - Streets and Sanitary Sewer shall be
knowledgeable in and capable of assisting and performing the duties of
Assistant Superintendent - Public Property, Vehicle Maintenance and
Ancillary Services if the rendering of such assistance is required.
§ 52-7. Duties of Assistant Superintendent - Public Property,
Vehicle Maintenance and Ancillary Services.
The Assistant Superintendent - Public Property, Vehicle Maintenance and
Ancillary Services shall perform the duties of assisting the Superintendent
as may be prescribed by the Superintendent in regard to the care,
maintenance and construction of all public buildings and public property.
Further, the Assistant Superintendent - Public Property, Vehicle
Maintenance and Ancillary Services will be responsible for the oversight
of the motor vehicle shop of the city and shall be responsible for all work
assigned to and carried on in such motor vehicle shop. The Assistant
Superintendent - Public Property, Vehicle Maintenance and Ancillary
Services shall be knowledgeable in and capable of assisting and performing
the duties of Assistant Superintendent - Streets and Sanitary Sewer if the
rendering of such assistance is required.
§ 52-8. Street lighting.
That portion of the street lighting system that is owned by the City of
Pleasantville shall be in the charge of and maintained by the Department.
§ 52-9. Shop Manager/Heavy-Duty Mechanic.
A. Within the Department of Public Works there is created the position of
Assistant Superintendent - Streets and Sanitary Sewer.
B. Within the Department of Public Works there is created the position of
Assistant Superintendent - Division of Public Property, Vehicle
Maintenance and Ancillary Services.
§ 52-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 52-9
52:94
A. There is hereby created the position of Shop Manager/Heavy-Duty
Mechanic, who shall be qualified and appointed by the Mayor, by and
with the advice and consent of Council, upon recommendation of the
hiring committee and after consultation with the City Administrator.
B. The Shop Manager/Heavy-Duty Mechanic shall ensure that the
maintenance and repairs of the city's heavy equipment and truck fleet
as well as the large number of automobiles are completed in a safe and
timely manner, with quick response to emergency situations.
C. The Shop Manager/Heavy-Duty Mechanic shall have the following
responsibilities:
(1) Supervise heavy-equipment mechanics and other mechanics within
the shop area and any other personnel that may be assigned at
anytime.
(2) Ensure that all employees are working safely and have the proper
safety equipment.
(3) Supervise, schedule and train mechanics who will perform repairs
and maintenance of equipment and city vehicles.
(4) Be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, for emergencies,
including snow removal.
(5) Utilization of computers for reports and files; recordkeeping duties,
which include budgeting and purchasing, to ensure that the
appropriate amounts of supplies and services are rendered within
budgetary restraints.
(6) Perform other related duties as assigned by the immediate
supervisor and other Department management, as required.
(7) Perform the following duties as a heavy-duty mechanic to
supplement and support the other mechanics within the shop:
(a) First echelon maintenance, such as changing oil, greasing
vehicles, changing tires, adjusting brakes, cleaning and
washing cars.
(b) Second echelon maintenance, such as installing new brakes,
mufflers and wheel bearings, and the tuning up of motors,
replacing spark plugs, carburetor adjustments, replacing
points and, if necessary, coils, adjusting and timing of engines
(c) When necessary, also perform third echelon maintenance,
including a complete motor overhaul, replacement or repair of
axles, springs, shock absorbers, water pumps, fuel pumps,
radiators, transmissions and other heavier-than-normal repair
and replacement work.
§ 52-9 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT § 52-9
52:95
Chapter 57
REVENUE AND FINANCE, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 4.
Defense and indemnification — See Ch. 20.
Ethics — See Ch. 27.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 41.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
§ 57-1. Department created; positions included.
There is created in the City of Pleasantville the Department of Revenue and
Finance, which will include those divisions of the City government and those
functions assigned to the department by the City Council in accordance with
D. The Shop Manager/Heavy Duty Mechanic's immediate supervisor will
be the Assistant Superintendent of Public Works, and he/she will report
directly to him.
E. Qualifications for this position are as follows:
(1) High school and vocational school graduate or equivalent.
(2) Training in basic and technical heavy equipment repair.
(3) Certification in the following areas:
(a) Diesel mechanics.
(b) Electrical.
(c) Feedback systems.
(d) Automatic transmissions.
(e) Automatic transaxle.
(f) Drivability and engine performance.
(4) Three years and supervisory oversight supervising at least three
mechanics in a bona fide auto repair shop.
(5) Must have own tools and utilize them on the job.
(6) Must possess a valid New Jersey driver's license with CDL
endorsement.
F. The salary or compensation of the Shop Manager/Heavy-Duty mechanic
shall be such as is provided for by ordinance.
§ 52-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 57-1
52:96
this chapter. It is intended that the department include the functions of the
office of the Chief Financial Officer and the Tax Collector.
§ 57-2. Chief Financial Officer.
A. Creation of office. The office of Chief Financial Officer is hereby created
in and for the City of Pleasantville pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.1 et seq. He shall possess the qualifications set forth therein.
The Chief Financial Officer shall serve as the department head of the
Department of Revenue and Finance.
B. Appointment. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the City
Council and shall serve in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.8.
C. Previous appointment. Any person serving as Chief Financial Officer at
the time of the adoption of this chapter shall continue in such position
without the need for reappointment and shall maintain all rights to the
office as have been acquired prior to the adoption of this chapter.
D. Supervision. The Chief Financial Officer shall be under the supervision
of and responsible to the City Administrator in all actions relative to the
duties and responsibilities of said office to the extent not prohibited by
law.
E. Duties. The Chief Financial Officer shall oversee financial operation of
the City of Pleasantville. The Chief Financial Officer shall also perform
all duties normally ascribed to the Chief Financial Officer, including all
the functions, powers and duties as provided by general law and City
ordinances. Additionally, the Chief Financial Officer shall perform all
the following:
(1) Keep and maintain books and records of the Division of Local
Finance in the Department of Community Affairs of the State of
New Jersey.
(2) Have custody of all public moneys of the City.
(3) Make monthly reports to the City Council of all receipts,
expenditure, commitments and unexpended appropriations.
(4) All moneys received from any source by or on behalf of the City or
any department, board, office or agency thereof, except as
otherwise provided by City ordinance, shall be paid to the Chief
Financial Officer who shall, by the next ensuing bank day after
their receipt, deposit them in the authorized public depository of
the City to the credit of the proper account.
(5) Maintain a central payroll system and all social security, FWT, SUI,
pension and insurance records required for municipal personnel.
(6) Prepare, on a monthly basis, a statement of the unexpended and
unencumbered balance in each account.
§ 57-1 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT § 57-2
52:97
§ 57-3. Tax Collector.
(7) Assist in the preparation of the City budget.
(8) Perform all general and budgetary accounting and fiscal controls
and such other duties as may be assigned.
F. Compensation. The Chief Financial Officer shall receive as
compensation the amount set forth in the salary ordinance for that
position.
G. Deputy Tax Collector. The Chief Financial Officer shall serve as Deputy
Tax Collector for the City and shall be responsible for securing
licensure or certification for such position within one year from the
adoption of this chapter or within one year from appointment to the
position of Chief Financial Officer.
A. Creation of office. The office of Municipal Tax Collector is hereby
created in and for the City of Pleasantville pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141 et seq. The Municipal Tax Collector shall serve as
deputy department head of the Division of Revenue and Finance.
B. Appointment; term; removal from office.
(1) The Municipal Tax Collector shall be appointed by the City Council
and shall serve for a term of four years pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-142. At the time of appointment, the Tax Collector shall be
certified by the State of New Jersey as Municipal Tax Collector.
(2) Any vacancy in the office of Municipal Tax Collector shall be filled
by appointment by the City Council.
(3) The Municipal Tax Collector shall not be removed from office
except in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.8, which statute is
incorporated herein by reference.
C. Supervision. The Tax Collector shall be under the supervision of and
responsible to the Chief Financial Officer in all actions relative to the
duties and responsibilities of said office to the extent not prohibited by
law.
D. Duties. The Tax Collector shall have and perform and discharge all
functions, powers and duties prescribed for tax collectors by general
law and by City ordinance. The Tax Collector shall receive and collect
all moneys assessed or raised by taxes or assessments for any purpose.
The Tax Collector shall keep proper record and shall report to the
Director of the Department of Revenue and Finance on a monthly basis
all receipts and deposits made.
E. Compensation. The Municipal Tax Collector shall receive as salary such
sums as may be fixed and adopted by the City Council in the annual
salary ordinance.
§ 57-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 57-3
52:98
§ 57-4. Deputy Tax Collector.
There is created in the City the position of Deputy Tax Collector. The Chief
Financial Officer shall serve as the Deputy Tax Collector and shall secure
such licenses or certification as required within one year from the adoption
of this chapter or within one year of the appointment to such position by
City Council.
§ 57-5. Municipal Tax Search Officer.
§ 57-6. Municipal Assessment Search Officer.
§ 57-7. State statutes.
Any and all positions, created and provided for in the Department of
Revenue and Finance, which positions are authorized by the statutes of
the State of New Jersey, shall be administered, and the person appointed
shall function within the parameters of such state statutes which are
incorporated herein by reference.
F. Deputy Chief Financial Officer. The Tax Collector shall serve as Deputy
Chief Financial Officer for the City and shall be responsible for securing
licensure or certification for such position within one year from the
adoption of this chapter or within one year from appointment to the
position of Tax Collector.
A. Creation of office. There is created in the City the position of Municipal
Tax Search Officer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-11.
B. Duties. The Municipal Tax Search Officer shall examine municipal
records as to unpaid municipal liens and shall certify the results of such
examination. Such examinations shall be conducted in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 54:5-11 et seq.
A. Creation of Office. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-18.1 et seq., there is
created in the City the position of Municipal Assessment Search Officer.
B. Duties. The Municipal Assessment Search Officer shall examine
municipal record and provide official certificates of searches as to
municipal improvement authorized by ordinance of the municipality,
but not assessed, affecting any parcel or tract of land in said
municipality in that future assessment will be made thereon pursuant to
such ordinance.
§ 57-3 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT § 57-7
52:99
Chapter 61
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Payrolls — See Ch. 16.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 41.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 44.
Chapter 65
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE CORPORATION
§ 57-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 57-7
61:100
ARTICLE I
Board of Trustees
[Adopted 7-17-1995 by Ord. No. 14-1995; amended in its entirety
8-18-2003 by Ord. No. 26-2003]
§ 65-1. Composition.
The Board of Trustees of the Pleasantville Urban Enterprise Corporation
will have nine Trustees and two alternates. Seven Trustees and one
alternate will be public Trustees. There will be three Trustees from the City
administration, one of which shall be the Mayor and two of which will be
Trustees of Council.
§ 65-2. Trusteeship requirements.
§ 65-3. Terms of office.
Each public Trustee shall be appointed for a term of three years, except
for the initial appointment which shall follow the effective date of this
article. Initial appointments shall be made so as to provide for staggered
expiration dates. Specifically, the initial appointment of the lender/banking
professional and one at-large resident shall expire December 31, 1995. The
A. Two of the public Trustees will be at-large trustees residing in the City
of Pleasantville. The remaining five public Trustees shall include one
Trustee from each of the following professions: attorney, realtor, retail
merchant, lender/banking official and Trustee of the City Planning
Board.
B. The five Trustees from the specified professions will be residents of the
City of Pleasantville or practice their profession in the City of
Pleasantville. Trustees of these professions who are retired are eligible
to serve in the position reserved for the profession for which the
Trustee has been retired. The Trustee of the Board who serves in the
position reserved for Planning Board Trustee must maintain his/her
position on the Planning Board, and any resignation or termination
from the Planning Board will be deemed a resignation or termination
from the Board of Trustees of the Pleasantville Urban Enterprise Zone
Corporation.
C. The Mayor shall serve by virtue of his/her office.
D. The Council Trustee shall be appointed annually by the President of
Council at the annual reorganization meeting of Council.
E. Two of the Trustees shall be designated as at-large alternates. One of
the alternates shall be a second Trustee of City Council and shall be
appointed annually by the President of Council at the annual
reorganization meeting of Council. The second at-large alternate shall
be either a resident of the City of Pleasantville or shall be an owner or
operator of a business located in the City of Pleasantville.
§ 65-1 URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE CORPORATION § 65-3
65:101
initial appointment of the retail merchant and one at-large resident shall
expire December 31, 1996. The initial appointment of the attorney, realtor
and City Planning Board Trustee shall expire December 31, 1997.
§ 65-4. Appointment of Trustees; vacancies.
Appointments of the public Trustees and alternates shall be made at the
annual reorganization meeting of the City Council by a majority vote of
Council. Any vacancy of public Trustee or alternate may be filled by a
majority vote of City Council at any regularly scheduled meeting of City
Council.
§ 65-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 65-4
65:102
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 80
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency communications plan — See Ch.
24, Art. I.
Fire Department — See Ch. 30.
Police Department — See Ch. 48.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Noise — See Ch. 171.
§ 65-4 ALARMS § 65-4
80:103

ARTICLE I
Automatic Protection Devices
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 60 of the
1982 Code]
§ 80-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM EQUIPMENT SUPPLIER — Any person, firm or corporation who
sells or leases and/or installs automatic protection devices.
ANSWERING SERVICE — A service whereby trained employees in
attendance at all times receive prerecorded voice messages from automatic
protection devices reporting an emergency at a stated location and have the
duty to relay immediately by live voice any such emergency message over a
designated or direct trunk line to the communications center of the Police
Department or Fire Department.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, bell, horn or siren which is attached to
the interior or exterior of a building and emits a warning signal audible
outside the building and is designed to attract attention when activated by
a criminal act or other emergency requiring police to respond.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE — An electrically operated instrument
composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which automatically
transmits a prerecorded voice alarm over regular telephone line, by direct
or indirect connection to the Police Department or Fire Department, upon
receipt of a stimulus from a sensory apparatus that has detected a physical
force or condition inherently characteristic of a fire or intrusion.
CENTRAL STATION PROTECTIVE SYSTEM — A protective system, or
group of such systems, operated privately for customers by a person, firm
or corporation which maintains supervisors and accepts recorded messages
from automatic protection devices at a central station having trained
operators and guards in attendance at all times who have the duty to
take appropriate action upon receipt of a signal or message, including
the relaying of messages by designated or direct trunk line to the
communications center of the Police Department or Fire Department.
CHIEF OF FIRE — The Chief of the City of Pleasantville's Fire Department.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the City of Pleasantville's Police
Department.
CITY — The City of Pleasantville, Atlantic County, New Jersey.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Pleasantville.
DESIGNATED TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the
communications center of the Police Department or Fire Department that is
for the primary purpose of handling emergency messages which originate
from automatic protection devices and are transmitted directly, or indirectly
through an intermediary.
§ 80-1 ALARMS § 80-1
80:105
DIRECT TRUNK LINE — A nonlisted, directly connected telephone line
leading from an intermediary to the communications center of the Police
Department or Fire Department that is for the primary purpose of handling
emergency messages on a person-to-person basis.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal activated by an automatic protection device,
any audible alarm or any other kind of direct or indirect signal given the
police or fire communications center to which police or firemen respond and
which is not the result of a burglary, fire, robbery or similar emergency.
FIRE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The fire communications room and
other rooms which house auxiliary communication equipment.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The City of Pleasantville Fire Department.
INTERMEDIARY — A central station protective system or an answering
service as herein defined.
KEY — To use a telephone line and equipment for transmitting a message
either directly or indirectly by an automatic protection device.
PERMIT — Written permission duly granted to an applicant by the city upon
payment of the required fee.
POLICE COMMUNICATIONS CENTER — The police communications room
and other rooms which house auxiliary communication equipment.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The City of Pleasantville's Police Department.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the communications
center of the Police Department or Fire Department that is for the purpose
of handling emergency calls on a person-to-person basis, which line is
identified by a specific listing among the white pages in the telephone
directory. 21
SECONDARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line leading into the
communications center of the Police Department or Fire Department that is
for the purpose of handling administrative and other calls on a person-toperson
basis, which line is identified by a specific listing among the white
pages in the telephone directory. 22
§ 80-2. Timing mechanism required.
After the enactment of this article, owners or lessees must equip audible
alarms with a timing mechanism that will disengage the audible alarm after
a maximum period of 15 minutes. Audible alarms without such a timing
mechanism shall be unlawful in the city and must be disconnected by the
owner or lessee within 60 days from the effective date of this article.
§ 80-3. Direct keying of automatic protection devices.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 80-3
80:106
§ 80-4. Indirect keying of automatic protection devices.
§ 80-5. List of current installations; supplemental list.
A. No automatic protection device installed after the effective date of this
article shall be keyed to a primary secondary trunk line.
B. After the effective date of this article, all automatic protection devices
that transmit recorded messages directly to the Police Department or
Fire Department shall be keyed to a designated trunk line.
C. Within 60 days from the effective date of this article, existing automatic
protection devices in the city shall be disconnected from primary and
secondary trunk lines.
D. Automatic protection devices disconnected, as provided in Subsection
C of this section, may be keyed to a designated trunk line.
E. After the effective date of this article, no one, except an alarm
equipment supplier holding a valid permit from the city, shall install any
automatic protection device to a designated trunk line.
A. Any person who has an automatic protection device in the city may
arrange to have such device keyed to an intermediary authorized to
relay emergency messages to the Police Department or Fire
Department.
B. The relay of messages by authorized intermediaries shall be over a
designated or direct trunk line.
C. Automatic protection devices keyed to an authorized intermediary may
also be keyed to another telephone which the owner or lessee of the
automatic protection device has available to himself or his
representative at some other location.
A. Within 90 days from the effective date of this article, every alarm
equipment supplier who has keyed an automatic protection device in
the city to the designated line shall furnish to the Chief of Police and the
Chief of the Fire Department a current list of such installations which
shall include the following information:
(1) The telephone number of the owner or lessee.
(2) The address where the device is installed and the telephone
number of that address.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of a central station
protective system or any other person or firm who is authorized to
respond to an emergency and gain access to the address where the
device is installed.
(4) The name and telephone number of any person, firm or
corporation, if any, other than the alarm equipment supplier who is
§ 80-3 ALARMS § 80-5
80:107
§ 80-6. Operational requirements.
Automatic protection devices installed in the city that are keyed to
designated trunk lines shall meet the following requirements:
§ 80-7. Technical information.
responsible for maintenance and repair of the automatic protection
device.
B. By the fifth working day of each month following the submission of the
initial list, every alarm equipment supplier shall furnish the Police
Department and Fire Department with a supplemental list of any
additional installations he has keyed to the designated trunk lines,
along with any corrections to or deletions from lists previously
furnished. An alarm equipment supplier who enters into the business
after the effective date of this article shall furnish a list containing the
information specified in § 80-5A by the fifth working day of the month
following a first installation and shall thereafter furnish supplemental
lists as required by this section.
C. All information furnished pursuant to these sections shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the use of the Police Department and Fire
Department only.
A. The type and content of recorded messages must be intelligible and in a
format approved prior to installation by the Chief of Police or Chief of
Fire as appropriate for the type of emergency.
B. No more than one call shall be made over a designated trunk line to the
Police Department or Fire Department as a result of a single activation
of the automatic protection device.
C. The time for transmitting each recorded message shall not exceed 15
seconds.
D. Recorded messages may be repeated during one call, but the interval
between each recorded message shall be no less than eight nor more
than 12 seconds.
E. The sensory mechanism used in connection with an automatic
protective device must be adjusted to suppress false indications of fire
or intrusion so that the device will not be actuated by impulses due to
fleeting pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, the
rattling or vibrating of doors and windows, vibrations to the premises
caused by the passing of vehicles or any other force not related to
genuine alarms.
F. All components comprising such a device must be maintained by the
owner or lessee in good repair to assure maximum reliability of
operation.
§ 80-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 80-7
80:108
§ 80-8. Repair service.
§ 80-9. Disconnecting alarm system.
When messages evidencing failure to comply with the operational
requirements set forth in § 80-6 are received by the Fire Department or the
Police Department and the Chief of the Department concerned concludes
that the automatic protection device sending such messages should be
disconnected in order to relieve the particular Department of the burden
of responding to false alarms, he is authorized to demand that the owner
or lessee of the device, or his representatives, disconnect the device until
it is made to comply with the operational requirements. If disconnection
of the defective device is not accomplished promptly and the Chief of
the Department concerned determines that the malfunctioning device is
repeatedly sending false alarms without any intermittent valid alarms, he
may then take any steps necessary to disconnect the defective automatic
protection device.
A. Each alarm equipment supplier who sells or leases an automatic
protection device in the city after the effective date of this article which
is keyed to a designated trunk line shall furnish operating instructions,
a circuit diagram and maintenance manual to the buyer or lessee.
B. Each alarm equipment supplier referred to in Subsection A shall
furnish, to the Chief of Police and Chief of Fire, operating instructions,
circuit diagram and maintenance manual for each type of automatic
protection device he deals in and installs in the city. If the instructions
are not clear, the alarm equipment supplier may be required to revise
the instructions to the Chief of Police and Chief of Fire and all buyers
and lessees of the particular automatic protection device.
A. Each alarm equipment supplier who sells or leases an automatic
protection device in the city which is keyed to a designated trunk line
shall make service available directly or through an agent on a twentyfour-
hour-per-day basis, seven days a week, to repair such device or to
correct any malfunction that may occur. Such service shall be made
available to any person using an automatic protection device supplied
at such user's election and expense.
B. At the time of installation, an alarm equipment supplier shall furnish, to
any buyer or lessee using a repair service, written information as to
how service may be obtained at any time, including the telephone
number of the alarm equipment supplier or agent responsible for
service. The buyer or lessee and the alarm equipment supplier or agent
supplying a service shall be responsible for having the device
disconnected or repaired as quickly as possible after notice that the
automatic protection device is not functioning properly.
§ 80-7 ALARMS § 80-10
80:109
§ 80-10. License and permit requirements.
Alarm equipment suppliers must conform to the requirements contained in
Chapter 119, Construction Codes, Uniform, as amended, as it pertains to
permits, licenses, inspections and tests by the Building Department.
§ 80-11. Inspection authority.
For the purpose of enforcing this article and as a condition to installing and
maintaining an automatic protection device, the owner or lessee thereof
shall execute a consent, in such form as may be prescribed by the City
Clerk, which will authorize the Director of the Building Department, the
Chief of Police and the Chief of Fire to enter upon a lessee's or owner's
premises within the City of Pleasantville, at such reasonable times and upon
reasonable notice, to inspect the installation and operation of an automatic
protection device.
§ 80-12. Testing automatic protection devices.
No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of an automatic
protection device without first obtaining permission from the Police
Department and Fire Department. Where the equipment is keyed through
an intermediary, no such permission is necessary unless the alarm or signal
is to be relayed to the Police Department or Fire Department.
§ 80-13. Furnishing of copies of article.
Alarm equipment suppliers, installers of audible alarms and intermediaries
shall furnish, at or prior to the time of contracting and at their expense, a
copy of this article to owners, lessees or users of the equipment or services
to be supplied.
§ 80-14. Responsibility for costs of false alarm.
A. For the purpose of defraying the costs to the city of responding to a
false alarm, the owner or lessee of an automatic protection device,
persons using the services of intermediaries and users of audible
alarms or any other kind of direct or indirect connection to the police or
fire communications centers, except persons using two-way live-voice
communication by telephone, shall, as a condition to installation and
continued operation of such equipment or service, execute a consent in
such form as may be prescribed by the City Clerk that such owner,
lessee or user shall pay the city $25 for each false alarm originating
from the owner's premises. This sum shall be a civil claim by the city
and does not affect the penalty provisions prescribed by § 80-15 hereof.
B. Any such owner, lessee or user who fails to execute the consent
described in § 80-14A within 90 days from the effective date of this
article shall, within the ninety-day period, disconnect the alarm,
automatic protection device or any other kind of direct or indirect
§ 80-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 80-14
80:110
§ 80-15. Violations and penalties.23
connection to the police or fire communications center and shall
discontinue using the services of any intermediaries.
A. Failure of any person to comply with the requirements of written notice
of a violation of any provision hereof within three days of receipt of such
notice, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, shall constitute
an offense punishable by a fine not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days. Such notice shall continue
in force and effect until full compliance with requirements stated
therein, and each and every failure to comply with such notice within 24
hours after the three days allowed for compliance shall constitute a
separate offense.
B. False alarm violation. Any person found guilty of misuse, false
activation or continual accidental activation shall be liable to the
penalties in Subsection A.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-14 ALARMS § 80-15
80:111

ARTICLE II
Smoke Detector, Fire Alarm and Sprinkler Systems
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II of Ch. 60 of the
1982 Code]
§ 80-16. Warning systems required in certain buildings.
Every building or structure not exceeding 35 feet in height above the
mean grade which is erected or substantially altered to be occupied for
residential purposes shall be protected with an automatic fire warning
system equipped with automatic smoke detection devices or automatic
smoke and heat detection devices primarily intended for the protection of
life by indicating abnormal conditions as hereinafter provided. Placement of
the aforesaid system shall be immediately adjacent to all sleeping quarters
in the building.
§ 80-17. Systems to conform to National Fire Code standards.
The aforesaid system shall conform to the requirements of the most recent
editions of National Fire Code Standard No. 101 relative to life safety and
of National Fire Code Standard No. 74 relative to household fire warning
equipment adopted by the National Fire Protection Association.24
§ 80-18. Systems to be installed and tested according to certain
standards.
Automatic smoke detection devices or automatic smoke and heat detection
devices which comprise such a system shall conform to and be installed and
tested periodically as specified by the most recent provisions of the Life
Safety Code, National Fire Protection Association No. 101, and Household
Fire Warning Equipment, National Fire Protection Association No. 74.25
§ 80-19. Audible alarm required in certain buildings.
For buildings and structures more than 35 feet in height above mean grade
occupied for residential purposes the automatic fire warning system shall
be installed as described above, and such system shall also initiate the
sounding of an audible alarm capable of being heard in all occupied areas
of the building or structure and shall register the location of the alarm at a
specified location within the building. The sounding of this system shall also
be tied into fire headquarters for receipt of fire alarms.
§ 80-20. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all residential buildings and structures
constructed after the effective date hereof, or substantially altered (over
24.Editor's Note: Copies of these standards are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
25.Editor's Note: Copies of these standards are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 80-16 ALARMS § 80-20
80:113
$1,500) after passage hereof, and shall include also all buildings hereafter
sold or transferred by deed or bill of sale.
§ 80-21. Control and enforcement of systems.
The number and placement of detectors shall be under the direct control
and enforcement of the Chief of the Pleasantville Fire Department and the
Fire Official of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 80-22. Notification to applicants for building permits.
Notification of this article shall be given to all applicants for building
permits prior to the issuance of such permits. Upon the issuance of a
building permit for new construction or alterations exceeding $1,500,
notification of same shall be forwarded to the Fire Official and the Chief of
the Pleasantville Fire Department.
§ 80-23. Installation of fire alarm and sprinkler systems in newly
constructed buildings.
A Class A fire system and approved combination fire alarm and sprinkler
systems, as defined in National Fire Codes No. 13 and No. 72 A, B, C, D
and L (whichever applicable) of the National Fire Protection Association,26
shall be installed in all new construction in the City of Pleasantville having
a sleeping capacity of 30 or more persons above the first floor, specifically
including tenement houses, apartment houses, boarding homes, lodging
houses, hotels, dormitories, clubhouses, public or private houses,
sanatoriums, surgical institutions, asylums, hospitals or homes for the aged.
All buildings four stories or more shall be totally sprinklered no matter what
type and/or occupancy.
§ 80-24. Application of provisions without regard to regulations of
funding agencies.
The provisions of this article shall apply without regard to the regulations of
lenders or funding agencies and shall be in addition to any control exercised
by such agencies concerning construction and fire protection requirements
related to such construction.
§ 80-25. Violations and penalties.27
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not less than $100
nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
26.Editor's Note: Copies of these standards are on file in the office of the City Clerk.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-20 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 80-25
80:114
ARTICLE III
Smoke Detectors and Alarms in Hotels and Multiple Dwellings
[Adopted 5-21-1984 by Ord. No. 12-1984]
§ 80-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to enact and establish in the City of
Pleasantville those regulations of the New Jersey Administrative Code
providing for the installation and maintenance of smoke detectors and/
or smoke alarms in hotels and multiple dwellings. Such regulations were
adopted and promulgated by the Commissioner of the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs in accordance with the authority and
power of law invested in him by N.J.S.A. 55:13A-7.1 which took place on
February 8,1980.
§ 80-27. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, as used in the Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Law, as amended (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.), the New Jersey
Administrative Code (N.J.A.C. 5:10-2 et seq.) and this article, shall have the
following meanings and be defined accordingly:
HOTEL — Any building, including but not limited to any related structure,
accessory building and land appurtenances thereto, and any part thereof,
which contains 10 or more units of dwelling space or has sleeping facilities
for 25 or more persons and is kept, used, maintained, advertised as or
held out to be a place where sleeping or dwelling accommodations are
available to transient or permanent guests. This definition shall also mean
and include any motor hotel, motel or established guesthouse which is
commonly regarded as a motor hotel, motel or established guesthouse, as
the case may be, in the community in which it is located.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building or structure of one or more stories
and any land appurtenances thereto, and any portion thereof, in which
three or more units of dwelling space are occupied or are intended to be
occupied by three or more persons who live independently of each other,
provided that this definition shall not be construed to include any building
or structure defined as a hotel in this article or registered as a hotel with the
Commissioner of Community Affairs or occupied or intended to be occupied
exclusively as such, nor shall this definition be construed to include dwelling
units of any mutual housing corporation construed under the Lanaham Act
(National Defense Housing) P.L. 849, 42 U.S.C. § 1521 et seq., as amended,
on or before June 1, 1941.
MULTIPLE-STATION UNIT — A smoke detector which may be either a
single-station unit interconnected with other single-station units for
common alarm enunciation or a smoke detector of the non-self-containedalarm
type connected to a remote alarm in a system designed to be
connected to a alternating current (AC) power supply source.
OWNER — The person who owns, purports to own or exercise control of any
hotel or multiple dwelling.
§ 80-26 ALARMS § 80-27
80:115
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, association or other entity, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 1:1-2.
SINGLE-STATION UNIT — A smoke detector which contains an alarm.
SMOKE DETECTOR — A fire alarm device which consists of an assembly
of electrical components, including a smoke chamber and provision for
connection to a power source and may either be a single-station unit or a
multiple-station unit.
SMOKE DETECTOR OF THE NON-SELF-CONTAINED TYPE — A smoke
detector, not containing an alarm, which is interconnected to a common
alarm or series of alarms.
TAG — A sticker or a piece of oaktag or cardboard attached or affixed to
a smoke detector, containing space for the entry of initials of the person
inspecting each detector and the date of inspection.
§ 80-28. Regulations adopted by reference; copies on file.
§ 80-29. Violations and penalties.28
Any person, owner, entity or other individual that is found guilty of violating
any of the provisions of this article and the New Jersey Administrative Code,
as incorporated by reference herein, shall be subject to a fine not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day that
such violation continues after a twenty-day written notice of same shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation of this article.
A. The provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:10-19.11(c), as amended by N.J.A.C.
5:10-25.3, shall be binding upon all owners, proprietors, managers and
operators of hotels and multiple dwellings as though fully set forth in
this article.
B. Three copies of said regulations have been placed on file in the office of
the Clerk of the City of Pleasantville upon the introduction of this article
for the use and examination of the public. Another copy of these
regulations is annexed hereto and made a part hereof.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 80-27 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 80-29
80:116
Chapter 84
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open alcoholic beverage containers — See Ch.
163.
Violations of the public peace — See Ch. 180.
Alcoholic beverages in taxicabs — See Ch.
265, § 265-23.
§ 80-29 ALARMS § 80-29
80:117

ARTICLE I
Licensing and Control
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 63 of the
1982 Code]
§ 84-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful to manufacture, sell, transport, rectify, blend, treat,
fortify, mix, process or distribute alcoholic beverages in the city, except in
accordance with the statute in such case made and provided and unless and
until a license therefor shall be first had and obtained.
§ 84-2. Issuing authority.
The Council shall constitute the authority to administer the issuance of
licenses under this article.
§ 84-3. License applications.
Each applicant for a license shall file a written application upon the form
prepared therefor by the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control, accompanied by a deposit of the full amount of the required license
fee, and shall cause a notice to make such application to be published,
as required by the rules and regulations issued by said Director, once a
week for two weeks, successively, in a newspaper printed in the city. Each
application must be duly sworn to by the applicant. Upon receipt of said
application, the same shall be referred to the License Committee of the
Council, who shall investigate the applicant, inspect the premises sought
to be licensed and report to the Council with its recommendation upon the
grant or refusal of said application.
§ 84-4. Types of licenses available.
§ 84-5. Number of licenses limited.
A. The licenses to be issued by Council shall be plenary retail consumption
licenses, plenary retail distribution licenses and club licenses.
B. No limited retail distribution license shall be issued.
C. No plenary retail distribution license shall be issued to permit the sale
of alcoholic beverages in or upon any premises in which any other
mercantile business is carried on.
D. All licenses shall be issued pursuant to law and subject to such rules
and regulations as may be imposed by the Director of the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control and by the Council of the city.
A. The number of licenses to be granted by the Council of the city shall be
limited as follows:
(1) Nine plenary retail consumption licenses.
§ 84-1 ALARMS § 84-5
80:119
§ 84-6. License term; proration of fee.
All licenses shall be issued for the term of one year on the first day of July in
each year. The license fee for all licenses shall be prorated according to the
date of the license and based on the respective annual fee.
§ 84-7. Fees.
(2) Three plenary retail distribution licenses.
(3) Three club licenses.
B. After November 1, 1965, no licenses shall be granted by the Council in
excess of the number above specifically provided and limited.
A. Retail consumption. [Amended 5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 3-1995]
(1) The annual fee for each plenary retail consumption license shall be:
[Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
Year Fee
1998 $1,000
1999 $1,200
2000 $1,440
2001 $1,728
2002 and after $2,000
(2) No plenary retail consumption license shall be issued to permit the
sale of alcoholic beverages in or upon any premises in which a
grocery, delicatessen, drugstore or other mercantile business
(except the keeping of a hotel or restaurant or the sale of cigars
and cigarettes at retail as an accommodation to patrons or the
retail sale of nonalcoholic beverages as accessory beverages to
alcoholic beverages) is carried on.
B. Retail distribution. [Amended 3-19-1984 by Ord. No. 4-1984;
5-15-1995 by Ord. No. 3-1995]
(1) The fee for each plenary retail distribution license shall be as
follows: [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
Year Fee
1998 $615
1999 $735
2000 $880
2001 $1,055
2002 $1,265
2003 $1,520
§ 84-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 84-7
80:120
§ 84-8. Restrictions on location of licensed premises; exceptions.
§ 84-9. Hours of sale.
Year Fee
2004 $1,835
2005 $2,000
(2) The annual license fees from and after July 1, 1995, shall be the
same as hereinabove fixed until changed and amended pursuant to
law.
C. The fee for each club license (license to sell alcoholic beverages
intended for immediate consumption on the licensed premises only to
bona fide club members and their guests) shall be the sum of $150.
D. All licenses hereinbefore mentioned shall be issued pursuant to law and
subject to such rules and regulations as may be imposed by the State
Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control and by the City Council of
the City of Pleasantville.
A. No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages within 200
feet of any church or public schoolhouse, except to hotels, clubs and
fraternal organizations which own or are in actual possession of the
licensed premises.
B. No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages within
1,000 feet of any duly licensed premises containing a plenary retail
consumption or distribution license.
C. The Council of the City of Pleasantville may grant an exception to
§ 84-8B for extraordinary circumstances. In order to grant an exception
to § 84-8B, it shall be necessary to have a vote of 2/3 of all Council
members.
A. No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver, or allow, permit or suffer the sale,
service or delivery, of any alcoholic beverage or permit the consumption
of any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises, other than in
private guest rooms of bona fide hotels and motels on Mondays,
Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays between the
hours of 4:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., and on Sundays between the hours of
4:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon; provided, however, that nothing in this
section shall prohibit the sale and service of alcoholic beverages on a
Sunday in the public dining rooms of bona fide hotels and motels
containing at least 25 sleeping rooms and in the public dining rooms
and bona fide restaurants as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t, but then only to
persons seated at tables and with bona fide meals.
B. It is further provided that no licensee in Pleasantville shall sell, serve or
deliver, or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery, of any
package sales before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Mondays,
§ 84-7 ALARMS § 84-9
80:121
§ 84-10. Interiors to be visible from outside.
The clear interior view of the whole of said licensed place or barroom
(except for toilet purposes) shall in no way be obstructed by a screen
or screens, nontransparent glass, shade or shades, blind or blinds, door,
shutter, merchandise or advertisements or by blank walls or other
obstructions, but the whole of the interior of said barroom or licensed place
shall be open to the public view from the sidewalk or sidewalks adjacent
thereto; provided, however, that it shall be lawful for screens or blinds to be
constructed or placed in the doors or windows of said licensed place to be
not in excess in height of five feet from the sidewalk level of the sidewalks
adjacent to said licensed place, said height to be calculated from the lowest
point of the sidewalk level.
§ 84-11. License suspension and revocation.
For the violation of any of the provisions of this article, the Council may
revoke or suspend any license issued by it; provided, however, that no
suspension or revocation of any license shall be made until a five-day notice
of the charges preferred against the licensee shall have been given to
him personally or by mailing the same by registered mail addressed to
him at the licensed premises and a reasonable opportunity to be heard
thereon afforded to him. A suspension or revocation of a license shall be
effected by a notice in writing of such suspension or revocation, designating
the effective date thereof, and in case of suspension, the term of such
suspension, which notice may be served upon the licensee personally or
by mailing the same by registered mail addressed to him at the licensed
premises. Such suspension or revocation shall apply to the licensee and to
the licensed premises.
§ 84-12. Sales to minors. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the service
or delivery of any alcoholic beverage directly or indirectly to any person
under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages or allow, permit or
Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays; provided,
however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale of alcoholic
beverages in original containers for off-premises consumption, package
sales on Sundays between the hours of 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m., with
the exception of sales beginning at 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. during May
1 through September 30 each year. [Amended 8-5-2013 by Ord. No.
7-2013]
C. During the hours that sales hereinabove are prohibited, the entire
licensed premises shall also be closed, but this closing-of-premises
requirement shall not apply to bona fide hotels or motels or to bona fide
restaurants as defined as aforesaid in N.J.S.A 33:1-1t. [Amended
2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
§ 84-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 84-12
80:122
suffer the consumption of alcoholic beverages by any such person upon the
licensed premises.
§ 84-13. Purchases by minors. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
No person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages shall
purchase or attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage.
§ 84-14. Misrepresentation of age. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
§ 84-15. Entertainment on private premises.29
§ 84-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
A violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable upon
conviction by a fine not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of community service
A. No person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages shall
falsely represent that he or she is of the legal age for purchasing
alcoholic beverages in an attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage.
B. No person shall misrepresent or misstate his or her age or the age of
any other person for the purpose of inducing any person to make sale,
serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a person under the legal age
for purchasing alcoholic beverages.
A. No licensee shall engage in or shall allow, permit or suffer any person
employed to perform dancing or other entertainment in or upon the
licensed premises to carry on any part of such dancing or other
entertainment in a lewd, licentious, lascivious or improper manner.
B. No licensee shall engage in or allow, permit or suffer any person to
appear on the premises of any establishment licensed for the sale and
distribution of alcoholic beverages in any act, scene, sketch or other
form of entertainment, including dancing for the benefit of patrons with
either or both breasts or the lower part of the torso uncovered in case of
females and, in case of males, the lower part of the torso uncovered or
so thinly covered or draped so as to appear uncovered.
C. No licensee shall employ, allow, permit or suffer any waitress or any
other person who comes in contact with or is likely to come in contact
with the patrons of any establishment licensed for the sale and
distribution of alcoholic beverages to appear in the presence of such
patrons with either or both breasts or the lower part of the torso
uncovered or so thinly covered or draped so as to appear uncovered.
29.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 175, Obscene Materials.
§ 84-12 ALARMS § 84-16
80:123
not exceeding 90 days. Each and every day such a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 84-16 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 84-16
80:124
ARTICLE II
Consumption and Use in Public30
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II of Ch. 63 of the
1982 Code]
§ 84-17. Alcohol dispensing and consumption restricted.
It is hereby prohibited to drink, dispense or use any intoxicating liquor
on any sidewalk, street, avenue, highway, public parking lot or public or
quasi-public place, public conveyance or in any motor vehicle not on private
property, within the City of Pleasantville, Atlantic County, New Jersey, at any
time.
§ 84-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not less than $100
nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
30.Editor's Note: See also § 163-3, Open alcohol containers restricted.
§ 84-17 ALARMS § 84-18
80:125

ARTICLE III
Underage Possession or Consumption on Private Property
[Adopted 11-19-2007 by Ord. No. 39-2007]
§ 84-19. Underage consumption.
It shall be unlawful for person under the legal age who, without legal
authority, knowingly possesses or knowingly consumes an alcoholic
beverage on private property.
§ 84-20. Penalty.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, as amended, be punished by a fine of $250
for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
§ 84-21. Additional penalties.
A. In addition to the fine authorized for this offense, the court may
suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of the
defendant. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the court shall forward a
report to the Division of Motor Vehicles starting the first and last day of
the suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, as amended. If a person at the time of the imposition
of sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of license
postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the privilege
of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the
sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after the
person reaches the age of 17 years.
B. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by the state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division of Motor Vehicles along with
the report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth,
eye color and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the court.
C. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
D. If a person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident, the
court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
§ 84-19 ALARMS § 84-21
80:127
§ 84-22. Exceptions.
submit it to the Division of Motor Vehicles on the required report. The
court shall not collect the license of a non-resident convicted under
this article. Upon receipt of a report from the court, the Division of
Motor Vehicles shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
A. Nothing contained in this article is intended, nor shall it be construed,
as prohibiting an underaged person from consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious observance, ceremony
or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in the
presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative
who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages.
B. As used in the preceding subsection (Subsection A hereof), the
following terms shall have the meaning set forth:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the
underaged person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underaged person's grandparent, aunt or uncle,
sibling or any other person related by blood or affinity.
C. Nothing contained in the article is intended nor shall it be construed as
prohibiting possession of alcoholic beverages by any such person while
actually engaged in the performance of employment by a person who is
licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while actively
engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or
hotel management program or at a county vocational school or
postsecondary educational institution; provided, however, that this
article shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty
under this article, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law against a
person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at
premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 84-21 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 84-22
80:128
Chapter 87
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pool and billiard parlors — See Ch. 203.
§ 84-22 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 84-22
87:129

ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Ch. 66 of the 1982 Code]
§ 87-1. Purpose.31
This article is enacted for the purpose of raising revenue and for the
regulation and control of coin-operated amusement games, devices or
machines.
§ 87-2. Definitions.32
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT GAME, DEVICE OR MACHINE — Any
coin-operated machine or device, whether mechanical, electrical or
electronic, designed for operation by the public by the insertion of a coin
for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, the object of which is to
achieve a score which, by comparison to that obtained by other players,
demonstrates relative supposed skill or competence, irrespective of
whether skill or competence was required. It shall include but not be limited
to devices such as pinball machines, skeeball machines, devices utilizing a
video or cathode tube and other similar machines or devices designed to
be representative of real games or activities; provided, however, that the
definition shall not include vending machines designed for the sale of a
product which do not incorporate gaming or amusement features and shall
not include jukeboxes as defined in Article II of this chapter.
§ 87-3. License required.33
All coin-operated amusement games, devices or machines operated,
maintained or used in any public or quasi-public place or in any building,
store or other place wherein the public are invited or wherein the public
may enter, and particularly, but not by way of limitation, all coin-operated
amusement games, devices or machines operated, maintained or used as
aforesaid, may be licensed by the city and shall not be placed, operated,
maintained or used within the municipal limits of the city without a license
for that purpose.
§ 87-4. License applications.34
A separate application for each machine shall be filed on a form to be
furnished by the City Clerk or designee,35 which form shall show:
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
32.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Licensing, Art. I.
§ 87-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-4
87:131
§ 87-5. Issuance of license; term.36
The licenses for the placing, operation, maintenance or use of such
amusement devices or machines shall be issued by the City Clerk or
designee to and in the name of the proprietor of the premises and shall
be issued for the year commencing June 1 and expiring May 31 at 12:00
midnight.
§ 87-6. Fee and payment.
§ 87-7. Posting of licenses; contents.
§ 87-8. License transfers.
A. The name of the applicant.
B. The post office address.
C. The number of machines the applicant intends to operate.
D. The manufacturer's serial number of each machine.
E. Whether or not the person making the application has ever been
convicted of a violation of this article.
F. Such other information as the City Clerk or designee shall deem
necessary or proper.
A. The fee for the issuance of a license shall be $100 for each game,
machine or device for the year or any part thereof. [Amended
6-21-1982 by Ord. No. 14-1982; 10-1-1984 by Ord. No. 21-198437]
B. The fee for the license shall be payable with the filing of the application,
and if the application is rejected the fee shall be returned to the
applicant.
A. No device or machine as specified in this article shall be placed,
operated, maintained or used until the license shall be affixed thereto in
a conspicuous place, so that the same shall be easily and quickly
identified.
B. Said license shall, on its face, disclose the manufacturer's serial
number, the name of the post office address of the licensee, the license
fee paid and shall briefly state that the machine or device to which the
same is affixed is licensed for operation by the city.
A. The holder of a license shall be permitted to transfer the license within
the year for which it is issued to any other like machine operated in the
same premises in place of the machine from which the license is
transferred.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 87-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 87-8
87:132
§ 87-9. License revocation.
If a license has been issued and the person to whom it has been issued shall
thereafter be convicted of a violation of this article, said license and every
other license held by the licensee under and by virtue of this article shall
immediately be revoked by the Council.
§ 87-10. Devices near school premises.
No machine or device licensed under this article shall be used, placed,
maintained or operated in any premises within 200 feet of any school.
§ 87-11. Use restrictions; maximum number of devices in one
premises. [Amended 6-21-1982 by Ord. No. 14-1982; 10-1-1984 by
Ord. No. 21-198439]
§ 87-12. Violations and penalties.40
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not less than $100
nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
B. The licensee, immediately upon such transfer, shall notify the City Clerk
or designee of such transfer and communicate to him the
manufacturer's serial number and the type of machine.38
A. No person shall use, or permit to be used, any of the machines or
devices licensed hereunder for the purposes of gambling.
B. No more than three coin-operated amusement games, devices or
machines shall be allowed on any one premises of any licensee.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 87-8 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-12
87:133

ARTICLE II
Jukeboxes
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. III of Ch. 155 of the
1982 Code]
§ 87-13. Definitions.41
As used in this article, the following definitions shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine or device which, upon the
insertion of a coin or purchased token, may be operated for the playing of
music, songs or other melodies or similar sounds.
§ 87-14. Hours of operation.
No person owning, keeping, leasing or having possession, in any store, cafe,
restaurant, nightclub, bar, saloon or in any place of amusement or business
in the city, of a device for playing music by records, commonly known as a
"jukebox," shall operate said jukebox or cause or permit the jukebox to be
operated between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. in such a loud
or offensive manner as to disturb or interfere with the peace, quiet or health
of persons in, or the good order of the neighborhood in which, the jukebox
is operated.42
§ 87-15. Creation of public nuisance prohibited.
No person shall operate a jukebox at any time in such a manner as to create
and maintain thereby a public nuisance in the city.
§ 87-16. Violations and penalties.43
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
41.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
42.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 171, Noise.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 87-13 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 87-16
87:135
Chapter 90
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pets at Municipal Harbor — See Ch. 99,
§ 99-4.
Animals in mobile home parks — See Ch. 166.
Pet excretions on walks and parking
areas — See Ch. 207, § 207-6D(1)(d).
§ 87-16 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 87-16
87:136
ARTICLE I
Dogs
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 98 of the
1982 Code]
§ 90-1. Applicability.
This article shall be deemed to apply only to a dog which has attained the
age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
§ 90-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG — Any male or female dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a
pet shop.[Added 11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 49-1997; amended 2-17-1999
by Ord. No. 6-1999]
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who harbors
or has such dog in his keeping.
§ 90-3. Application for license and registration tag.
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age in the city
shall, in the month of January in each year, apply for and procure from the
City Clerk a license and official metal registration tag for each such dog
so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each such dog a collar or
harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 90-4. Deadline for application for license and tag.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall apply for a license and registration tag for such
dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 90-5. Only one license and tag required.
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and a license and tag issued by any
other municipality of this state shall be accepted by the city as evidence of
compliance with §§ 90-3 and 90-7.
§ 90-6. Application contents.
§ 90-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 90-6
87:137
§ 90-7. License and tag fees; exception.
§ 90-8. Unauthorized removal or attachment of registration tag.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 90-9. Running at large.
No dog, whether licensed or not, shall be permitted by its owner or keeper
to run at large upon any of the sidewalks, streets or public places of the
city at any time; provided, however, that the owner or keeper of a dog, his
agent, servant or employee may permit his dog to be upon the sidewalks,
streets, avenues, highways or alleys if such dog shall be led by a line, leash
or chain fastened to the collar or harness upon such dog. The line, leash
or chain shall be held by such owner or keeper or his agent, servant or
A. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the dog for which the license and registration are sought and whether it
is of a long-haired or short-haired variety and the name, street and post
office address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor
such dog.
B. The information on said application and the registration number issued
for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the City
Clerk. In addition, he shall forward to the State Department of Health
each month, on forms furnished by said Department, an accurate
account of registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed of.
Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the applications.
A. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection B of this section, the person
applying for the license and registration tag shall pay to the City Clerk
one of the following: [Amended 11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 49-1997]
(1) Five dollars for each dog which has been spayed or neutered; $8 for
each dog that is not spayed or neutered. Said licenses shall expire
on the 31st day of January in each year.
(2) A late fee of $5 will be charged to each license purchased after
March 31, with the exception of dogs who could not be licensed
prior to March 31.
B. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service dogs" or dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other dogs hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or
keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
[Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
§ 90-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 90-9
87:138
employee in such manner that the dog shall be kept fully under control of
such owner or keeper, or his agent, servant or employee so as to prevent
the dog from biting persons upon the sidewalks, streets or public places and
in such manner as to prevent said dog from causing damage or injury to
property of any of the residents of this City.44
§ 90-10. Animal Control Officer.
There shall be a Animal Control Officer appointed by the Council, whose
duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this article. He shall be paid an
annual salary as determined by ordinance of the Council. Nothing contained
in this section or in any other section of this article shall be construed as
limiting the duty or authority of the Chief of Police and of the members of
the Police Department to enforce the provisions of this article.45
§ 90-11. Canvass of dogs; report. [Amended 11-3-1997 by Ord. No.
49-1997; 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
The City Clerk shall biennially cause a canvass to be made of all dogs
owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the City. He/she shall report,
on or before September 1 of each year, the results to the State Department
of Health.
§ 90-12. Seizure and impoundment.
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to take into custody and
impound or cause to be taken into custody and impounded and taken to a
suitable facility or place determined by the Council, the following:
§ 90-13. Cruelty to animals prohibited. [Amended 8-1-2016 by Ord.
No. 9-2016]
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:22-11-1 through N.J.S.A. 4:22-60 governing the
prevention of cruelty to animals are incorporated herein by reference.
A. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog, which said Animal Control Officer has reason to
believe is a stray dog.
B. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog, without a current registration tag on his collar.
C. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog.
D. Any dog running at large in violation of § 90-9.
44.Editor's Note: Former § 98-10, Muzzling proclamation, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 49-1997.
45.Editor's Note: Former § 98-12, Deputy Dog Warden appointed, which immediately followed
this section, was repealed 11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 49-1997.
§ 90-9 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 90-13
87:139
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
TETHER — To restrain an animal by tying to any stationary object or
structure, including but not limited to a house, tree, fence, post, garage
or shed, by any means but not limited to a chain, rope, cord, leash,
or pulley/running line, but shall not include the use of a leash when
walking an animal.
B. Chaining or tethering of dogs.
(1) Dogs shall be able to move freely when tethered and shall be so
confined for a period no greater than nine hours in a twenty-fourhour
period. The size of the tether shall be a minimum of 15 linear
feet and shall remain tangle-free. Dogs must be equipped with a
properly fitted harness or buckle-type collar. The tether or chain
shall be constructed of lightweight material, not weighing more
than 1/16 of the animal's weight. A doghouse shall be accessible to
dogs that are chained or tethered. Tethered animals shall have
access to potable water, food, shelter, and dry ground at all times.
(2) No dog or other domesticated animal shall remain outdoors,
tethered, untethered, or penned during a period of extreme
weather, including but not limited to, extreme heat (above 90º F.)
extreme cold (below 32º F.), or during thunderstorms, tornadoes,
tropical storms, or hurricanes.
(3) In no instance shall a dog or other domesticated animal remain
outdoors, tethered, untethered, or penned under the age of six
months old, or while sick, injured, or in distress.
C. Enforcement and entry onto premises.
(1) Any Pleasantville Police Officer, humane law enforcement officer or
agent of the New Jersey Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (SPCA), Atlantic County SPCA, the Pleasantville Animal
Control Officer or vendor may, upon notification to the Pleasantville
Police Department, immediately enter onto private property where
a dog is located and take physical custody of the dog or other
animal which is at risk of imminent harm due to a violation of this
subsection; and shall place the dog or other domesticated animal
under the care of the Atlantic County Animal Shelter to ensure the
humane care and treatment of the dog or other domesticated
animal.
(2) Upon taking physical custody of a dog or other domesticated
animal pursuant to this subsection the person taking custody shall
provide notice in accordance with procedures described in § 90-15.
§ 90-13 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 90-14
87:140
§ 90-14. Interference with enforcement.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with any person appointed as
Animal Control Officer or any officer of the City or other duly authorized
agent in the performance of any duty authorized or empowered by this
article.
§ 90-15. Notice of seizure. [Amended 11-3-1997 by Ord. No.
49-1997]
§ 90-16. Disposition of fees collected.
A. If any dog seized as provided in Subsections A to D, both inclusive, of
§ 90-12 wears a collar or harness having inscribed thereon or attached
thereto the name and address of any person or a registration tag, or if
the owner or the person keeping or harboring said dog is otherwise
known, the Animal Control Officer shall forthwith serve or cause to be
served on the person whose address is given on the collar, or on the
owner or on the person keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a
notice in writing stating that the dog has been seized and will be liable
to be offered for adoption or destroyed if not claimed within seven days
after the service of the notice. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
B. The notice referred to in Subsection A of this section may be served
either by delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served or by
leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of abode or at the
address given on the collar or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid
letter addressed to that person at his usual or last known place of abode
or to the address given on the collar.
C. The preceding requirements of Subsections A and B of this section shall
not be deemed applicable when any dog found running at large or
seized and impounded pursuant to § 98-12 (whether licensed or
unlicensed) is vicious or appears to be suffering from rabies. In such
case, the Animal Control Officer or any member of the Police
Department may forthwith cause said dog to be destroyed.
A. License fees, redemption fees and other moneys collected or received
under the provisions of this article, except registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded by the City Clerk to the City Treasurer within 30 days after
collection or receipt.
B. Such fees and other moneys shall be placed in a separate account from
any of the other accounts of the City and shall be used only for the
purposes permitted by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.11.
C. The registration tag fees shall be forwarded by the Clerk, within 30
days after collection, to the State Department of Health, as prescribed
by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.11.
§ 90-14 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 90-17
87:141
§ 90-17. Vicious dogs.
§ 90-18. Nuisance barking.46
No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually barks,
howls, whines or cries between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. or
which, by frequent barking, howling, whining or crying, disturbs the peace,
comfort or quiet of the neighborhood, thereby creating or maintaining a
nuisance.
§ 90-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999; 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 7-2000]
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.19, any person violating or failing to
comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in the
Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville, be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding
90 days and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each
day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute
a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. Any person pleading
guilty may pay a fine of $50 directly to the Municipal Court of the City of
Pleasantville.
A. Any dog which has attacked or bitten any human being or which
habitually attacks other dogs or domestic animals is hereby defined to
be a "vicious dog" for the purposes of this section.
B. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or Acting Chief to receive and
to cause to be investigated complaints against dogs. When any dog
complained against shall be deemed by the Chief of Police or Acting
Chief to be a vicious dog as herein defined, he shall report the facts to
the Municipal Judge, who shall thereupon cause the owner or person
harboring such dog to be notified in writing of the complaint against
such dog and to appear before said Judge at a stated time and place.
The Judge, at the time set for such hearing, shall inquire into the facts
and give all interested persons an opportunity to be heard, under oath,
and to be represented by counsel.
C. If the Judge shall decide, in accordance with the evidence before him,
that such dog complained of is a vicious dog as defined by this section,
notice of such decision shall be given to the owner or person harboring
such dog. Thereafter, no such dog, determined as aforesaid to be a
vicious dog, shall be permitted to run at large or be upon any street or
public place in the city, except while securely under leash, as provided
in § 90-9 hereof. The owner or person harboring any such vicious dog
who shall suffer or permit such dog to run at large or be upon any street
or public place in the City, while not securely muzzled and under leash,
shall be guilty of a violation of this article. [Amended 2-17-1999 by
Ord. No. 6-1999]
46.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 171, Noise.
§ 90-17 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 90-19
87:142
ARTICLE II
Pet Shops, Kennels, Shelters and Pounds
[Adopted 11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 49-1997]
§ 90-20. License required.
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel or pet
shop shall apply to the City Clerk for a license entitling him or her to keep
or operate such establishment. Any person holding such license shall not
be required to secure individual licenses for dogs owned by such licensee
and kept at such establishments; such licenses shall not be transferable to
another owner or different premises.
§ 90-21. Application information.
§ 90-22. License term. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
All licenses issued for a kennel or pet shop shall state the purpose for which
the establishment is maintained, and all such licenses shall expire on the
last day of June of each year.
§ 90-23. License fees. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
License fees for kennels and pet shops shall be as follows:
§ 90-24. Causes for revocation.
All licenses issued for a kennel or pet shop shall be subject to revocation
by the city on recommendation of the State Department of Health or the
Atlantic County Health Officer for failure to comply with the rules and
regulations of either, after the owner has been afforded a hearing by either
the State Department of Health or the Atlantic County Board of Health.
A. The application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
(2) The street address where the establishment is located, or proposed
to be located, together with a general description of the premises.
(3) The purposes for which it is to be maintained.
B. Each application shall be accompanied by the written approval of the
Health Officer of the Atlantic County Board of Health that the
establishment or proposed establishment complies with local and state
rules governing the location of and sanitation at such establishment.
A. A kennel accommodating 10 or fewer dogs shall pay $10 each year.
B. A kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs shall pay $25 each year.
C. Pet shops shall pay $10 each year.
§ 90-20 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 90-25
87:143
§ 90-25. Control of dogs off premises.
No dog kept in a kennel or pet shop shall be permitted off such premises,
except on a leash or in a crate or under other safe control.
§ 90-26. Report to state.
The City Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Health a list of all
kennels, pet shops and pounds licensed within 30 days after the licenses
therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and address of the
licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 90-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
§ 90-25 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 90-27
87:144
ARTICLE III
Wild and Other Animals
[Adopted 11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 49-1997]
§ 90-28. Feral cats.
No person shall feed, harbor or shelter feral cats within the City of
Pleasantville and their removal is encouraged.
§ 90-29. Keeping of certain other animals prohibited.
No person, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, association or
individual shall harbor or keep hogs, swine, chickens, horses, geese, goats,
ducks, mules and donkeys within the limits of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 90-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of the
above sections of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of community service not exceeding
90 days. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
§ 90-31. Feeding of wildlife. [Added 11-21-2005 by Ord. No.
34-2005]
A. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
B. Prohibited conduct. No person shall feed, in any public park or on any
other property owned or operated by the City of Pleasantville, any
wildlife, excluding confined wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in
zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or unconfined wildlife at
environmental education centers).
§ 90-28 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 90-31
87:145
C. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
Police Department and the Construction/Code Department of the City of
Pleasantville.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$100.
§ 90-31 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 90-31
87:146
ARTICLE IV
Pet Waste
[Added 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 33-2005]
§ 90-32. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement,
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 90-33. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
§ 90-34. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this article while such animal is being
used for that purpose.
§ 90-35. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the Construction/Code Enforcement Department of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 90-32 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 90-36
87:147
§ 90-36. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.
§ 90-36 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 90-36
87:148
Chapter 95
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 187. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 278.
§ 90-36 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS § 90-36
95:149

ARTICLE I
Bicycle Regulations
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Ch. 71 of the 1982 Code]
§ 95-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly provided, or unless there is something in the
subject or context repugnant to such construction, or unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of Council, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
BICYCLE — Includes a vehicle with two tandem wheels, neither of which
are less than 20 inches in diameter, with solid or pneumatic tires, having a
steering bar or wheel, a saddle seat, and propelled by human power.
DEALER IN BICYCLES — Any person engaged in the sale of bicycles at
retail or wholesale.
LICENSEE — Any person who procures from the City Clerk a license sticker
for a bicycle, together with a receipt.[Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No.
20-1982]
LICENSE STICKER — A registration sticker issued by the City Clerk
bearing the license number.[Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 20-1982]
OPERATE — The use, putting into action or causing to function of a bicycle
by a person mounted thereon.
RENTAL AGENCY — Any person engaged in the business of offering for
rental and renting bicycles for hire by the public.
§ 95-2. License and registration.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place in the city without having first registered
such bicycle and secured a license therefor.
§ 95-3. Registration procedure. [Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No.
20-1982]
A. Registration and license for a bicycle shall be made by the owner by
applying at the Pleasantville Police Department.
B. Such registration shall be signed by the owner, and, if the owner is a
person under 18 years of age, the signature shall be witnessed by a
parent of the owner or, if no parent is living, then by the legal guardian
of the owner. The application shall state the full name and address of
the owner of the bicycle, the name of the manufacturer, the serial
number of the frame thereof, the approximate date when the owner
obtained title thereto and, if not new, when it was obtained and the
name and address of the person from whom it was obtained.
§ 95-1 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS § 95-3
95:151
§ 95-4. License term. [Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 20-1982]
The license so issued shall be effective indefinitely, unless revoked.
§ 95-5. Loss, sale or destruction of bicycle. [Amended 8-16-1982 by
Ord. No. 20-1982]
When any bicycle which has been registered and licensed as herein
provided is sold or is otherwise disposed of or destroyed, the licensee shall
immediately surrender to the Chief of Police the receipt and registration
sticker issued therefor, with the name and address of the new owner,
if any, written on the back of the receipt; and the Chief of Police shall
immediately make proper endorsements thereof on his records and deliver
the information to the City Clerk, who shall immediately make proper
endorsements on his record.
§ 95-6. Loss of license sticker. [Amended 8-16-1982 by Ord. No.
20-1982]
The licensee shall report immediately to the Chief of Police the loss or
destruction of the license sticker of the licensee and the circumstances
surrounding the loss or destruction thereof. With the approval of the Chief
of Police, the City Clerk shall issue a duplicate license sticker upon payment
of a fee of $2.
C. Such registration shall be presented to the Chief of Police. The bicycle
to be registered and licensed shall be brought to the police station at
the time of presenting the application for the purpose of examination.
D. The Chief of Police or some person authorized by him shall examine the
bicycle, and, if he finds the mechanical condition thereof such that it
can be safely operated and that it is equipped with the lights and
attachments as herein provided, he shall issue a registration sticker.
This applicant shall thereupon pay a registration fee of $2.
E. The Police Department, upon receiving such license fee, shall issue to
the owner of the bicycle a registration sticker, together with a receipt.
Said receipt will give a description of the bicycle to be registered,
together with the owner's name and address. Said registration sticker
shall contain the words "City of Pleasantville" and the number of the
license. The registration sticker shall be attached to the bicycle on the
front thereof immediately below the steering bar or wheel.
F. After the issuance of the registration sticker, the Police Department will
so note in the registration book the date of issuance and corresponding
number of the sticker. The original receipt shall be kept on file in the
office of the Police Department, and the duplicate sticker thereof shall
be delivered to the City Clerk's office and shall be kept on file in said
office.
§ 95-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 95-7
95:152
§ 95-7. Riding single file.
When more than two persons in a group are operating bicycles on a
roadway, they shall ride single file.
§ 95-8. Clinging to vehicles.
No person operating a bicycle shall cling or attach himself or the bicycle to
any other moving vehicle.
§ 95-9. Extra passengers.
No person operating a bicycle shall carry another person on the handlebars
of said bicycle.
§ 95-10. Emerging from side access.
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, garage or
private sidewalk shall stop the bicycle immediately prior to driving onto or
across a public sidewalk or onto or across a public sidewalk line projected
across an alley and shall exercise extreme care in making such movements.
§ 95-11. Bicycling while impaired.
No person shall operate a bicycle while under the influence of liquor or
drugs or while physically or mentally unfit to safely operate the same.
§ 95-12. Lights and reflectors.
Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear which shall emit a red light
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear. In addition to the red
lamp, a red reflector may be mounted on the rear, of a type approved by the
Division of Motor Vehicles, which shall be visible from all distances from 50
feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of
head lamps on a motor vehicle.
§ 95-13. Safe mechanical condition.
No person shall operate a bicycle which is not in such mechanical condition
so that it can be safely operated.
§ 95-14. Riding on sidewalks.
Bicycles may be operated on sidewalks in public parks and in residence
districts, but in single file only. Under all circumstances, the rider shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians using the sidewalk, and due and proper
care shall at all times be exercised by the rider for the pedestrians. When
approaching a pedestrian on the sidewalk, the speed of a bicycle shall
be reduced to a speed which is no greater than necessary to continue
§ 95-7 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS § 95-14
95:153
the operation of the bicycle without the rider dismounting and shall not
be increased until the pedestrian has been passed. No bicycle shall be
operated upon any sidewalk in the business portion of the city.
§ 95-15. Parking bicycles.
Bicycles, when parked in the business district, shall be parked in zones
or places designated and marked for the purpose. It shall be unlawful to
park any bicycle along buildings in such a manner as to interfere with
pedestrians or along roadways where they may interfere with traffic or with
persons getting into or out of motor vehicles. No person other than the
owner or operator shall move, or in any manner interfere with, any bicycle
properly parked, nor shall any person interfere or in any manner hinder any
person from properly parking a bicycle, except that members of the Police
Department and Fire Department may move or, in proper cases, prevent the
parking of the bicycle, when, in the judgment of the policeman or fireman,
his action is necessary in order to properly safeguard persons or property.
§ 95-16. Riding on right-hand side of road.
All bicycles when operated on roadways shall be kept to the right and shall
be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
§ 95-17. Speed.
No bicycle shall be operated at any time faster than is reasonable or proper,
and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of
the rider and of other persons and property.
§ 95-18. Traffic regulations.
Every person operating a bicycle shall strictly observe all traffic signs and
signals and all other traffic rules and regulations applicable thereto and
shall obey the orders and directions of every officer of the city authorized to
direct or regulate traffic.47
§ 95-19. Rights and duties of bicycle riders.
Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all the rights
and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle
by N.J.S.A. 39:4-1 et seq., and all supplements thereto, except as to those
provisions thereof which by their nature can have no application.
§ 95-20. Position of hands and feet; additional passengers.
A person propelling or riding on a bicycle shall not ride other than upon
or astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto, nor shall he ride
with his feet removed from the pedals or with both hands removed from the
handlebars, nor shall he practice any trick or fancy riding in a street. No
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 278, Vehicles and Traffic.
§ 95-14 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 95-20
95:154
bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for
which it is designed and equipped.
§ 95-21. Turns; starting and stopping.
The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn, shall
follow the right-hand edge of the roadway, and the operator of a bicycle on
a roadway, when making a left turn, shall approach the point of turning in
the traffic lane nearest the center of the roadway. No operator of a bicycle
shall start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn without first indicating such
movement as provided by law.
§ 95-22. Yielding right-of-way.
Any person riding a bicycle shall yield the right-of-way in the following
circumstances:
§ 95-23. Riding through safety zones.
No rider of a bicycle shall ride through any safety zone unless directed by
traffic signals, a police officer or an official posted sign.
§ 95-24. Racing on highways.
It shall be unlawful for any person riding or operating a bicycle to race any
other bicycle, person or vehicle along any highway or roadway or to try to
set a speed record along any highway, roadway or street.
§ 95-25. Obstructing rider's view.
No person shall ride a bicycle which is so loaded as to obstruct the view of
the rider.
§ 95-26. Stopping before crossing.
Any person riding a bicycle shall stop before crossing a crosswalk, sidewalk
or intersection or when emerging from an alley, garage or driveway.
A. When a pedestrian is crossing or about to cross a roadway.
B. When a pedestrian is in a crosswalk or in an intersection when the
signal light changes.
C. When a vehicle is stopped to yield right-of-way to a pedestrian.
D. When a blind person, using a cane or guide dog, is crossing any
highway or intersection.
E. When traffic is so close as to be a hazard.
§ 95-20 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS § 95-27
95:155
§ 95-27. Blocking roads or intersections.
No person riding or operating any bicycle shall block any road or
intersection so as to interfere with other vehicles or with pedestrians.
§ 95-28. Riding on inappropriate bicycle parts.
No person shall ride on any part of a bicycle not intended for passengers or
operator.
§ 95-29. Spilling loads.
No person shall operate any bicycle so loaded as to spill such load.
§ 95-30. Crossing center line of highway.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bicycle to cross the center line
of any roadway on the left in order to pass any other vehicle unless the way
ahead is clear and no traffic is approaching. It shall be unlawful for any such
operator to cross the center line on a hill or curve if such operator cannot
see ahead for at least 500 feet or to pass in a no-passing zone.
§ 95-31. Overtaking vehicles.
The operator of a bicycle being overtaken and passed by another vehicle
shall give way on hearing the signal of the overtaking vehicle.
§ 95-32. Marked lanes.
If a roadway is divided into marked lanes, the operator of a bicycle shall:
§ 95-33. Following too closely.
The operator of a bicycle shall remain at a safe distance behind any other
vehicle and shall not follow too closely.
§ 95-34. Approach of emergency vehicles.
When an ambulance, fire engine or other emergency vehicle gives warning
of its approach, the operator of a bicycle shall pull to the right and stop until
such emergency vehicle has passed.
A. Ride in the right lane unless overtaking another vehicle or when about
to make a left turn.
B. Ride within a single lane and change only when safe to do so.
C. If there are three lanes, the middle lane should be used only for passing
or overtaking another vehicle or for making a left turn.
§ 95-27 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 95-35
95:156
§ 95-35. Following or parking near fire apparatus.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a bicycle to follow any fire apparatus
closer than 100 feet or to park closer than 200 feet to any such apparatus.
§ 95-36. Backing or turning on street.
No operator of a bicycle shall back or turn on any street if this action
interferes with other traffic.
§ 95-37. Crossing railroad tracks.
No operator of a bicycle shall cross any railroad track unless he can do
so safely and shall stop within 50 feet, but no less than 15 feet, from the
nearest rail of the track when:
§ 95-38. Approaching stopped school bus.
§ 95-39. Parking areas restricted.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a bicycle to park his bicycle in any of
the following places:
A. Any mechanical signaling device gives warning of an approaching train.
B. A crossing gate is lowered or a flagman gives or continues to give signal
of approaching train.
C. A train is approaching from 1,500 feet, more or less, to the crossing and
is giving an audible signal of its approach.
D. Whenever the operator can see any train approaching such crossing.
A. On any undivided highway or street, the operator of a bicycle
approaching a school bus which has stopped to pick up or discharge
passengers shall stop at least 10 feet from such school bus and shall not
start up again until the passenger has entered the school bus or
reached the side of the highway or street.
B. On any divided highway, the operator of a bicycle approaching a school
bus on the opposite side of a divided highway, which bus has stopped to
pick up or discharge passengers, shall reduce speed to 10 miles per
hour until the bus and any passengers have passed.
A. Within any intersection.
B. On a crosswalk.
C. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within at least 20 feet of
a point on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone.
D. In front of a public or private driveway.
§ 95-35 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS § 95-39
95:157
§ 95-40. Renting bicycles.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to rent, or offer
to rent, any bicycle without first complying with the provisions of §§ 95-2
through 95-6 of this chapter relating to the registration and licensing of
bicycles.
§ 95-41. Rented bicycles; equipment.
Bicycles offered for rent by a rental agency shall be equipped with the lights
and other equipment required by this chapter and shall be kept in good and
safe working condition. Rental agencies shall comply with all the provisions
of this chapter and shall be responsible for the condition of the bicycles they
rent.
§ 95-42. Inspection of rental agencies.
The Chief of Police shall make periodic inspections of the rental agencies to
ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 95-43. Bicycle shops to report.
Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of selling, buying
or trading new or used bicycles within the city is hereby required to make a
E. Within 25 feet of the nearest crosswalk or side line of a street or
intersecting highway, except at alleys.
F. On a sidewalk.
G. In any place where no-parking signs are posted and established
pursuant to only promulgated regulations of the State Highway
Commissioner.
H. Within 50 feet of a stop sign.
I. Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
J. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
K. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or on the
opposite side of the street within 75 feet of such entrance.
L. Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
M. On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of any street.
N. Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a
highway tunnel or underpass or on the immediate approach thereto,
except where space for such parking is provided for and so posted.
§ 95-39 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 95-43
95:158
written report to the Chief of Police at the end of each month, or more often
if requested by him. Such report shall contain the following information:
§ 95-44. Periodic inspections.
Any member of the Police Department is authorized to inspect any bicycle
at any reasonable time for the purpose of making a checkup of the license
plate and license number, serial number and for the purpose of determining
the mechanical condition of the bicycle.
§ 95-45. Removal of license sticker serial numbers. [Amended
8-16-1982 by Ord. No. 20-1982]
It shall be unlawful for any person, willfully or maliciously, to remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter any license sticker or registration card during the
time in which the license sticker or registration is in force. The Chief of
Police is hereby authorized to stamp numbers on the frame of a bicycle,
in a legible manner, for identification purposes, upon which bicycle no
serial number can be found or upon which the serial number is illegible or
insufficient for identification purposes.
§ 95-46. Operating bicycle without owner's consent.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any bicycle within the
city without the consent of the owner.
§ 95-47. Bicycle without serial number.
It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the city or any dealer in
bicycles operating in the city to purchase, receive in trade or otherwise
acquire any bicycle from which the serial number on the frame has been
removed, destroyed, mutilated or altered without first reporting the same
to the Chief of Police.
§ 95-48. Enforcement; suspension; revocation.
The Chief of Police shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Chief of
Police may revoke or suspend, for a period of 30 days, any bicycle license
for any violation of any provision of this chapter or any applicable provision
of the statutes relating to traffic; and, in addition, the Chief of Police may
impound the bicycle of any such violator for a period not exceeding 30 days.
A. The name and address of each person to whom a bicycle was sold,
purchased or traded during the period covered by the report.
B. A description of the bicycle involved in each such transaction, including
the name of the manufacturer, the serial number of the frame and the
license number of the bicycle, if the bicycle has been registered and a
license issued therefor to the owner by the city.
C. Such additional information as the Chief of Police may require.
§ 95-43 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS § 95-49
95:159
§ 95-49. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999; 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 7-2000]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville, be punished
for each offense by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. Any person pleading guilty may
pay a fine of $50 to the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 95-49 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 95-49
95:160
ARTICLE II
Bike Paths and Sidewalks
[Adopted 10-16-2000 by Ord. No. 30-2000]
§ 95-50. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Any two-or-more-wheeled vehicle having a tandem or triangular
arrangement of the wheels and having cranks, levers or pedals for its
propulsion by the feet.
BIKE LANE — Utilizes existing roadways and is contiguous thereto but
provides a separate lane of travel for the exclusive or semi-exclusive use
of bicycles. The bike lane is physically separated from motor vehicle traffic
by painted lines, pavement coloration, curbing, parked vehicles or other
barriers.
BIKE PATH — A separate pathway for the exclusive use of bicycles and
pedestrians separated from motor vehicle traffic except at bike crossings.
BIKE ROUTE — Utilizes existing streets and roads. No separation of motor
vehicle and bicycle traffic is provided as only signs are present to indicate
the course of the bike route.
MOTORIZED VEHICLE — Car, van, SUV, truck, motorcycle, moped,
motorized bicycle and anything powered by an internal combustion engine
or other motorized power source, but excluding motorized wheelchairs.
OTHER MANUALLY POWERED DEVICES — Skateboards, roller blades,
roller skates, scooter, go-cart or other device powered by pedals or other
system requiring the user to exert force in order to be propelled, but
excluding devices used for the assistance of the physically handicapped.
§ 95-51. Establishment of bike path.
§ 95-52. Shared facilities.
A. The City Administrator shall cause to be placed appropriate signs or
other markings indicating the bike path designated below:
Beginning at the intersection of Chestnut Street and the abandoned
railroad right-of-way acquired by the city from J.P. Rail and extending
along the abandoned railroad right-of-way south to the border of
Northfield.
B. An engineer drawing and general geographic map is kept on file in the
City Clerk's office.
A. While roadways are provided for the safety and convenience of vehicles,
sidewalks are provided for the safety and convenience of pedestrians
and bike paths are provided for the safety and convenience of bicycles
§ 95-50 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS § 95-52
95:161
§ 95-53. Riding on sidewalks.
§ 95-54. Driving vehicles across bike paths and lanes.
§ 95-55. Safety regulations.
and other manually powered devices, it is recognized that in many such
instances such facilities may be shared.
B. On shared facilities, the following regulations shall apply:
(1) When using bike paths, pedestrians shall walk as far to the right as
practicable; shall walk no more than two abreast; and shall
exercise due care. Anyone using a bicycle or other manually
powered device shall give audible signal before passing a
pedestrian on a bike path or route.
(2) When using sidewalks, bicyclists and anyone using other manually
powered devices shall not exceed seven miles per hour, shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians and shall pass only on the left and
only after giving audible warning to pedestrians.
A. Where signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall ride a
bicycle or other manually powered device upon a sidewalk. Signs
prohibiting such activity shall be installed at locations as directed by
the appropriate city official.
B. Unless otherwise posted pursuant to Subsection A, a person may ride a
bicycle, or other manually powered device, upon any public sidewalk.
This section does not permit any type of motorized vehicle to be ridden
on the sidewalk where otherwise unlawful. When doing so, such person
shall be subject to the following additional provisions: Such person shall
yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and exempt vehicles.
C. Penalty. Violation of any provision of this section by any person shall be
a civil traffic offense punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more
than $100 for each offense.
A. No person shall drive a motorized vehicle upon or across a bike path
and sidewalk or lane except at public street intersections or to enter a
driveway.
B. No person shall drive upon or across a bike path or bike lane as
permitted by this section except after giving the right-of-way to all
bicycles within the lane.
C. This section shall not apply to police and emergency vehicles and
vehicles necessary to the maintenance and repair of the bike path and
its appurtenances.
A. This section shall only apply to users of the bike path and sidewalks as
defined in this article. Bicyclists and users of other manually powered
§ 95-52 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 95-55
95:162
§ 95-56. Rules and regulations pertaining to operation; required
equipment.
devices utilizing streets and other public roadways are subject to the
rules and regulations promulgated by the State of New Jersey and
generally found in N.J.S.A. 39:4-10 et seq.
B. Helmets are required for riders 14 years of age and younger pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 39:4-10.1.
C. No person operating a bicycle shall allow anyone four years old or
younger, and weighing 40 pounds or less, to ride as a passenger on the
bicycle, other than in a seat which shall adequately retain the
passenger in place and protect the passenger from the bicycle's moving
parts; or else astride a regular seat of a tandem bicycle.
D. No person operating a bicycle or other manually powered device shall
allow anyone to ride as a passenger unless the passenger is wearing a
helmet as defined in Subsection A above or else is in an enclosed trailer
or other device which meets or exceeds current nationally recognized
standards of design and manufacture for the protection of the
passenger's head from impact in an accident without the need for a
helmet.
A. This section shall only apply to users of the bike path and sidewalks as
defined in this article. Bicyclists and users of other manually powered
devices utilizing streets and other public roadways are subject to the
rules and regulations promulgated by the State of New Jersey and
generally found in N.J.S.A. 39:4-10 et seq.
B. Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on
the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a lamp on the rear which shall emit a red
light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the rear.
C. No bicycle or other manually powered device shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed.
D. No person riding upon any bicycle or other manually powered device
shall attach the same or himself/herself to any vehicle, and no operator
of any vehicle shall knowingly allow any person riding upon any bicycle
to attach the same or himself/herself to the vehicle.
E. Every bicycle or other manually powered device shall be equipped with
a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid
on dry, level, clean pavement.
F. Every person riding or operating a bicycle or other manually powered
device shall obey all traffic signals, signs and devices in the same
manner and to the same extent as would be required if said person was
operating a motor vehicle.
§ 95-55 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS § 95-56
95:163
§ 95-57. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
G. Every person riding or operating a bicycle or other manually powered
device shall be required immediately, before crossing a street or public
roadway, where any bike path or sidewalk intersects, to come to a
complete stop for the purpose of making an observation in order to
ensure that said street or sidewalk is clear of pedestrians or vehicles.
H. On any bike path or sidewalk, bicyclists shall not ride any more than
two abreast.
I. No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk in the Central Business
District between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
J. Parking.
(1) All bicycles, when parked on sidewalks, shall be parked only in
such a manner as not to obstruct pedestrian traffic or access to
adjacent buildings.
(2) No bicycle shall be parked in any street. No bicycle shall be parked
in such a manner as to obstruct the pedestrian walkway or in a
manner that interferes with the entrance and/or exit of a business.
K. Speed. No person shall operate a bicycle at speeds faster than are
reasonable or proper, which in no case shall be in excess of legal speed
limits, unless participating in an officially sponsored or sanctioned rally
or road race.
L. Reckless or careless riding. No person shall ride a bicycle in a reckless
or careless manner which endangers or is likely to endanger the safety
or welfare of other persons or property.
M. Exemption. This section shall not apply to bicycles operated by police
officers on duty and using a bicycle as part of their official police work.
A. Adult operators. Any person 16 years of age or older found in violation
of any provision of this article, where no penalty is specified, shall be
subject to a fine in the amount prescribed in Subsection C after
issuance of a summons for said violation.
B. Operators under the age 16.
(1) Any person under the age of 16, found in violation of any provision
of this article, is subject to the following penalties:
(a) First offense: written notification sent to parent advising of the
violation and warning that subsequent violations, of any
provisions, may result in impoundment of the bicycle.
(b) Second offense: impoundment of bicycle by the Police
Department until such time as the person brings their parent
or guardian to the police station to pick up the bicycle. The
§ 95-56 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 95-57
95:164
§ 95-58. Parental responsibility.
The parent of a child and the guardian of a ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit the child or ward to violate any provision of this article.
parent or guardian will be provided with a notice
acknowledging that any additional infraction will result in the
assessment of the scheduled fine.
(c) Third and subsequent offenses: impoundment of bicycle by
Police Department until pick-up by parent or legal guardian
and payment by parent or legal guardian of scheduled fine.
(2) For purposes of this section, the number of offenses can be the
repeated violation of one specific provision or any combination of
provisions.
C. An adult offender, 18 years or above, issued a summons in accordance
with Subsection A may waive the right of a court hearing by completing
the appearance, plea and waiver on the reverse side of the summons
and delivering or mailing same, together with payment of the fine, to
the Municipal Court Violations Clerk. This waiver may be exercised for
first offenses only.
D. Violation Bureau schedule of fines:
Violation Fine
Operating without proper lights after dark $35
Failure to obey traffic sign or signal $25
Exceeding legal speed limits $25
Improper parking $10
Riding against the flow of traffic $35
Failure to ride in designated area where
prescribed
$50
Operating with inoperative braking devices $50
Hitching on to moving vehicles $100
Reckless or careless riding $50
Unauthorized driving of vehicle on bike path $100
Creating obstruction or hazardous condition
upon bike path
$45
E. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and empowered to administer
the provisions of this article.
§ 95-57 BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS § 95-58
95:165
Chapter 99
(RESERVED)
Chapter 102
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Littering — See Ch. 159.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 207.
Solid waste — See Ch. 247.
§ 102-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BRUSH, WEEDS AND DEBRIS — Includes brush, weeds, dead or dying
trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash or other
debris.
§ 102-2. Declaration of purpose.
This chapter is enacted for the preservation of the public health, safety and
general welfare and the elimination of fire hazards within the limits of the
city.
§ 102-3. Removal from designated land. [Amended 2-6-1989 by Ord.
No. 3-1989]
Whenever it shall be deemed necessary and expedient by the Code
Enforcement Department, for the preservation of the public health, safety,
general welfare or for the elimination of a fire hazard within the limits of
the city, to remove brush, weeds and debris from lands situate in said city,
the Code Enforcement Department shall, by its resolution, designate said
lands by lot and block numbers as shown upon the Tax Assessment Map of
the city.48
§ 102-4. Removal notice; service. [Amended 2-6-1989 by Ord. No.
3-1989]
A. Whenever the Code Enforcement Department shall find upon any such
lot, yard, land or premises any brush, weeds or debris to such an extent
as, in its opinion, is inimical to the public health, safety or general
welfare of the city or to such an extent as to constitute a fire hazard, it
48.Editor's Note: A copy of the Tax Assessment Map of the City of Pleasantville is on file in
the office of the City Clerk.
§ 95-58 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 102-4
99:166
§ 102-5. Failure to comply. [Amended 2-6-1989 by Ord. No. 3-1989]
Any owner or tenant, as the case may be, who fails or neglects to comply
with the notice duly served as provided in § 102-4 hereof and within the
time prescribed therein shall be subject to the imposition of those penalties
prescribed in § 102-7 hereof.
§ 102-6. Noncompliance; abatement; lien. [Amended 2-6-1989 by
Ord. No. 3-1989]
§ 102-7. Violations and penalties.49
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
Chapter 105
shall give written notice to the owner or tenant of said premises to
remove therefrom such brush, weeds or debris in the manner herein set
forth within 10 days after service of said notice.
B. Service of such notice shall be made upon the owner or tenant, either
personally or by registered or certified mail.
A. Whenever, after notice has been given as provided in § 102-4 hereof, the
owner or tenant shall have refused or neglected to remove such brush,
weeds or debris in the manner and within the ten-day period prescribed
in § 102-4, the Code Enforcement Department shall forward a certified
copy of the notice so served upon the owner or tenant to the
Department of Public Works of the city, which shall thereupon remove
or cause to be removed from such lands said brush, weeds and debris.
B. The Code Enforcement Department shall forthwith certify to the
Council the cost of removal thereof. The Council shall examine the
certificate and, if it finds the certificate to be correct, shall, by
resolution, cause the amount of the cost as shown upon the certificate
to be charged against said lands.
C. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands
and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be
assessed, levied and collected upon such lands. The amount of such
charge or lien shall bear interest at the same rate as taxes and shall be
collected and enforced by the Collector of Taxes of the city in the same
manner as general taxes.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 102-4 BUILDING MATERIALS § 102-7
105:167
BUILDING MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Construction contractors — See Ch. 121.
Fences — See Ch. 127.
Junk dealers and collectors — See Ch. 151.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 207.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 231.
§ 102-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 102-7
105:168
ARTICLE I
Licensing of Secondhand Dealers
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Ch. 80 of the 1982 Code]
§ 105-1. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of keeping, storing, buying, selling
or otherwise dealing in used or secondhand building materials in the city
without first obtaining a license as hereinafter provided in this article.
§ 105-2. License application, issuance and renewal.
§ 105-3. Fee.
The fee for a license issued under this article shall be $100.
§ 105-4. Fencing requirements.
A. All persons desiring to engage in the business of keeping, storing,
buying, selling or otherwise dealing in used or secondhand building
materials shall make application for a license to the City Clerk, who is
hereby designated as the licensing officer for the purpose of this article.
B. The application shall be in writing and shall set forth the name of the
person and his address or principal place of business and shall describe
the premises upon which said business is to be conducted, giving the
street frontage and approximate depth of said premises. Said
application shall be accompanied by the license fee provided by § 105-3.
C. The City Clerk is hereby directed to present said application to the
Council at its next meeting and is hereby authorized to issue a license to
such person on approval of the same by the Council.
D. The license shall be effective from the date of issue to the 31st day of
December of the year in which said license is issued. All persons, upon
the expiration of any license granted hereunder, shall make application
to the City Clerk for a license to conduct said business for the ensuing
year or part thereof and shall pay for said license the same fee as set
forth in § 105-3.
A. Each lot, or any part thereof, licensed under this article shall be
enclosed with a board fence not less than six feet nor more than eight
feet in height and constructed of such material and in such manner that
the interior of such yard and the contents thereof shall not be visible
from outside of said fence. The fence shall be located at least 20 feet
from the property line of the street or highway near or upon which it is
located.
B. The fence or enclosure shall be maintained and kept in good condition
at all times, and no merchandise, building supplies or lumber or other
equipment covered by this article shall be so placed or piled as to be
§ 105-1 BUILDING MATERIALS § 105-4
105:169
§ 105-5. Inspection of premises.
The Health Officer of the city is authorized and directed, during reasonable
business hours, to make reasonably periodic and effective inspections of
all premises and buildings mentioned in this article for the purpose of
ascertaining that the business is being conducted on the licensed premises
in accordance with the provisions of this article.50
§ 105-6. Records and reports.
§ 105-7. Cleansing of materials before storage or sale.
All used or secondhand building material, before being placed, stored or
exposed for sale on any premises in the city, shall be thoroughly cleansed
of all roaches, bugs, vermin or other foreign matter likely to give off
dangerous, harmful or noxious odors or produce conditions harmful to the
health of the citizens in the vicinity of the premises upon which said used or
secondhand building materials are kept, stored or exposed for sale.
§ 105-8. Storage of plumbing fixtures.
All used or secondhand bathtubs, lavatories, urinals, basins, boilers or
plumbing fixtures of like kind and description shall be kept, stored and
exposed for sale in a watertight building constructed with a suitable
concrete, brick or like foundation and floor, so as to prevent, so far as
possible, the harboring of rats, mice, roaches, bed bugs and vermin. All
other building materials or parts so designed or constructed as to catch and
hold rainwater shall be kept, stored and exposed for sale in a building of
similar character.
visible above said enclosure. The fence shall not be used for advertising
purposes except as may be authorized by the Council upon application
to it.
A. The licensee shall keep a record in which shall be written at the time of
each purchase a description of the article so purchased, the name or
residence of the person from whom each purchase is made and the date
of such purchase. Said books shall, at all reasonable times, be open to
inspection by the Chief of Police, the Building Subcode Official,
Plumbing Subcode Official or Electrical Subcode Official or any persons
duly authorized in writing for the purpose by the Chief of Police.51
B. The licensee shall make, within 24 hours of any purchase, written
reports to the Chief of Police of the material or materials purchased by
him, specifically mentioned and provided for in this article.
50.Editor's Note: Former § 80-6, Inspection of materials before sale, which immediately
followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 105-9
105:170
§ 105-9. Piling of materials to cause fire hazard prohibited.
No used or secondhand building materials shall be permitted to be piled
in such manner as to create a fire hazard or to furnish a place for the
harboring or breeding of rats, mice or vermin.
§ 105-10. Storage regulations.
No used or secondhand building material of any kind shall be piled, stacked
or racked or otherwise placed upon said premises closer to the property
line than 20 feet. All used or secondhand building material shall be so piled,
stacked, racked or otherwise placed on said premises as to prevent injury
to persons lawfully passing along the sidewalk in front of said premises or
injury or damage to the adjoining premises or to persons lawfully using
the same, in the event that said piles, stacks, racks or building material
otherwise placed should fall or become dislodged.
§ 105-11. Violations and penalties.52
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-9 BUILDING MATERIALS § 105-11
105:171

ARTICLE II
Placement of Construction Waste
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. VII of Ch. 188 of the
1982 Code]
§ 105-12. Placement on sidewalk; storage around construction
sites.
§ 105-13. Violations and penalties.55
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall place or deposit at the curb or on
the sidewalk in the City of Pleasantville, for collection or removal by the
Public Works Department or by others, any materials, debris or waste
incidental to or resulting from any building construction, alterations or
improvement work.53
B. No person, firm or corporation shall cause the accumulation of debris
on or around construction sites or its storage in such a manner that it
shall be likely to be removed by natural forces onto adjacent property.
[Added 6-19-1989 by Ord. No. 12-1989]
C. A dumpster must be kept on all work site locations, or a trash bin must
be installed at each site. The bin must be out of public view and emptied
at least once a week. The locations of dumpsters and trash bins must be
approved by the Zoning Official.54
53.Editor's Note: For additional provisions regarding street and sidewalk obstructions, see
Ch. 255, Art. III.
54.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-12 BUILDING MATERIALS § 105-13
105:173
Chapter 108
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 108-1. All buildings to be numbered.
The buildings situate within the city upon the respective streets, avenues,
highways and alleys thereof shall be numbered as designated upon the Tax
Map of the city filed in the office of the Collector of Taxes of the city.
§ 108-2. Display of numbers.
The owners of such buildings shall cause the same to be numbered with
the numbers prominently displayed in accordance with the numbers so
assigned as aforesaid.
§ 108-3. Violations and penalties.56
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
Chapter 111
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Uniform Fire Safety Code — See Ch. 135, Art.
II.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 207.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 235.
§ 111-1. Justification for action.
It is hereby found and declared that the existence and occupation of
dwellings in this municipality which are unfit for human habitation are
inimical to the welfare and dangerous and injurious to the health and safety
of the people of this municipality and that a public necessity exists for the
repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings and that such dwellings shall
be repaired, closed or demolished in the manner herein provided.
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 105-13 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 111-2
108:174
§ 111-2. Appointment and term of Code Enforcement Official.
A Code Enforcement Official shall be appointed to exercise the powers
prescribed by this chapter, and the term of said office shall be for a term of
one year or until a successor shall be duly appointed.
§ 111-3. Code Enforcement Official's compensation.
The compensation of the Code Enforcement Official shall be as provided
annually by the Mayor and Common Council.
§ 111-4. Investigation petition; complaints and hearings.
When a petition is filed with the Code Enforcement Official by a public
authority or at least five residents of this municipality, charging that any
dwelling is unfit for human habitation, or whenever it appears to the Code
Enforcement Official, on his own motion, that any dwelling is unfit for
human habitation, the Code Enforcement Official shall, if his preliminary
investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be
served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the Code Enforcement Official, or his designated
agent, at a place therein fixed, not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days
after the serving of said complaint; that the owner and parties in interest
shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear
in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in
the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law
or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Code Enforcement
Official.
§ 111-5. Fact-finding reports; compliance with order.
If, after such notice and hearing, the Code Enforcement Official determines
that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, he shall
state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof and parties in
interest an order:
A. If the repair, alteration or improvement of said dwelling can be made at
a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling (which
reasonable cost shall be not over 20% of the value of the dwelling),
requiring the owner (to the extent and within the time specified in the
order) to repair, alter or improve said dwelling to render it fit for human
habitation or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the
dwelling as a human habitation.
B. If the repair, alteration or improvement of said dwelling cannot be made
at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling (reasonable
cost shall not exceed 20% of the value of said dwelling), requiring the
owner (within the time specified in the order) to remove or demolish
such dwelling.
§ 111-2 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 111-6
111:175
§ 111-6. Posting of premises.
If an owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or, at the
option of the owner, to vacate and close the dwelling, the Code Enforcement
Official may cause such dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to
be vacated or closed. The Code Enforcement Official may cause to be posted
on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation. The use or occupation
of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful."
§ 111-7. Noncompliance procedure.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
dwelling, the Code Enforcement Official may cause such dwelling to be
removed or demolished.
§ 111-8. Costs to be lien against real property.57
The amount of such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, the
cost of filing legal papers, expert witness fees, search fees and advertising
costs or vacating and closing or removal or demolition shall be a municipal
lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. If the
dwelling is removed or demolished by the Code Enforcement Official, he
shall sell the materials of such dwelling, if marketable, and shall credit the
proceeds of such sale against the cost of removal or demolition, and any
balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Code
Enforcement Official, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by
such Court and shall be disbursed by such Court to the persons found to be
entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court; provided, however,
that nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.
§ 111-9. Conditions constituting unfit dwelling.58
The Code Enforcement Official may determine that a dwelling is unfit for
human habitation if he finds that the following conditions exist in such
dwelling, which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such dwelling, the occupants of neighboring buildings or
other residents of this municipality (without limiting the generality of the
foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; uncleanliness; failure to comply
with the requirements of the Building Code or the certificate of occupancy.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 111-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 111-10
111:176
§ 111-10. Complaints and orders.
Complaints or orders issued by the Code Enforcement Official pursuant to
this chapter shall be served upon persons, either personally or by registered
mail, but if the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and the same
cannot be ascertained by the Code Enforcement Official in the exercise
of reasonable diligence and the Code Enforcement Official shall make an
affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order upon
such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for two
successive weeks in the newspaper used for publication of legal notices by
the City of Pleasantville. A copy of such complaint or order shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or order. A
copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record
with the county recording officer.
§ 111-11. Powers of Code Enforcement Official.
The Code Enforcement Official is authorized to exercise such powers as
may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes
and provisions of this chapter, including the following powers, in addition to
others herein granted:
§ 111-12. Position of Code Enforcement Official created; duties.
[Added 5-19-1986 by Ord. No. 13-1986]
A. To investigate the dwelling conditions in this municipality in order to
determine which dwellings are unfit for human habitation.
B. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations,
provided that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
E. To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
A. The position of Code Enforcement Official is hereby created.
B. The Code Enforcement Official shall perform all duties prescribed by
this chapter, in addition to enforcement of the New Jersey Housing
Code.59
C. The Code Enforcement Official shall supervise and be responsible for all
Housing Inspectors in the Code Enforcement Department.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 111-10 BUILDINGS, UNFIT § 111-13
111:177
§ 111-13. Violations and penalties.60
Notwithstanding any other remedy provided by this chapter, any person
who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject
to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 115
CAMPGROUNDS, PRIVATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fences — See Ch. 127.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 166.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 235.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
§ 115-1. Definitions.
§ 115-2. New Jersey Private Campgrounds Code adopted.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NEW JERSEY PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS CODE — That certain printed
code known as the "New Jersey Private Campgrounds Code (1964
Edition)," recommended by the State Department of Health and the
State Department of Community Affairs.
PRIVATE CAMPGROUNDS CODE OF THE CITY — The Private
Campgrounds Code of the city adopted as set forth in this chapter.
B. Whenever the following words, terms or phrases are used in the New
Jersey Private Campgrounds Code, they shall have the meanings herein
given:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Health Officer of the city.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Pleasantville.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1946, c. 21, as amended by P.L. 1948,
c. 276 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq.), the whole of the New Jersey Private
Campgrounds Code, save and except Section 7.4 thereof, which is
deleted, is hereby adopted and is hereby incorporated in this chapter by
reference and made a part hereof as though it had been set forth herein
at length, a printed copy thereof having been annexed to the ordinance
passed April 4, 1966, adopting said New Jersey Code.
60.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 111-13 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 115-2
115:178
§ 115-3. Enforcement official; compensation.
The Health Officer is hereby designated as the officer to exercise the powers
prescribed by this chapter, including the New Jersey Private Campgrounds
Code herein adopted, and to administer and enforce the provisions thereof.
He shall serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 115-4. Compliance required.
No person shall occupy as owner or occupant, or rent to another for
occupancy, any camp dwelling or any facilities thereof for the purpose
of living therein, which does not conform to the applicable provisions of
this chapter, including the New Jersey Private Campgrounds Code herein
adopted.
§ 115-5. License required.
No private campground shall be constructed, operated or maintained unless
a license has first been obtained therefor from the Health Officer and the
license fee paid as prescribed by § 115-6 of this chapter.
§ 115-6. License fees.
B. Three copies of said New Jersey Private Campgrounds Code, so marked
as to indicate the deletion of Section 7.4 thereof, have been placed on
file in the office of the City Clerk and shall there remain on file for the
use and examination of the public so long as this chapter shall remain in
effect.
C. Said New Jersey Private Campgrounds Code as adopted in Subsection A
hereof, together with the provisions of this chapter, are hereby
established as a standard to be used in determining whether
campground dwellings, as well as their facilities, located in the city are
safe, sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental.
A. The applicant for a license to construct, operate and maintain a private
campground in conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall pay
the following yearly fees to the Health Officer:
(1) For a campground not exceeding in area one acre and not
exceeding an average of 20 campsites, inclusive of service roads,
toilet buildings and other buildings: $50.
(2) For a campground not exceeding in area two acres and not
exceeding an average of 40 campsites, inclusive of service roads,
toilet buildings and other buildings: $75.
(3) For a campground not exceeding in area three acres and not
exceeding an average of 60 campsites, inclusive of service roads,
toilet buildings and other buildings: $100.
B. The term of the license shall be one year, expiring May 31.
§ 115-2 CAMPGROUNDS, PRIVATE § 115-7
115:179
§ 115-7. Sewer lines.
The sewer lines of all campgrounds, as required by the Health Officer of the
city and as approved by him, shall be connected to and with the sanitary
sewer system of the city.61
§ 115-8. Fence enclosure.
Every campground, as defined by Section 2.1 of the New Jersey Private
Campgrounds Code, shall be entirely enclosed with a suitable fence,
approved by the Health Officer and the Mayor and Council.62
§ 115-9. Inspections by Health Officer.
§ 115-10. Rules and regulations.
The Health Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to make and adopt
such written rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that such
rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter nor in anywise alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Health Officer shall file in his office and in the office of the City
Clerk a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he may adopt.
§ 115-11. Emergency orders; compliance and hearing.
A. The Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of camp dwellings, as well as
their facilities located within the city, in order to safeguard the health
and safety of the occupants of such camp dwellings and facilities and of
the general public.
B. For the purpose of making such inspections, the Health Officer is
hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times
all camp dwellings and the facilities thereof. The owner or occupant of
every camp dwelling and the facilities thereof, or the person in charge
thereof, shall give said Officer free access to such camp dwelling, as
well as its facilities, at all reasonable times for the purpose of such
inspection, examination and survey. Every occupant of a camp dwelling
shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any
part of such camp dwelling and the facilities thereof at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or
with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Whenever the Health Officer finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety, he may,
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 235, Sewers and Sewage Disposal.
62.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 127, Fences.
§ 115-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 115-11
115:180
§ 115-12. Violation notice.
If the Health Officer shall determine, after due inspection, that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, he shall give notice of such violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor.
§ 115-13. Form and contents of notice.
§ 115-14. Service of notice.
The notice required by § 115-13 of this chapter may be served upon the
owner or his agent or the occupant, as the case may require, by any of the
following methods:
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such
an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately.
B. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith
immediately, but, upon petition to the Health Officer, he shall be
afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
C. After such hearing, depending upon the findings of the Health Officer as
to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, he shall
continue such order in effect or modify it or revoke it.
A. The notice required by the preceding section shall:
(1) Be in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act required by
such notice.
B. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken,
will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
A. Personal service of a copy of the notice.
B. Mailing a copy thereof by registered mail to his last known address.
C. Posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling
affected by the notice.
D. Service by any other method authorized or required under the laws of
this state.
§ 115-11 CAMPGROUNDS, PRIVATE § 115-15
115:181
§ 115-15. Service without petition.
Any notice served pursuant to this chapter shall automatically become an
order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the City
Clerk as provided in § 115-16.
§ 115-16. Petition in general.
§ 115-17. Hearing; decision; record.
§ 115-18. Denial and suspension of permit.
The procedure set forth in Sections 17.1 and 17.2 of the New Jersey Private
Campgrounds Code herein adopted shall be applicable in the case of a
denial or suspension of a permit to construct, operate and maintain a
private campground.
A. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Health Officer, provided that such
person shall file in the office of the City Clerk a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
B. Upon receipt of such petition, the Health Officer shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof.
C. The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days after the day on
which the petition was filed, provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, the Health Officer may postpone the date of the hearing for a
reasonable time beyond such ten-day period if, in his judgment, the
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such
postponement.
A. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
B. After the hearing the Health Officer shall sustain, modify or withdraw
the notice, depending upon his findings as to whether the provisions of
this chapter and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
have been complied with. If he sustains or modifies the notice, his
decision shall be deemed to be an order.
C. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Health Officer, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered
as a matter of public record in the office of the City Clerk. Such record
shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection
with the matter.
§ 115-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 115-19
115:182
§ 115-19. Right of appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Health Officer may seek relief
therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of
the state.
§ 115-20. Violations and penalties.63
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
Chapter 117
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land management — See Ch. 300.
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 115-19 CAMPGROUNDS, PRIVATE § 115-20
115:183

ARTICLE I
Hours of Operation
[Adopted 2-5-2018 by Ord. No. 1-2018]
§ 117-1. Hours of operation.
No business or commercial establishment to which the public is invited,
defined either as a "permitted use," "accessory use," or "special exception
use," within the Central Business District (CBD) set forth in the City of
Pleasantville Land Use Ordinance,64 as amended, or as may hereafter be
amended or supplemented, or any nonconforming such use or variance
permitting such use, located within such districts, or in any other zoning
district, shall be opened to the public or conduct any such business,
operations or activities in any manner before 6:30 a.m. on any day and
after 11 p.m. on the same day. Except with respect to security lighting, all
exterior and window electrical lighting or illumination, whether temporary
or permanent, for each such business or commercial establishment shall be
extinguished at the closing time thereof, as established herein.
§ 117-2. Exclusions.
Subject to § 117-3 below, the following businesses and commercial
establishments, if not otherwise excluded pursuant to § 117-1 above, shall
be excluded from the application of § 117-1, all being either otherwise
regulated by law, deemed to involve minimal nuisance characteristics,
necessary to the public health, safety, welfare or convenience, or some
combination of the foregoing, as follows:
A. Establishments licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to
the Code of the City of Pleasantville. New Jersey, whose hours and mode
of operation are governed separately by City ordinances and by the
laws of New Jersey pertaining to alcoholic beverages.
B. Gasoline service stations, provided such operations do not include
automobile, truck or other motor vehicle repair or body and fender
repair work during the hours of operation prohibited by § 117-1 above.
C. Hotels and motels.
D. Medical and dental offices, hospitals, nursing homes and rehabilitation
centers.
E. Restaurants offering full service meals on a twenty-four-hour basis.
seven days a week.
F. Incidental activities, not involving business operations or sales or
services, within or about any business or commercial establishment
which may be required in advance of or after the hours of operation
permitted by § 117-1, including, but not limited to, cleaning and
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Land Management.
§ 117-1 CAMPGROUNDS, PRIVATE § 117-2
115:185
§ 117-3. Violation and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation. limited liability company, partnership or
other business entity or commercial establishment of any type whatsoever
violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, pay a fine not
to exceed $1,000 or be imprisoned not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the court. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day or part thereof during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 117-4. Relief from hours of operation.
Any waiver of or relief from the provisions contained in this article, in
whole or in part, must be sought by way of an application made to the City
Council of the City of Pleasantville pursuant to this § 117-4, and only the
City Council shall have the authority to provide relief from and/or waive the
provisions contained in this article, in whole or in part.
sweeping, off-street loading and unloading of inventory and supplies,
and disposal of waste and garbage, provided such activities are carried
on in such reasonable manner as to emit the least possible noise.
§ 117-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 117-4
115:186
Chapter 119
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 80.
Secondhand building materials — See Ch.
105.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 111.
Construction contractors — See Ch. 121.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 166.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
§ 119-1. Establishment of enforcing agency; membership;
qualifications; local office.
§ 119-2. Board of Appeals. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
Any appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency shall be submitted to
the Atlantic County Construction Board of Appeals.
A. There is hereby established in the City of Pleasantville a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency, to be known as the "Department
of Permits and Inspections," consisting of a Construction Official,
Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical
Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official, Elevator Subcode
Official and such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as
the Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of
New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform
Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the chief
administrator of the enforcing agency. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 6-1999; 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 15-2017]
B. Each official position created in Subsection A hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended,65 and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
C. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location, except for emergencies and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
65.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 117-4 CAMPGROUNDS, PRIVATE § 119-3
115:187
§ 119-3. Fees; reports. [Amended 8-5-1985 by Ord. No. 17-1985;
5-2-1988 by Ord. No. 8-1988; 10-16-1989 by Ord. No. 19-1989;
8-5-1991 by Ord. No. 11-1991; 2-17-1992 by Ord. No. 2-1992]
A. The City of Pleasantville hereby adopts the fees schedule set up
pursuant to the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23
(see the attached exhibit fee schedule). [Amended 10-2-1995 by Ord.
No. 16-1995; 2-5-1996 by Ord. No. 2-1996; 5-19-1997 by Ord. No.
19-1997; 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999; 7-7-1999 by Ord. No.
27-1999; 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 4-2016]
B. Additional fees set by the City of Pleasantville: [Amended 7-7-1999 by
Ord. No. 27-1999; 3-18-2002 by Ord. No. 6-2002; 4-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 8-2009]
(1) Zoning verification letter to § 119-3B fee $250 up to four pages
($50 each additional page). [Added 3-7-2016 by Ord. No.
4-2016]
(2) Fences shall be a flat fee of $46 for R-3/R-4 uses. All other use
groups shall be a flat fee of $75.
(3) (Reserved)
(4) (Reserved)
(5) Piling, foundations, bulkheads, etc:
(a) Up to and including $100,000: $15 per $1,000.
(b) One hundred thousand one dollars to $300,000: $12 per
$1,000.
(c) Three hundred thousand and one dollars and above: $10 per
$1,000.
(d) Premanufactured construction and external utility connections
shall be based on estimated cost of site improvements. The fee
shall be at a rate of $50 per $1,000.
C. The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal year
to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July 31, the
total amount of the surcharge fee (15%) collected in the fiscal year. In
the fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said
report shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
D. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Council,
biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire limits. This
report shall indicate the recommendations of the Construction Official,
the Building Subcode Official and the Fire Subcode Official regarding
those areas which should be designated as within fire limits, with the
reasons therefor.
§ 119-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 119-3
115:188
Chapter 121
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building materials — See Ch. 105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
General licensing provisions — See Ch. 155.
§ 121-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other
business entity to engage in the business or act in the capacity of a
contractor or builder within the City of Pleasantville without first having
obtained a license therefor as provided herein.
§ 121-2. Definitions.
§ 121-3. Exemptions.
A. Scope and meaning of certain words and terms. Unless the context
clearly indicates the contrary, words used in the present tense include
the future, the singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular. The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is
permissive.
B. Definition of terms. The following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any roofed structure built for the support, shelter or
enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
CONTRACTOR — Any person who is in any capacity other than as the
employee of another with wages as the sole compensation, undertakes
or offers to undertake or purports to have the capacity to undertake
of accepts an order or contract whether on a fixed sum cost plus or
percentage or fixed fee, or any combination thereof, or submits a bid
to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, demolish, re-roof,
concrete work, fencing, site work, reside or in any way improve any
building, structure, property, project or improvement, or to do any part
thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or
works in connection therewith.
PERSON — Any individual, firm association, partnership or corporation.
A. The owner or occupant of a building or structure who performs any of
the activities set forth under the definition of "contractor" in § 121-2 on
such building or structure shall not be required to be registered in
accordance with the Uniform Construction Code N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided
§ 119-3 CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS § 121-3
121:189
§ 121-4. Application for registration and license.
that such owner and/or occupant performs and supervises his own
work.
B. This chapter shall not apply to any person offering any service provided
for herein who shall be otherwise licensed by the State of New Jersey
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23.
A. Application for registration and license as required by § 121-1 shall be
made to the Construction Official under oath on a form furnished by
him.
B. The application shall set forth the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, business name, business address (post office
box not sufficient), mailing address and telephone number.
(2) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership, corporation or
any other entity and, if other entity, a full explanation and
description thereof.
(3) If the applicant is an individual, the applicant's residence address,
the date and place of birth and social security number.
(4) If the applicant is a partnership, the full names, residence
addresses, dates and places of birth of each member and their
respective social security numbers.
(5) If the applicant is a corporation or other entity:
(a) In the case of a corporation, the full names, residence
addresses, dates and places of birth and social security
numbers of each major officer and each stockholder, the name
and address of the registered agent and the name and address
of the principal office (the term "stockholder" as used herein
means and includes any person owning or having an interest,
either legal or equitable, in 10% of the stock issued and
outstanding in the applicant's corporation).
(b) In the case of another entity, the full names, residence
addresses, dates and places of birth and social security
numbers of each person owning or having an interest, either
legal or equitable, aggregating in value 10% or more of the
total capital of said entity, the name and address of the
registered agent, if any, and the address of the principal office.
(6) Whether the applicant or any partners, officers or stockholders
thereof have ever been arrested or convicted of a crime, and, if so,
the name of the person arrested or convicted, the date of arrest,
the crime or charge involved and the disposition thereof (the term
"officers" as used herein means and includes the president, vice
§ 121-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 121-4
121:190
president, secretary, assistant secretary, treasurer and assistant
treasurer of the corporate applicant).
(7) The number of years the applicant has been in business at its
present business address or at any prior location, including the
addresses of such prior location and all corporate names under
which the applicant has operated and all corporate offices and
major interest holders.
(8) The name and address of the insurance company providing the
applicant with public liability insurance, policy number, expiration
date and the amount of coverage.
(9) The name and address of the applicant's workers' compensation
insurance carrier, policy number and expiration date of said policy.
(10) The identity of any other municipality in which the applicant is
licensed and the name, address and phone number of two
individuals for whom the applicant has performed comparable
work.
(11) The identity of any municipality which requires licensing in which
the applicant's license has been revoked for any reason. If there
has been a revocation of said license, indicate the municipality and
the reason for revocation.
(12) If applicant is not licensed in at least two other municipalities, he/
she must take and pass a written test given at the Construction
Official's office.
(13) The applicant must carry the license with him when working within
the City limits, and every vehicle shall display the license. The
initial license fee pays for a license and two vehicle stickers.
Additional vehicle stickers shall cost $5 each.
C. Upon receipt of such application, the Construction Official shall
determine if the character and business responsibility of the applicant
and/or any partner, officer or stockholder thereof is satisfactory and, if
the Construction Official so determines, he shall cause the applicant to
be registered and licensed. The Construction Official shall determine
that the character and business responsibility of the applicant or any
partner, officer or stockholder thereof is satisfactory unless the
application or other evidence presented to the Construction Official
shall tangibly describe any of the following:
(1) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude.
(2) Prior violations of statutes, ordinances or regulations relevant to
the construction, erection, alteration, repair, restoration, reroofing,
re-siding, removing or demolition of any building, structure,
swimming pool, sign, billboard or part thereof or any property
improvements which have not been timely corrected.
§ 121-4 CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS § 121-4
121:191
§ 121-5. Types of contractors' licenses.
§ 121-6. Registration fees; renewals; change of address.
(3) A determination of previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(4) A history of adjudicated breaches of contracts.
(5) The failure to carry and maintain public liability and workers'
compensation insurance coverage.
D. If said application for registration and license is denied, the applicant
shall be advised in writing of the reasons for denial. The applicant may
appeal to the Public Service Committee of the City Council within 20
days of the Construction Official's determination. A copy of the notice of
appeal shall be served upon the City Clerk, City Administrator and the
Construction Official. The Committee shall entrain the appeal within 30
days of the receipt of the notice of appeal unless any other date is
required because of the inability of Council to meet within said period
or because of the mutual consent of the parties. If the Committee
cannot meet within said thirty-day period, the appeal shall be heard not
later than the next regularly scheduled meeting after said thirty-day
period. At said appeal, the applicant may be represented by counsel
but, in any event, will be required to give testimony under oath. The
applicant or his representative may cross-examine any witness and may
call witnesses on his behalf.
A. Class I includes but is not limited to general, building, electrical,
plumbing, siding, roofing, masonry, etc.
B. Class II includes but is not limited to handyman, minor jobbing,
painting, tree surgeons, landscapers, etc.
A. Upon filing such application, the applicant shall pay to the Construction
Official the following fees:
(1) Class I: a fee of $100.
(2) Class II: a fee of $75. This classification may be exempt from
§ 121-4B(8), (9) and (12) at the discretion of the Construction
Official.
(3) A separate fee as determined by the State of New Jersey for a
request for criminal history record information and made payable
to the State Bureau of Investigation for such registration and
license or for registration after revocation of a registration
previously issued to such applicant and in accordance with
provisions of § 121-10. Each of these provision's fees must be paid
by separate check only.
B. The term of such registration shall be January 1 through December 31
of each year.
§ 121-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 121-6
121:192
§ 121-7. Revocation of registration or license; violations and
penalties.
C. Registration fee as shown in Subsection A of this section will be
prorated monthly.
D. The license must be renewed by January 16. If January 16 falls on
Saturday, it must be renewed by Friday, January 15. If it falls on Sunday,
it must be renewed by Monday, January 17. A license shall automatically
be renewed by the Construction Official upon payment by the applicant
of an annual renewal fee of $50.
E. The fees for the reinstatement of a revoked license are as follows:
(1) Loss of license, first offense: $25.
(2) Loss of license, second offense: $75.
(3) Loss of license, third offense: $200 and cannot be renewed for at
least two years.
F. All registered contractors shall notify the licensing officer of any
change in the names, addresses, places of business and telephone
numbers listed on the application.
G. A file of all registered contractors shall be kept in the office of the
Construction Official, which shall include the contractors' respective
names, addresses and telephone numbers.
H. The contractor shall notify the Construction Official of any change in
the name and address of the insurance carrier and change in policy
limits for the public liability and workers' compensation coverage and
shall confirm the renewal, each year, of these coverages by submitting a
certificate of insurance for each policy to the Construction Official, to
be kept on file.
A. If any person, firm, or corporation registered under the provisions of
this chapter shall fail in the execution of this chapter to comply with any
work for which a permit is required, including this chapter, other
applicable ordinances and regulations of the City of Pleasantville
relevant to the construction, erection, alteration, repair, restoration, residing,
reroofing, concrete, fences, moving or demolition of any
building, structure, swimming pool, sign or billboard or part thereof or
any property improvement, the Construction Official shall cause a
notice of violation to be served upon such person or the principal
member or officer of any such firm or corporation in accordance with
the established procedures as set forth in the Uniform Construction
Code of the State of New Jersey. Upon conviction for such violation or
upon failure to correct such violation within the period of time stated in
the notice of violation, the registration and license of such person, firm
or corporation shall be revoked by the Construction Official who shall
strike the name of such person, firm or corporation from the
§ 121-6 CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS § 121-7
121:193
§ 121-8. Taxes.
If a contracting business covered under this chapter is physically located
within the City of Pleasantville, all property taxes shall be paid in full prior
to the issuance or renewal of any license required by this chapter. Any
license issued under this chapter shall be revoked for the failure to keep
current all real estate taxes on said property.66
§ 121-9. Appeals.
Appeals from any decision made by the Construction Official and the
revocation or execution of other duties pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall be made to the Public Service Committee of the City Council
of the City of Pleasantville. Any appeals from convictions in the Municipal
Court of the City of Pleasantville shall be made as provided for by the laws
registration list and shall not reenter or reinstate such registration
or license during such time as said violation exists or remains. The
Construction Official shall give written notice prior to revoking any
license.
B. Any person, firm or corporation giving false or misleading statements
will be in violation of this chapter and the registration and license of
such person, firm or corporation shall be revoked by the Construction
Official who shall strike the name of such person, firm or corporation
from the registration list.
C. Any person or persons, whether agents, servants and/or employees,
who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter and any person,
firm or corporation violating or assisting in violation thereof shall, upon
conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville, be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
D. Each day that such person or persons, whether agents or employees,
shall fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter, shall constitute a
separate or additional offense against the provisions hereof.
E. The terms of any suspension shall be at the discretion of the
Construction Official and not less then six months.
F. Upon the anniversary of the issuance of a registration or license to a
contractor under the terms of this chapter, said registration and license
shall undergo review by the Construction Official and, if the contractor
has been the recipient of an excessive number of notices of violation
and/or stop-work notices, said license shall be revoked for a period of
six months.
66.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 155, Licensing, Art. II, Payment of Taxes.
§ 121-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 121-9
121:194
of the State of New Jersey and the rules governing the courts of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 121-10. Registration after revocation.
Any person, firm or corporation whose registration has been revoked under
the provisions of § 121-7 of this chapter may register and have his or her
name reentered upon the registration list upon the filing with the Public
Service Committee, or its designated representative, a certification by the
Construction Official to the effect that all violations with reference to which
conviction was secured have been corrected or are nonexistent and upon
payment of the fee described in § 121-6.
Chapter 123
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 123, Curfew, adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as
Ch. 95 of the 1982 Code, as amended, was repealed 12-1-2014 by
Ord. No. 25-2014.]
Chapter 125
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 123.
Loitering — See Ch. 163.
Noise — See Ch. 171.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 180.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 191.
§ 125-1. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, the use of the masculine pronoun shall be
deemed to apply to the feminine, and vice versa; the use of the singular
number shall be deemed to apply to the plural; the use of the word "person"
shall be deemed to apply to individuals, partnerships, limited liability
companies and corporations.
§ 125-2. Definitions; unlawful acts.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGGRESSIVELY BEG — To beg with intent to intimidate another person
into giving money or goods.
BEG — To ask for money or goods as a charity, whether by words, bodily
gestures, signs or other means.
§ 121-9 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 125-2
125:195
§ 125-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville, be punished
for each offense by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for any
term not exceeding 90 days in the county jail or in any place provided by
the municipality for the detention of prisoners, or both.
OBSTRUCT PEDESTRIAN OR VEHICULAR TRAFFIC — To walk, stand,
sit, lie or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by
another person or a vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of
a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact.
B. Prohibited acts.
(1) No person shall sleep in or on the street, sidewalks, public parks or
other public places in the city or obstruct or interfere with the
passage of any person or persons lawfully being on or upon said
streets, public parks or other public places.
(2) No person while in an intoxicated condition or under the influence
of liquor shall be upon or assemble upon the streets, sidewalks,
public parks or other places in the City of Pleasantville.
(3) No person, while upon any highway, sidewalk or other public place,
shall intentionally obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic or
aggressively beg. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's
Constitutional right to picket or to legally protest and acts
authorized by a permit issued pursuant to the Code of the City of
Pleasantville shall not constitute obstruction of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
(4) No person shall, while upon any highway, sidewalk or other public
place, accost or annoy any person or persons upon such places.
(5) No person shall revel, quarrel, brawl or otherwise misbehave in a
disorderly manner to the disturbance or annoyance of the
peaceable inhabitants of the city.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously give
or make or cause to be made a false fire, first-aid, air-raid or police
alarm.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act constituting
lewd, immoral or indecent conduct, unlawful destruction of
property, willful injury to or unlawful interference with any person,
a hazard to the public health or disturbances of the peace not
otherwise expressly prohibited herein.
(8) No person shall be guilty of any other disorderly conduct as
provided by law in or on the streets, sidewalks, public parks or
other public places.
§ 125-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 125-3
125:196
Chapter 126
FEES
§ 125-3 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 125-3
125:197

ARTICLE I
Copies of Government Records
[Adopted 8-5-2002 by Ord. No. 24-2002]
§ 126-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "City of Pleasantville Access to
Government Records and Establishment of Fees Ordinance."
§ 126-2. Purpose.
It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the City of Pleasantville to
recognize the public's general right to know pursuant to the Open Public
Records Act.67 All records kept in the course of official duties by any City of
Pleasantville officer or employee shall be deemed to be government records,
as that ten is defined by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, and such records shall be subject
to inspection by the public unless exempt under the statutes or other
regulation, common law practice, executive order of the Governor, Rules of
Court, federal law or judicial decision; this article was established to comply
with the mandate of N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., known as the Open Public
Records Act, including that portion of the law permitting the establishment
of charges/fees, not otherwise provided, to be imposed and associated with
the reproduction of the materials requested.
§ 126-3. Custodian of records; records request form.
§ 126-4. Inspection and copying of public records.
A. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.1, the Municipal Clerk or his/her
designee is designated as the custodian of records with the exception of
the records kept by the Police or Fire Department. The Chief of Police
or his/her designee shall be the custodian of records for the City of
Pleasantville Police Department and the Chief of the Pleasantville Fire
Department or his/her designee shall be the custodian of records for the
City of Pleasantville Fire Department.
B. The City recognizes the fact that the daily operation of the various
departments regularly involves the distribution of public records, as the
term is defined by state law, to the public, and that it would be
inefficient to require that all requests be submitted to the City Clerk. In
an effort to make records available within the time frames specified by
the law, the City will continue this policy in addition to the procedure
provided by this article.
A. Any person seeking to inspect, examine or copy a public record of this
municipality shall make application in writing to the Municipal Clerk, or
other custodian identified by this article, during regular business hours,
67.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1.
§ 126-1 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 126-4
125:199
§ 126-5. Time limits for compliance.
Unless a shorter time period is otherwise provided by statute, regulation
of executive order, the Clerk shall grant access to a government record or
deny a request for access to a record as soon as possible but not later than
seven business days after receiving the request, provided that the record
is currently available and not in storage or archived. In the event that the
Clerk fails to respond within seven business days after receiving a request,
the failure to respond shall be deemed a denial of the request, unless the
requestor has elected not to provide a name, address or telephone number,
or other means of contacting the requestor. If the requestor has elected not
to provide an address, or telephone number, or other means of contacting
the requestor, the custodian shall not be required to respond until the
on the form provided. All requests for public records shall be as specific
as possible, including the type of record and date created, if known.
B. The Municipal Clerk or other custodian shall promptly comply with a
request to inspect, examine, copy or provide a copy of a government
record. If the custodian is unable to comply with a request for access,
he or she shall indicate on the request form the specific basis for such
inability to comply and shall promptly return it to the requestor. The
custodian shall sign and date the form and provide the requestor with a
copy thereof.
C. In those instances where the nature of the request to the record itself
leads the custodian to doubt whether or not the record is a government
record as defined by law or is a record exempt from disclosure, the
Clerk shall request an opinion from the Municipal Attorney. A copy of
the request form shall be forwarded to the attorney, who, after review
and investigation, shall issue an opinion and note such opinion on the
request form and promptly return to the custodian.
D. If any part of a particular record is exempt from public access pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq., the custodian shall delete, redact or excise
from a copy of the record that portion which is exempt from access and
shall promptly permit access to the remainder of the record.
E. If the record requested is temporarily unavailable because it is in use or
storage, the custodian shall so advise the requestor and shall make
arrangements to make a copy of the record available.
F. If a request for access to a government record would substantially
disrupt municipal operations, the Clerk may deny access to the record
after attempting to reach a reasonable solution with the requestor that
accommodates the interests of the requestor and the municipality.
G. As required by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5e, immediate access shall be granted for
access to budgets, bills, vouchers, contracts (including collective
negotiations agreements and individual employment contracts), and
public salary and overtime information.
§ 126-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 126-5
125:200
requestor reappears before the custodian seeking a response to the original
request. If the government record is in storage or archived, the requestor
shall be so advised within seven business days after the custodian receives
the request. The requestor shall be advised by the custodian when the
record can be made available. If the record is not made available by that
time, access shall be deemed denied.
§ 126-6. Posting of appeals procedures.
The Clerk shall post prominently in public view, in or adjacent to the Clerk's
office, a statement that sets forth in clear, concise and specific terms the
right to appeal a denial or failure to provide access to government record
and the procedure by which an appeal may be filed.
§ 126-7. Viewing of government records; removal prohibited.
§ 126-8. Procedures and fee for purchasing copies of public
records.
Copies of records may be purchased for the fee prescribed by law or
regulation. If a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, the fee shall be
the actual cost of duplicating the records, provided, however, that where the
actual cost for duplication of a record exceeds the rates below, the actual
cost shall be imposed:
A. Upon the approval of a request to view, inspect, examine or copy a
record, the record and the requestor shall remain in the presence of the
custodian at all times. Under no circumstances shall any government
record be removed from the office where it is normally kept unless
accompanied by the custodian or his or her authorized representative.
B. In the event that the nature of the request to view records requires that
the custodian or other municipal employee observe or monitor such
viewing for a period of time exceeding one hour, the requestor shall be
responsible for reimbursing the municipality for time spent by the
custodian or other employee.
A. Standard sized paper documents, up to 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches in
size.
Number of Pages
Rate
(per page)
1 to 10 $0.75
11 to 20 $0.50
All over 20 $0.25
B. Large sized paper documents and maps.*
(1) Zoning Map.
§ 126-5 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 126-8
125:201
(2) Street Map.
(3) Drug Free School Zone Map.
(4) Soils Survey Map.
(5) Site plan.
(6) Subdivision plat.
(7) Tax maps.
(8) Engineering plans.
C. Preprinted documents.*
(1) Copy of the Code book.
(2) Each Code supplement.
(3) Zoning and Land Use pamphlet.
(4) Master plan.
D. Police and Fire reports and photographs.
(1) Police/Fire reports and photographs: Black and white copy, same as
Subsection A above; Color copy.*
(2) Police accident reports and Fire incident reports: same as
Subsection A above, if requested and picked up in person.
(3) Police accident and Fire incident reports, when copies are
requested other than in person: $5 for the first three pages and $1
per page for each additional page, as established by N.J.S.A.
39:4-131.
(4) Photographs.*
E. Electronic records.*
(1) Copy of videotape:
(a) If tape is supplied by requestor.
(b) If tape is supplied by municipality.
(2) Copy of audiotape:
(a) If tape is supplied by requestor.
(b) If tape is supplied by municipality.
(3) Copy of electronic document or database.*
(a) Floppy disks.*
§ 126-8 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 126-8
125:202
§ 126-9. Certified copies of vital records. [Added 7-7-2004 by Ord.
No. 16-2004; amended 4-16-2007 by Ord. No. 19-2007; 2-17-2016 by
Ord. No. 2-2016]
Copies of a vital record, including birth, marriage, death, domestic
partnership, and civil union certificates, may be purchased for a fee of $10
for each certificate.
§ 126-10. Notary services. [Added 11-6-2017 by Ord. No. 18-2017]
A notary fee of $2 shall be imposed for each page.
(b) CD.*
F. Miscellaneous medium.*
(1) Microfilm.
(2) Mailing labels.
G. A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual costs
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner or collation
or volume of printed mater is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request. A special service charge will be
applied when the custodian must change the medium in which the
record is normally kept in order to comply with the request. The special
service charge will include the cost of labor in addition to the cost of
materials as well as any other actual costs incurred by the City. The
requestor shall have the opportunity to review and object to the special
service charge prior to its imposition.
H. Conversion of records from one medium to another. Cost of duplication
plus special service charges as follows:*
(1) Conversion of paper record to electronic form.
(2) Conversion of electronic files from one software product to another.
I. Applicable postage shall be added for any and all records by mail.
J. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any anonymous request where it is
estimated that the information requested will cost in excess of $5 to
produce. The amount of the deposit shall equal the total estimated cost
of filling the request.
* NOTE: The fees for the items specified will be the actual cost and
adopted by resolution of Council, and are subject to change. The
resolution specifying the costs for these items will be posted next to
the appeal notice described above or in some other conspicuous place.
§ 126-8 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 126-10
125:203

ARTICLE II
Marriage and Civil Union Ceremony Fees
[Adopted 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 9-2017]
§ 126-11. General provisions.
Purpose: The general purpose of this article is to establish policies and
procedures for the collection of fees associated with the performance of
marriage and civil union ceremonies by the Mayor.
§ 126-12. General regulations.
A. Collection of fees. Persons seeking marriage or civil union ceremonies
by the Mayor shall remit the applicable fee delineated below to be paid
to the City of Pleasantville:
(1) Residents of Pleasantville: $100.
(2) Nonresidents of Pleasantville: $100.
(3) Active military: $0.
B. Compensation and reimbursement of expenses incurred through the
performance of marriage and civil union ceremonies:
(1) Receipt of fees. The fee shall be paid by check, cash or money order
payable to the City of Pleasantville. Fees collected shall be
deposited into City's Escrow Account.
(2) Disbursement of fee. The fees for service may be disbursed to the
Mayor through the appropriate budget line item and with
appropriate authorization.
(3) Eligible persons. The City shall reimburse only proper reasonable
expenses incurred directly by and for the Mayor. Under no
circumstances shall the City reimburse expenses or expenditures
on behalf of or because of any spouse, child, guest or other person.
§ 126-11 DISORDERLY CONDUCT § 126-12
125:205
Chapter 127
FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119. Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
§ 127-1. Height and width of division fences.
All division or partition fences between the lands of any two or more
adjoining owners, whether built or erected as division or partition fences
between such lands and whether the same exist or are erected entirely
or only partly upon the lands of any such adjoining owners or along or
immediately adjacent to any division or partition lines of such lands,
consisting of posts and rails, timber, boards, brick or stone walls, hedges
and all other kind or character of fences, shall not exceed four feet two
inches in height, measured from the level or surface of the earth and shall
not exceed two feet in width.
§ 127-2. Fence location; disagreement procedure.
§ 127-3. Violations and penalties.69
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
Chapter 131
A. The place where any partition fence is or shall be made shall be equally
divided, regard being had to the quantity of fence necessary and other
conveniences of fencing. Each party shall take an equal share of such
fence to make or amend and maintain so that it may be known which
part thereof is his own.
B. If the parties cannot agree to the making of such division, the Public
Service Committee of the Council, being disinterested and indifferent
between the parties, shall, on the application of either party, in the
presence of the parties if they desire to be present, make such division
and determine the part of such fence which each party is to make or
mend and maintain, pursuant to the statute in such case made and
provided.68
68.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:20-9 et seq.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 126-12 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 127-3
127:206
FIREARMS
§ 131-1. Discharge of firearms.
No person shall discharge any gun, pistol, firearm or other weapon using
cartridges or gunpowder for ammunition within the limits of the city except
for the protection of life, limb or property. This section shall not be
applicable to the use and discharge of any firearm or weapon by any person,
officer or official authorized pursuant to the laws of this state or of the
United States or pursuant to other ordinances of the city.
§ 131-2. Violations and penalties.70
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 135
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 30.
Alarms — See Ch. 80.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 147.
Fire and emergency vehicular zones in
Pleasantville Shopping Center — See Ch. 197,
Art. I.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 127-3 FIREARMS § 131-2
131:207

ARTICLE I
Hazardous Materials
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II of Ch. 110 of the
1982 Code]
§ 135-1. Permit application.
Application for a permit required by this article shall be made to the
Fire Subcode Official in such form and detail as the Fire Subcode Official
shall prescribe. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by plans or
drawings as required by the Fire Subcode Official for evaluation of the
application.
§ 135-2. Inspection before issuance.
Before a permit is issued, the Fire Subcode Official or the Fire Subcode
Official's designated representative shall make or cause to be made such
inspections or tests as are necessary to assure that the use and activities for
which application is made comply with the provisions of this article.
§ 135-3. Permit authority; term; transfer.
A permit shall constitute permission to maintain, store or handle materials
or to conduct processes which produce conditions hazardous to life or
property or to install equipment used in connection with such activities in
accordance with the provisions of this article. Such permission shall not be
construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the provisions
of this article. Said permit shall remain in effect until revoked or for such
period of time specified on the permit. Permits are not transferable, and any
change in use, operation or tenancy shall require a new permit.
§ 135-4. Compliance.
Plans approved by the Fire Subcode Official are approved with the intent
that they comply in all respects to this article. Any omissions or errors
on the plans do not relieve the applicant of complying with all applicable
requirements of this article.
§ 135-5. Revocation.
The Fire Subcode Official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the
provisions of this article if, upon inspection, any violation of the code exists
or if conditions of a permit have been violated or if there has been any false
statement or misrepresentation as to material fact in the application, data
or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
§ 135-6. Fee.
A permit shall not be issued until the designated fee has been paid. The
designated fee for the aforementioned permit is $10, and the fee must be
paid to the City of Pleasantville.
§ 135-1 FIREARMS § 135-7
131:209
§ 135-7. Violations and penalties.71
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
71.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 135-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 135-7
131:210
ARTICLE II
Uniform Fire Safety Code
[Adopted 6-3-1985 by Ord. No. 11-1985]
§ 135-8. Local enforcement. [Amended 12-7-1987 by Ord. No.
27-1987; 8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 13-1989]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202, the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be
locally enforced in the City of Pleasantville.
§ 135-9. Enforcing agency designated. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 6-1999]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Fire Official in the Pleasantville Fire
Department.
§ 135-10. Duties of enforcing agency. [Amended 8-21-1989 by Ord.
No. 13-1989]
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code in all buildings, structures and premises within the established
boundaries of the City of Pleasantville, other than owner-occupied buildings
used exclusively for dwelling purposes and containing fewer than three
dwelling units or buildings, structures and premises owned or operated by
the state, interstate agencies or the federal government, and shall faithfully
comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the
Uniform Fire Code.
§ 135-11. Life hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 135-9 of this article shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.72
§ 135-12. Fire Official; inspectors and employees. [Amended
8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 13-1989; 8-18-1997 by Ord. No. 30-1997]
A. The Fire Official shall be appointed by City Council upon
recommendation from the Fire Chief. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 6-1999]
B. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of four years.
C. Such inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
recommended by the Fire Official and Fire Chief and appointed by City
Council.
D. Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing agency shall be
subject to removal by the City Council upon recommendation of the Fire
72.Editor's Note: Former § 110-23, Organization, which immediately followed this section,
was deleted 2-16-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999.
§ 135-8 FIREARMS § 135-12
131:211
§ 135-13. Board of Appeals. [Amended 8-18-1997 by Ord. No.
30-1997]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,73 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Atlantic County Board of Appeals.
§ 135-14. Fees. [Amended 12-7-1987 by Ord. No. 27-1987;
8-21-1989 by Ord. No. 13-1989; 7-2-1990 by Ord. No. 13-1990;
8-18-1997 by Ord. No. 30-1997]
§ 135-15. Violations and penalties. [Added 8-21-1989 by Ord. No.
13-1989]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $5,000 for each violation.
Official and Fire Chief for inefficiency or misconduct. The Fire Official
shall be subject to removal by the City Council upon recommendation
of the Fire Chief for the same. The Fire Official and inspectors or
employees to be so removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be
heard by the City Administrator or a designated hearing officer.
A. The permit fees shall be pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C.
5:70-2.9 and N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3 and N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19(d). [Amended
10-7-2002 by Ord. No. 32-2002; 7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 19-2003]
B. Non-life-hazard use inspection fees for all buildings and structures that
are not classified as life-hazard uses pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.2. shall be the following for all use groups: [Amended
10-20-1997 by Ord. No. 46-1997; 10-7-2002 by Ord. No. 32-2002;
7-7-2003 by Ord. No. 19-2003; 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 41-2005;
2-20-2013 by Ord. No. 1-2013]
Square Footage of Business Fee
3,000 square feet and under $50
3,001 square feet to 6,000 square
feet
$85
6,001 square feet to 9,000 square
feet
$115
9,001 square feet and over $145
C. All inspection fees are due 30 days after inspection. Nonpayment of
inspection fee penalty will be two times the fee plus the original fee.
(Example: a fee of $50 with penalty ($100) would total $150.)
[Amended 2-20-2013 by Ord. No. 1-2013]
73.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208, respectively.
§ 135-12 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 135-15
131:212
Chapter 139
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 251.
Land management — See Ch. 300.
§ 135-15 FIREARMS § 135-15
131:213

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization; Findings of Fact; Purpose and Objectives
§ 139-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of City of Pleasantville, of
Atlantic County, New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 139-2. Findings of fact.
§ 139-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
A. The flood hazard areas of City of Pleasantville are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 139-1 FIREARMS § 139-3
131:215
§ 139-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 139-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 139-4
131:216
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 139-5. Terms defined.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
ADVISORY BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (ABFE) — The elevation shown on a
community's Advisory Flood Hazard Area Map that indicates the advisory
stillwater elevation plus wave effect (ABFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting
from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD AREA (AFHA) — The land in the floodplain
within a community subject to flooding from the one-percent-annual-chance
event depicted on the Advisory Flood Hazard Area Map.
ADVISORY FLOOD HAZARD MAP — The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Administration has delineated the areas of
advisory flood hazards applicable to the community.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year. It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30,
AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS) including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For Zones
VE and V1-30 the elevation represents the stillwater elevation (SWEL) plus
wave effect (BFE = SWEL + wave effect) resulting from a flood that has a
one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
§ 139-5 FIREARMS § 139-5
131:217
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA — The most recent available flood
risk guidance FEMA has provided. The best available flood hazard data may
be depicted on but not limited to Advisory Flood Hazard Area Maps, Work
Maps or Preliminary FIS and FIRM.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along
an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action from
storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The official map on
which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
§ 139-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 139-5
131:218
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 139-5 FIREARMS § 139-5
131:219
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRELIMINARY FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (PFIRM) — The draft
version of the FIRM released for public comment before finalization and
adoption.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — A continuous or nearly continuous mound
or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
overtopping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland limit
of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
SAND DUNES — Naturally occurring or man-made accumulations of sand
in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
A. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
C.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
D.
§ 139-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 139-5
131:220
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
B.
§ 139-5 FIREARMS § 139-5
131:221

ARTICLE III
General Provisions
§ 139-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the City of Pleasantville, Atlantic County, New Jersey.
§ 139-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
§ 139-8. Violations and penalties.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Pleasantville,
Community No. 340015, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, City of
Pleasantville, New Jersey, Atlantic County," dated July 19, 1982.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map, City of Pleasantville, New Jersey,
Atlantic County," as shown on Index and Panels 0001B, 0002B,
0003B, 0004B, 0005B whose effective date is January 19, 1983.
(3) Advisory base flood elevations from Advisory Flood Hazard Maps
"Atlantic City NW," "Ocean City NE," "Oceanville SW" and
"Pleasantville SE," dated December 14, 2012. These documents
shall take precedence over only base flood elevations (BFEs)
previously derived from effective panels and FIS in construction
and development regulations only. Where the Special Flood Hazard
Area (SFHA) BFE and the advisory base flood elevation (ABFE)
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
requirement shall prevail.
(4) Best available flood hazard data. These documents shall take
precedence over effective panels and FIS in construction and
development regulations only. Where the effective mapping
conflicts or overlaps with the best available flood hazard data
mapping, whichever imposes the more stringent requirement shall
prevail.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 18
North First Street, Pleasantville, New Jersey.
§ 139-6 FIREARMS § 139-8
131:223
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Pleasantville
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 139-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 139-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 139-11. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of City of Pleasantville,
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 139-8 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 139-11
131:224
ARTICLE IV
Administration
§ 139-12. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 139-7. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and
may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing
the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities;
and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is
required:
§ 139-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 139-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 139-17B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment provisions of 5.3[1]74 are met.
74.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 139-12 FIREARMS § 139-14
131:225
(4) Review all development permits in the coastal high-hazard area of
the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
development alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood
damage.
(5) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level in accordance with § 139-18B(4).
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 139-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 139-17A, Residential construction, and
§ 139-17B, Nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 139-12C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 139-15.
§ 139-14 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 139-15
131:226
§ 139-15. Variance procedure.
A. Appeal board.
(1) The Atlantic County Board of Appeals as established by Atlantic
County Board of Chosen Freeholders shall hear and decide appeals
and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Atlantic County Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Atlantic County Board of
Appeals, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Atlantic
County Board of Appeals, as provided in this chapter.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Atlantic County Board of
Appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,
§ 139-15 FIREARMS § 139-15
131:227
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Atlantic County Board of Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the
items in § 139-15A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 139-15A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
§ 139-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 139-15
131:228
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 139-15 FIREARMS § 139-15
131:229

ARTICLE V
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
§ 139-16. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
§ 139-16 FIREARMS § 139-16
131:231
§ 139-17. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 139-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 139-14B, use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
(2) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development and other
proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or five acres
(whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction.
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities elevated at or above the base flood elevation
(published FIS/FIRM) or advisory base flood elevation, whichever is
more restrictive, plus one foot (or more).
(2) Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade one foot above or more the depth number
specified in feet (at least three feet if no depth number is specified)
or at or above the advisory base flood elevation plus one foot,
§ 139-16 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 139-17
131:232
whichever is more restrictive. And, require adequate drainage
paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and
away from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities:
(1) Either:
(a) Elevated to or above the base flood elevation (published FIS/
FIRM) or the advisory base flood elevation, whichever is more
restrictive, plus one foot or more; and
(b) Require within any AO Zone on the municipality's DFIRM that
all new construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade one foot or more the depth number
specified in feet (at least three feet if no depth number is
specified) or at or above the advisory base flood elevation plus
one foot, whichever is more restrictive. And, require adequate
drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
(2) Or:
(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one
foot, or advisory base flood elevation plus one foot or more
(whichever is more restrictive), the structure is watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in § 139-14C(2)(b).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 139-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation (published FIS/FIRM) or the
§ 139-17 FIREARMS § 139-17
131:233
§ 139-18. Coastal high-hazard area.
Coastal high-hazard areas (V or VE Zones) are located within the areas
of special flood hazard established in § 139-7. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges and
hurricane wave wash; therefore, the following provisions shall apply:
advisory base flood elevation, plus one foot (whichever is more
restrictive).
A. Location of structures.
(1) All buildings or structures shall be located landward of the reach of
the mean high tide.
(2) The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited, except
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
B. Construction methods.
(1) Elevation. All new construction and substantial improvements shall
be elevated on piling or columns so that:
(a) The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
lowest floor (excluding the piling or columns) is elevated to or
above the base flood elevation (published FIS/FIRM), the
advisory base flood elevation or as required by the Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23), whichever is more
restrictive, and,
(b) For all new construction and substantial improvements within
the coastal high-hazard areas (V or VE Zones) as delineated by
the published Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) or the best
available flood hazard data (whichever is more restrictive)
shall have all space below the lowest floor's supporting
member open so as not to impede the flow of water, except for
breakaway walls as provided or in Subsection B(4).
(2) Structural support.
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
securely anchored on piling or columns.
(b) The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement due to the effects of wind and water loading values,
each of which shall have a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year
mean recurrence interval).
(c) There shall be no fill used for structural support.
§ 139-17 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 139-18
131:234
(3) Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall
develop or review the structural design specifications and plans for
the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards
of practice for compliance with the provisions of Subsection B(1)
and (2)(a) and (b).
(4) Space below the lowest floor.
(a) Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a
structure started after the enactment of this chapter shall not
enclose the space below the lowest floor unless breakaway
walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening are used as
provided for in this section.
(b) Breakaway walls, open wood lattice-work or insect screening
shall be allowed below the base flood elevation provided that
they are intended to collapse under wind and water loads
without causing collapse, displacement or other structural
damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting
foundation system. Breakaway walls shall be designed for a
safe loading resistance of not less than 10 and no more than 20
pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls which exceed
a design safe loading of 20 pounds per square foot (either by
design or when so required by local or State codes) may be
permitted only if a registered professional engineer or
architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following
conditions:
[1] Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less
than that which would occur during the base flood; and
[2] The elevated portion of the building and supporting
foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement or other structural damage due to the effects
of wind and water load acting simultaneously on all
building components (structural and nonstructural). Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by
applicable state or local building standards.
(c) If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage
and not for human habitation.
(d) Prior to construction, plans for any breakaway wall must be
submitted to the Construction Code Official or Building
Subcode Official for approval.
C. Sand dunes. Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zones
VE and V on the community's DFIRM which would increase potential
flood damage.
§ 139-18 FIREARMS § 139-18
131:235
Chapter 143
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoke detectors — See Ch. 80.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 111.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 207.
Rent control — See Ch. 215.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 281.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
§ 143-1. Designated official; compensation.
The Building Subcode Official of the City of Pleasantville shall be and is
hereby designated as the officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this
chapter, and he shall serve in such capacity without any additional salary.
§ 143-2. Standards adopted; copies on file.
Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1946, c. 21 (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 et seq.),
the New Jersey State Housing Code (1980 Revision), as approved by the
Department of Community Affairs and filed in the Secretary of State's office,
is hereby accepted, adopted and established as a standard to be used as
a guide in determining whether dwellings in this municipality are safe,
sanitary and fit for human habitation and rental. A copy of the New Jersey
State Housing Code (1980 Revision) is annexed to this chapter, and three
copies of the same have been placed on file in the office of the City Clerk
and are available to all persons desiring to use and examine the same.
§ 143-3. Inspections and repairs.
A. The Building Subcode Official is hereby authorized and directed to
make inspections to determine the condition of dwelling units, rooming
units and premises located within the City of Pleasantville in order that
he may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the
occupants of dwellings and of the general public.
B. For the purpose of making such inspections, the Building Subcode
Official is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all
reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises.
C. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming
unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Building Subcode
Official free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and
its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any
§ 139-18 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 143-3
131:236
§ 143-4. Violation notices.
§ 143-5. Hearing; relief; emergencies.
part of such dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises at an reasonable
times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or
with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Whenever the Building Subcode Official determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or
persons responsible therefor as hereinafter provided.
B. Such notice shall be put in writing, shall include a statement of the
reasons why it is being issued, shall allow a reasonable time for the
performance of any act it requires and shall be served upon the owner
or his agent or the occupant, as the case may require, provided that
such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or
agent or upon such occupant if a copy thereof is served upon him
personally or if a copy thereof is sent by certified mail to his last known
address or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the dwelling affected by the notice or if he is served with such notice by
any other method authorized or required under the laws of this state.
C. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken,
will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
A. Filing of petition; hearing.
(1) Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter or
of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto may request and
shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the Building
Subcode Official, provided that such person shall file in the office of
said Building Subcode Official a written petition requesting such
hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor
within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
(2) Upon receipt of said petition, the Building Subcode Official shall set
a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner
written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given
an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be
modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later
than 10 days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided
that upon application of the petitioner the Building Subcode
Official may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time
§ 143-3 FIREARMS § 143-5
131:237
§ 143-6. Rules and regulations.
The Building Subcode Official is hereby authorized and empowered to make
and adopt such written rules and regulations as he may deem necessary for
the proper enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however,
that such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter, nor in anywise alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions
thereof. The Building Subcode Official shall file a certified copy of all rules
and regulations which he may adopt in his office and in the office of the
Clerk of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 143-7. Occupancy of nonconforming dwellings; creation of
additional dwelling units. [Amended 4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 9-2009]
beyond such ten-day period if in his judgment the petitioner has
submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
(3) After such hearing, the Building Subcode Official shall sustain,
modify or withdraw the notice, depending upon his finding as to
whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If
the Building Subcode Official sustains or modifies such notice, it
shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to this
chapter shall automatically become an order if a written petition
for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Building Subcode
Official within 10 days after such notice is served.
(4) The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and
decision of the Building Subcode Official, shall be summarized,
reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the
office of the City Clerk. Such record shall also include a copy of
every notice or order issued in connection with the matter.
B. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Building Subcode Official
may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as
provided by the laws of this state.
C. Whenever the Building Subcode Official finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health or safety,
he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence
of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he
deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other
provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately but,
upon petition to the Building Subcode Official, shall be afforded a
hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his
findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have complied with, the
Building Subcode Official shall continue such order in effect or modify it
or revoke it.
§ 143-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 143-7
131:238
§ 143-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, and each
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and each day the same is
violated shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 147
INSURANCE CLAIMS, FIRE
§ 147-1. Payment of claims restricted.
No insurance company issuing a fire insurance policy on any real property
located within the City of Pleasantville shall pay any claim against said
policy in excess of $2,500 unless and until the insured person submits an
official certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12,
certifying that all taxes, assessments or other municipal liens or charges
levied, assessed, due and payable against said property have been paid or
the municipality submits a certified copy of a resolution adopted pursuant
to § 147-3 of this chapter.
§ 147-2. Lien disbursement prior to payment.
Unless a resolution adopted in accordance with § 147-3 of this chapter
is received by an insurance company writing fire insurance policies in
the City of Pleasantville, such insurance company is hereby authorized
and required, prior to the payment of any claims for fire damages in
excess of $2,500, to pay to the City of Pleasantville the amount of the
liens appearing on the official certificate or other recorded liens or related
charges as may be related to the insurance company; provided, however,
A. No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or rent to another for
occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living
therein which does not conform to the provisions of the New Jersey
State Housing Code (1980 Revision), established hereby as the
standard to be used in determining whether a dwelling is safe, sanitary
and fit for human habitation.
B. No person shall alter, construct, add on to or otherwise create any
dwelling or dwelling unit in addition to the number of units approved
pursuant to the provisions of this Code without first obtaining all
applicable and necessary building and construction permits; all
applicable and necessary zoning approvals; a Code compliance
inspection; and an amended certificate of occupancy that includes the
new unit or units. Violations of this section shall be subject to a
minimum fine of $250 and other applicable penalties under § 143-8.
§ 143-7 INSURANCE CLAIMS, FIRE § 147-2
147:239
that if an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge other than
an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75% of the full amount of
the lien or charge being contested pending termination of all proceedings,
at which time such moneys and all interest accruing thereon at a rate paid
on interest-bearing accounts in banking institutions or savings and loan
associations in this state shall be disbursed in accordance with the final
judgment or order of the court.
§ 147-3. Agreements between Council and claimant.
The City Council of Pleasantville may enter into an agreement by formal
resolution with the owner of any fire-damaged property to pay in full all
delinquent taxes, assessments or other municipal liens by installments,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or for the redemption of the tax sale lien
by installment payments pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of
the New Jersey statutes, if City Council is satisfied that the claim for fire
damages is to be used to restore or improve the fire-damaged property. An
insurance company receiving a certified copy of the resolution of agreement
between City Council and the owner or insured of fire-damaged property is
authorized to make full payment of the claim to the insured person.
§ 147-4. Effect on insurance company obligations and authority of
city.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to:
§ 147-5. Copy on file with Commissioner of Insurance.
A certified copy of this chapter shall be filed after final adoption hereof with
the State Commissioner of Insurance.
A. Obligate the insurance company for any amount in excess of the value
of the fire insurance policy on the property or the amount of the liability
of the insurance company thereunder.
B. Obligate the insurance company for any liens not appearing on the
official certificate or any certified changes submitted by the bonded
official.
C. Affect the authority of the City of Pleasantville to enforce a municipal
lien under any of the laws of this state.
§ 147-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 147-5
147:240
Chapter 151
JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dealers in secondhand building
materials — See Ch. 105, Art. I.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 195.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 231.
Garage and yard sales — See Ch. 223.
§ 147-5 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 147-5
151:241

ARTICLE I
Junk Dealers
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 128 of the
1982 Code]
§ 151-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK DEALER — Any person who:
§ 151-2. License required.
No person shall carry on the business of a junk dealer without first having
obtained a license as provided in this article.
§ 151-3. License application; content.
Every applicant for a license to engage in the business of junk dealer shall
file with the City Clerk a written application signed by the applicant or
applicants. Said application shall state:
Keeps, conducts or maintains any building, structure, yard or place
for keeping, storing or piling in commercial quantities, whether
temporarily, irregularly or continually, or for the buying or selling or
the dealing in by weight, piece or quantity, or otherwise, at retail or
wholesale, any old, used or secondhand materials of any kind, including
cloth, rags, clothing, paper, rubbish, bottles, glass, rubber, iron, brass,
copper or other metal, furniture, newspapers, magazines, cardboard,
rags of cotton, wool or mixed carpets, bagging, hair, feathers,
mattresses, automobile tubes, used motor vehicles or the parts thereof
and other articles whose worn condition renders them practically
useless for the purpose for which they were made and which are
commonly classed as "junk."
A.
Buys or sells, at retail or wholesale, or deals in, by weight, piece or
quantity, or otherwise, any of the materials itemized in Subsection A of
this definition, from any peddler, gatherer or scavenger of said material
or any person not engaged in the junk business.
B.
A. The names and residences of the applicants, if an individual,
partnership or firm, or the names of the principal officers and their
residences if the applicant is an association or corporation.
B. The length of time such applicant or applicants, if an individual, firm or
partnership, or the manager or person in charge, if the applicant is a
firm or corporation, has or have resided in the city, his or their places of
previous employment, whether married or single, whether he or they or
any of them have been convicted of a crime and, if so, what offense,
when and in what court.
§ 151-1 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 151-3
151:243
§ 151-4. Signing and swearing of licenses.
Every application for a license to engage in the business of junk dealer shall
be signed and sworn to.
§ 151-5. City Clerk's application report; condition of premises.
§ 151-6. License issuance, numbering and content.
§ 151-7. Posting of licenses; display of signs.
C. Whether the applicant or applicants or officers or manager of the
applicant had been employed by a junk dealer or had been a junk
dealer.
D. The detailed nature of the business to be conducted and the kind of
materials to be collected, bought, sold or otherwise handled.
E. The premises where such business is to be located or carried on.
A. The City Clerk shall report such application to the Chief of Police, Fire
Chief and Building Subcode Official, who shall inspect or cause to be
inspected such premises to determine whether it complies with all laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations.
B. The premises and all structures thereon shall be so situated and
constructed that the business of junk dealer may be carried on in a
sanitary manner, shall contain no fire hazards and shall be arranged so
that thorough inspection may be made at any time by the proper health,
fire, building and police authorities.
A. Upon the filing of the application and after investigation, the Council
shall, upon approval of such application and the payment to the City
Clerk of the license fee provided by § 151-9, issue to the applicant a
license to engage in business as a junk dealer.
B. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which they are issued and
shall state clearly the location of the junk business, the date of issuance
and expiration of the license and the name and address of the licensee.
A. Every holder of a junk dealer's license shall at all times keep said
license posted, while in force, in a conspicuous place on the premises
described in the application for such license.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to post a license upon premises other
than those mentioned in the application or knowingly to deface or
destroy any such license.
C. Each vehicle, wagon and cart kept or used by a junk dealer in the
exercise of his license shall be marked on both sides with his name,
address of the applicant's place of business, the words "junk dealer"
and "Pleasantville, New Jersey," and the number corresponding to the
§ 151-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 151-7
151:244
§ 151-8. Business place to be designated on license; transferability.
Every junk dealer's license shall designate the place of business in or from
which the junk dealer receiving such license shall be authorized to carry on
such business. No licensee shall remove his place of business from the place
designated in the license until a written permit has been secured from the
Council and the same shall have been endorsed upon the license. All signs
and vehicle markings required by § 151-7 shall be altered to contain the new
address.
§ 151-9. License fee and duration.
Every person engaged in the business of a junk dealer shall pay an annual
license fee of $100, due and payable on June 1 of each year. Every license
shall expire at 12:00 midnight on May 31 following its issuance.
§ 151-10. License revocation and suspension.
§ 151-11. Consequences of license revocation.
number of his license in plain letters and figures at least three inches
high and of such color as to be plainly read at a distance of 60 feet.
D. Every licensed junk dealer shall have and keep a sign on the outside and
in front of each of his places of business, on which shall be clearly set
forth in conspicuous letters his name, the words "junk dealer" and the
number of his license.
A. In addition to the penalty provided in § 151-20, any license issued under
this article may be suspended or revoked by the Council, after notice
and hearing, if it appears after such hearing that the licensee has
violated any of the provisions of this article.
B. The following procedure shall be observed:
(1) Complaint shall be made in writing by any municipal official or by
any resident of the city.
(2) A notice shall be issued to the licensee to appear before the Council
at a time specified therein, not less than three days after the date of
service thereof, and to show cause why his license should not be
revoked or suspended.
A. Whenever any license shall be revoked or suspended pursuant to the
provisions of § 151-10, no refund of any unearned portion of the fee
therefor shall be made.
B. For a period of five years from any revocation the Council may, in its
discretion when it deems the revoked licensee unfit to hold a license,
withhold a license from such person.
§ 151-7 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 151-12
151:245
§ 151-12. Promulgation of rules and regulations by Atlantic County
Board of Health.
The Atlantic County Board of Health may formulate reasonable rules and
regulations relating to the conduct of business of junk dealers for the
purpose of protecting the health of the community. No junk dealer shall
violate any such rule or regulation.
§ 151-13. General rules and regulations.
A. No junk dealer shall carry on the business at or from any other place
than the one designated in the license therefor or carry on said business
after such license has been revoked or has expired.
B. No junk dealer shall make any purchase from any person or receive any
articles except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. No
purchase or receipt of any goods shall take place on Sundays and
holidays.
C. No junk dealer shall purchase or acquire from any person under the age
of 21 years any junk, other than old rags or paper, unless accompanied
by a parent or guardian of such person. No item shall be acquired from
any intoxicated person.
D. The contents of the premises of every junk dealer shall be arranged in
an orderly manner with all similar things located together so as to
facilitate inspection by the proper authorities. The premises of every
junk dealer shall be subject to inspection by the proper municipal
authorities at any time.
E. All articles received, except old paper and rags, shall be retained for at
least 48 hours before disposal or before such articles are broken or
otherwise changed from the condition in which they were at the time of
purchase or their identity otherwise destroyed. Payment shall not be
made for any junk purchased, except paper and rags, until at least 24
hours after the time when said articles have been received by the junk
dealer, and then payment shall only be made between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 12:00 noon so as to permit police investigation. Where,
however, the person from whom junk is purchased is personally known
to the junk dealer and said person's residence or place of business is
likewise known, then the restriction as to the time of payment shall not
apply. If said person from whom junk is purchased cannot be found at
the residence or place of business shown on the record of the junk
dealer, this fact shall be considered prima facie proof that said person
was not personally known to the junk dealer.
F. No junk dealer shall purchase or otherwise acquire bottles or glass
from bottles owned or used by any individual, firm or corporation
engaged in the dairy business in Pleasantville, except from the legal
owner of such bottles. Every junk dealer shall report to the Chief of
Police of the city within two hours the fact that such bottles or glass
§ 151-12 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 151-13
151:246
§ 151-14. Record maintenance by junk dealer.
§ 151-15. Deadline for delivery of reports to Chief of Police; keeping
of records by Chief.
were presented or offered to such junk dealer for sale or other
disposition.
A. Each junk dealer shall keep a daily record, written in ink or in indelible
pencil, in the English language, of articles purchased, including an
accurate description thereof; the name and residence of the person
from whom each article was purchased; the name of the employer of
such person, if any; the day and hour of such purchase; and the price
paid therefor. The records shall at all reasonable times be open to the
inspection of any police officer, or any person duly authorized in writing
for such purpose by the Chief of Police who shall exhibit such
authorization to the junk dealer, his agent or employee. No entry in
such records shall be changed, erased, obliterated or defaced.
B. In the case of motor vehicles or parts thereof, there shall be kept, in
addition, a record of the personal description of the person from whom
purchased and a complete description of the purchase. When parts of
motor vehicles are purchased as a complete unit and are capable of
reuse in the same form, this description shall include the trade name
and the motor body, axle, coil, starter, carburetor, magneto, steering
gear, radiator and manufacturers' numbers and any other serial
number, the style of body, model, color and license number. When parts
of motor vehicles are bought in bulk as metal junk, said description may
be general in its character.
C. In purchasing junk from any person or persons delivering said junk by
any vehicle, wagon or cart, the dealer shall, in addition to writing down
the information above mentioned, make a record of the motor vehicle's
registration number or municipal license number of the vehicle, wagon
or cart.
A. It shall be the duty of every junk dealer to deliver or cause to be
delivered to the Chief of Police or his representative, every day except
Sunday, before the hour of 11:00 a.m., a legible and correct transcript
from the records provided by § 151-14, showing the information
prescribed therein. Such information shall be supplied as the Chief of
Police may require.
B. All reports required by this article shall be signed at the bottom by the
licensee or his duly authorized representative.
C. The Chief of Police shall cause a record to be kept of all such reports,
showing the date and time each report is received, the licensee making
the report, his license number and his address.
§ 151-13 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 151-16
151:247
§ 151-16. Additional reports.
Every junk dealer, upon being served with a written notice to do so by a
member of the Police Department, shall, in addition to the reports provided
for by § 151-15 of this article, report to the Chief of Police an accurate
description of all goods, articles or things purchased or received by him
in the course of business of a junk dealer at such time and during such
period of time specified in the notice, stating the amount paid therefor and
the name, residence and general description of the person from whom such
goods, articles or things were received.
§ 151-17. Regulations concerning motor vehicles.
No licensee, either acting for himself or by or through his agent or
employee, shall wreck, tear down, paint or otherwise destroy the identity
of or dispose of or allow to be taken out of his or its possession any
secondhand motor vehicle, part or accessory capable of reuse as such in
its same form, purchased or otherwise secured by or left for sale with him
or it, until five days after the report provided in § 151-15 has been made
to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police may, after proper report is made
to him, grant a special permit to a licensee permitting a secondhand motor
vehicle, part or accessory, in such special permit properly described, to be
sold or disposed of and delivered to another when the Chief of Police has
investigated and determined that there is no question as to the ownership
of such secondhand motor vehicle, part or accessory.
§ 151-18. Unidentified motor vehicles or parts.
§ 151-19. Lost or stolen property.
If any goods, articles or things whatsoever shall be advertised in any
newspaper printed in the city as having been lost or stolen and the same
or any answering the description advertised or any part or portion thereof
shall be in or come into the possession of any junk dealer or peddler, he shall
give information thereof, in writing, to the Chief of Police and state from
whom the same was received. Any junk dealer or peddler who shall have or
receive any goods, articles or things lost or stolen, or alleged or supposed
to have been lost or stolen, shall exhibit the same on demand to any police
A. No person shall knowingly buy, sell, receive, dispose of, conceal or have
in his possession any motor vehicle, part or accessory from which the
manufacturer's serial number or any other number or identification
mark has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the identity of such vehicle,
part or accessory.
B. Every person to whom is offered for sale, storage or wreckage any
motor vehicle, part or accessory from or on which the manufacturer's
serial number or any other number or identification mark has been
removed, defaced, altered or destroyed shall within two hours notify
the Chief of Police of such offer.
§ 151-16 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 151-19
151:248
officer or any person duly authorized, in writing, by the Chief of Police, who
shall exhibit such authorization to such dealer or peddler.
§ 151-20. Violations and penalties.75
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 151-19 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 151-20
151:249

ARTICLE II
Junk Collectors
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II of Ch. 151 of the
1982 Code]
§ 151-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK COLLECTOR — Any person who engages in the business of buying,
selling or collecting old rope, old iron, old brass, old copper, old lead
or other old metal, old or used glass or glassware, used or secondhand
building materials, rags, glass or paper and any other debris, material or
refuse of similar character and who does not have a fixed place of business
within the city for the purposes thereof.
§ 151-22. License required.
No person shall have, conduct or engage in the business of junk collector
without first obtaining a license therefor from the City Clerk.
§ 151-23. License fee and duration.
Every person engaged in the business of a junk collector shall pay an annual
license fee of $25, due and payable on June 1 of each year. Each license
shall expire at 12:00 midnight on May 31 following its issuance.
§ 151-24. License application and issuance.
Applications for licenses shall be made to the City Clerk. He shall not issue
the said license unless payment of the license fee is first made.
§ 151-25. Violations and penalties.76
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 151-21 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 151-25
151:251
Chapter 155
LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 84.
Amusement devices — See Ch. 87.
Secondhand building materials dealers — See
Ch. 105, Art. I.
Construction contractors — See Ch. 121.
Junk dealers and collectors — See Ch. 151.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 195.
Pool and billiard parlors — See Ch. 203.
Garage, yard and closeout sales — See Ch.
223.
Dealers in secondhand goods — See Ch. 231.
Towing — See Ch. 269.
§ 151-25 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 151-25
151:252
ARTICLE I
Mercantile Licensing
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Ch. 130 of the 1982
Code]
§ 155-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS, TRADE or CALLING — All businesses, all trades and all callings
and vocations, with the exception of those businesses, trades, callings
and vocations for which licenses or certificates have been issued by any
department, board, commission or other agency of the State of New Jersey,
other than real estate auctioneers or real estate brokers engaged in selling
at auction and their auction businesses.
§ 155-2. Purpose. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
The license fees prescribed by this article are to license and regulate, as
police measures for the public health, safety and morals or welfare, the
businesses described herein and to impose thereupon license fees for the
issuance thereof or as may be otherwise provided by law.
§ 155-3. Scope and construction.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to supersede or be in lieu of any
regulatory provisions relating to any license or permit required by any other
chapter or article of this Code.
§ 155-4. License required; exceptions.
§ 155-5. Investigation of applicants. [Amended 5-7-1990 by Ord. No.
4-1990; 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
A. No person shall, unless a license has first been obtained therefor as
hereinafter provided in this article:
(1) Engage in or carry on any business, trade or calling in the City.
(2) Aid or assist, as employee, clerk or otherwise, in carrying on any
business, trade or calling in the City.
(3) Use any store, stand, vehicle, wagon or other place or thing for
which a license is required by this article.
(4) Sell or offer for sale any goods or thing for which a license is
required by this article.
B. Exceptions. Nothing in this article shall apply to or require the
obtaining of a license by any charitable or religious society or
incorporated benevolent association not for pecuniary profit.
§ 155-1 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 155-5
151:253
§ 155-6. License fee amounts; businesses enumerated. [Amended
5-7-1990 by Ord. No. 4-1990]
A. Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police or a police
officer designated by him, who shall immediately institute whatever
investigation of the applicant's business responsibility, moral character
and ability to properly conduct the license activity he considers
necessary for the protection of the public. He shall communicate his
findings in writing to the Licensing Officer within a reasonable time
after the application has been filed. If the investigator decides that the
applicant's character, ability or business responsibility is unsatisfactory
or the products, services or activity are not free from fraud, he shall
disapprove the application and the Licensing Officer shall refuse to
issue the license and shall so notify the applicant. Otherwise, the
Licensing Officer shall issue the license immediately, provided that the
required license fees have been paid, except in cases where approval of
the City Council is required. In the event of the refusal of the issuance
of a license, the applicant may appeal to the City Council for hearing.
The appeal shall be filed, in writing, with the City Clerk within 14 days
after notification of the refusal. The City Council shall hold its hearing
within 10 days thereafter and its decision shall be final.
B. No license shall be granted for any business until the Construction
Official certifies, in writing, to the Licensing Official that the applicant
has complied with all the ordinances and regulations pertaining to said
business.
A. The license fees to be paid annually as above provided to Pleasantville
for conducting the businesses, trades, professions or occupations
herein named at the places to be designated in the license certificate
issued therefor shall be as follows, the names used being a designation
of the businesses, trades, professions or occupations required to be
licensed: [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999; 12-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 29-2014]
Type Fee
Appliances
Sales/service $75
Repairs only $50
Auctioneer $125
Auto
Sales $125
Parts/supplies $75
Repairs $75
Leasing $75
Awnings $50
§ 155-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 155-6
151:254
Type Fee
Bicycle sales/service $50
Car wash/service $50
Carpet cleaning $50
Deliveries, per truck with no store license $25
Department store
1 to 6 leased departments $400
7 to 10 leased departments $500
Over 10 leased departments $600
Development contractor
First year $500
Renewal, each year $100
Driving school, each vehicle $25
Drugstore $75
Electrical supplies $75
Expositions (circus; carnival) $1,000
Furniture $100
Grocery $75
Hardware $75
Ice cream
Stand $35
Parlor $50
Ice plant $100
Jewelry $50
Laundry $100
Laundromat $50
Each machine $5
Locksmith $50
Lumberyard $100
Manufacturer $100
Marine rentals, per slip $15
Monument work $50
Motel $100
Plus, each room $5
Motorcycle sales, parts and service $75
Newsstand $35
Novelties $50
§ 155-6 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 155-6
151:255
§ 155-7. Payment of license fees; reduced fees.
Type Fee
Office supplies $50
Furniture and equipment $75
Optical sales/service $50
Parking lot $100
Bus parking $2,500
Per bus, per day $5
Personal service establishment $50
Petroleum storage $300
Photographer $50
Pizza parlor $50
Print shop $50
Produce and/or flower stand $35
Restaurant $75
Plus, per seat $0.10
Retail sales $75
Secondhand dealer $250
Service station $75
Supermarket $250
Telephone service $50
Theater $200
Trailer park sales and service $150
Trailer tax, per week, per trailer $1
Upholstery $50
Variety store $200
Vending machine $15
Music $30
Games $50
Warehouse $100
Wholesale sales $100
B. Miscellaneous. Any trade or business which is not listed in this article
will be charged $75.
A. All license fees shall be due and payable to the City Clerk prior to the
issuance of the license. [Amended 5-7-1990 by Ord. No. 4-1990]
§ 155-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 155-7
151:256
§ 155-8. License contents and duration.
§ 155-9. New licenses for additional businesses.
§ 155-10. Display of licenses. [Amended 5-7-1990 by Ord. No.
4-1990]
The license, when issued, shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises
where the business, trade or calling is conducted. Licensees having no local
place of business shall exhibit their license when requested to do so by
officers of the City Clerk's office and of the Police Department.
§ 155-11. Certification for new business. [Added 5-7-1990 by Ord.
No. 4-1990]
B. All fees for licenses issued after January 1 and expiring on May 31 at
12:00 midnight of the same year shall be 1/2 of the amount of the fees
prescribed by § 155-6.
A. Every license shall specify by name the person, firm or corporation to
which it shall be issued; the business, trade or calling for which it is
granted; and the location at which such business, trade or calling is to
be carried on.
B. All mercantile licenses provided for by this article shall expire on May
31 at 12:00 midnight following the date of issuance.
A. No person shall transact any business except with respect to the
business, trade or calling for which the license was issued, except as
otherwise provided in this section.
B. If any person conducting a business, trade or calling required to be
licensed by the provisions of this article desires to add thereto and
conduct therewith any other business, trade or calling not included in
any classification for which such license was issued, he shall be entitled
to receive, upon payment to the City Clerk of an additional fee
amounting to 1/2 of the license fee prescribed by this article for the
business, trade or calling so added, a new license which shall include
such additional business, trade or calling. [Amended 5-7-1990 by
Ord. No. 4-1990]
C. No licensee shall conduct any additional business, trade or calling
referred to in Subsection B of this section without having first obtained
a new license as provided for in said Subsection B.
D. No license shall cover any place of business other than that for which
the license has been issued.
A. All new businesses located in structures within the City must be
certified and inspected by the Zoning Officer, the Building Subcode
Official and the Fire Official or their designated representatives. The
structures will have to be in compliance with the State Uniform
§ 155-7 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 155-11
151:257
§ 155-12. License transferability. [Amended 5-7-1990 by Ord. No.
4-1990; 11-20-2000 by Ord. No. 35-2000]
§ 155-13. Access to buildings by Clerk. [Amended 5-7-1990 by Ord.
No. 4-1990]
Every person conducting a business, profession, trade or calling required
to be licensed shall permit and allow the City Clerk or designated
representative to have access to every building for the purpose of
ascertaining the nature of the business, trade or calling as the basis for the
license fee to be paid.
§ 155-14. Records of licenses issued. [Amended 5-7-1990 by Ord.
No. 4-1990]
The City Clerk shall maintain a record of licenses issued and the numbers
of licenses assigned therefor.
§ 155-15. Violations and penalties.
Construction Code and the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code and will be
subject to the permitted uses section of Chapter 290, Zoning and Land
Use, of the City of Pleasantville. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
B. The fee for certification shall be $50.
C. No license shall be issued to any person who has not complied with the
laws of the State of New Jersey or with any ordinance of the City of
Pleasantville.
A. Licenses are nontransferable, either from person to person or from
place to place. An existing business moving to a new location within the
City, retaining the same ownership, must notify the City Clerk and
Zoning Official prior to relocating.
B. In the event of a transfer of a business licensed under this article, the
new owner shall notify the City Clerk of such transfer or sale before
operating the business.
C. Fees will be charged as follows:
(1) A licensed business moving to a new location within the City and
under the same ownership will pay a fee of $15 for administrative
services.
(2) All other transfers will be required to pay the annual license fee in
accordance with § 155-6.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville, be
punished for each offense by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
§ 155-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 155-15
151:258
§ 155-16. Revocation of license. [Added 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
$1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period
of community service not exceeding 90 days. Any person pleading
guilty may pay a fine of $100 to the Municipal Court of the City of
Pleasantville. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999; 4-17-2000
by Ord. No. 7-2000]
B. In addition to the penalty provided in Subsection A of this section, any
license issued under this article may be revoked by the Council, after
due notice and opportunity to be heard, for violation of any provision of
this article.
A. Any license or permit issued by the City may be revoked by the City
Council after notice and a hearing for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or
license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
(3) A violation of any provision of this article.
(4) Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or
disorderly person's offense involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conduct of the licensed activity, whether by the licensee himself or
his agents or employees, in an unlawful manner or in a manner that
constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare.
(6) Any licensee who, on more than one occurrence during a calendar
year, violates, and receives a citation therefor, any regulation
stated in § 207-1 et seq., Property Maintenance, or §§ 300-57
through 300-64, Signage, and fails to abate such violations within
the time period allotted by the Code Official or his/her
representative. [Added 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 11-2014]
B. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon an application
pending the results of the investigation provided for by this article, such
license may be summarily revoked if the result of the investigation is
such as would have resulted in denial of the application.
C. Notice of hearing.
(1) Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license or permit shall be
given in writing by the City Clerk. The notice shall specifically set
forth the grounds upon which the proposed revocation is based and
the time and place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing a
copy to the licensee at his last known address by certified mail,
§ 155-15 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 155-16
151:259
return receipt requested, at least five days prior to the date set for
the hearing.
(2) At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be
heard, to be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his
own behalf, to cross-examine opposing witnesses and to have a
permanent record made of the proceedings at his own expense. The
City Council shall revoke or suspend the license if it is satisfied by a
preponderance of the evidence that the licensee is guilty of the acts
charged.
(3) The City Council may issue another license to a person whose
license has been revoked or denied as provided in this article if,
after a hearing, it is satisfied by clear and convincing evidence that
the acts which led to the revocation or denial will not occur again;
otherwise, no person whose license has been revoked or denied,
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be issued
another license to carry on the same activity.
D. Immediate suspension. Notwithstanding the above provisions, any
activity at the licensed premises by the licensee or any agent of the
licensee which results in an arrest for an indictable offense for such
conduct at the licensed premises shall be reason to immediately
suspend the license pending a hearing before City Council which
hearing shall be held by Council within 30 days of such suspension.
Such hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures
described above. [Added 12-1-2014 by Ord. No. 26-2014]
§ 155-16 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 155-16
151:260
ARTICLE II
Payment of Taxes
[Adopted 4-4-1988 by Ord. No. 3-1988]
§ 155-17. Applicability.
The following provisions shall apply to each and every license or permit of
any kind issued by or requiring the approval of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 155-18. Payment required.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:52-1.2, any applicant who is the
owner of the property, seeking the issuance or renewal of any license or
permit issued by or requiring the approval of the City of Pleasantville shall
be required to pay any delinquent property taxes or assessments on the
property wherein the business or activity for which the license or permit is
sought or wherein the business or activity is to be conducted.
§ 155-19. Revocation or suspension of existing license or permit.
[Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
Any licensee or permittee, who is an owner of the property on which the
licensed business or permitted activity is conducted, who has failed to pay
the property taxes due on the real estate for at least three consecutive
quarters, shall be subject to the revocation or suspension of said license or
permit upon notice thereof by the City of Pleasantville. Each such licensee
or permittee so notified shall have 30 days within which to make payment of
the delinquent taxes or assessment. Upon failure to make payment, the City
Clerk, without further notice, shall cause the license or permit in question
to be revoked or suspended and shall notify said licensee or permittee
of said suspension or revocation. Any licensee or permittee who, during
any period of suspension or revocation, continues the business or activity
licensed or permitted during such period of suspension or revocation shall,
upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 155-20. Proof of payment.
Prior to the issuance or renewal of any license or permit subject to the
provisions of this article, the City Clerk shall require that the applicant
present sufficient proof from the Tax Collector of the City of Pleasantville
indicating that no taxes or payments are due on the property. The City Clerk
may provide to the applicant a form upon which such proof may be given by
the Tax Collector of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 155-17 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 155-21
151:261
§ 155-21. Nonapplicability to alcoholic beverage licensee or
permittee.77
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or include any alcoholic
beverage licensee or permittee subject to the provisions of the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 84, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 155-21 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 155-21
151:262
ARTICLE III
Business Registration
[Adopted 5-6-2002 by Ord. No. 13-2002]
§ 155-22. Business registration required.
A. All businesses operating in the City shall be required to register their
business.
B. The fee for registration shall be $25. Any businesses that purchase a
yearly mercantile license shall be exempt from paying the registration
fee.
§ 155-22 JUNK DEALERS AND COLLECTORS § 155-22
151:263
Chapter 159
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering at Municipal Boat Harbor — See Ch.
99.
Construction waste — See Ch. 105, Art. II.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 195.
Temporary signs — See Ch. 243.
§ 155-22 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 155-22
159:264
ARTICLE I
Distribution of Commercial Advertisements
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Ch. 56 of the 1982 Code]
§ 159-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING MATTER — Any sample or device, dodger,
bill, handbill, circular, pamphlet, paper, booklet, picture or any other written
or printed or reproduced matter which:
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule
or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
§ 159-2. Permit required.
§ 159-3. Compliance with regulations.
The permit issued under this article shall not be deemed to authorize
the holder thereof to distribute commercial advertising matter except in
compliance with the regulations hereinafter set forth in this article.
Advertises any merchandise, product, commodity, service or other thing
for sale.
A.
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
B.
While containing reading matter other than advertising mater, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
C.
Advertises any medicine or medicinal preparation represented to cure
ailments or diseases of the body or mind.
D.
A. No person shall distribute commercial advertising matter in the city
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Licensing Officer as
hereinafter provided in this article.
B. Nothing in Subsection A of this section shall be construed to require a
permit for the distribution of commercial advertising matter on or in
business premises by the proprietor thereof or his agents, servants or
employees; nor shall it be deemed to prohibit the delivery of any article
expressly permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, Subsection 22.
§ 159-1 LITTERING § 159-4
159:265
§ 159-4. Permit application; contents.
§ 159-5. Issuance, term and exhibition of permit.
§ 159-6. Permit fee.
The fee for a permit shall be $25.
§ 159-7. Distribution on private property.
No person holding a permit issued under this article shall throw, deposit or
distribute any commercial advertising matter in or upon private premises
which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting the same directly
to the owner, occupant or other person then present, except as hereinafter
provided. A person, unless requested by anyone upon the premises not to
do so, may place or deposit any such commercial advertising matter in or
upon inhabited private premises if the premises are not posted as provided
in § 159-8 and the commercial advertising matter is placed or deposited so
as to secure or prevent it from being blown or drifted about the premises
or sidewalks, streets or other public places. Mailboxes may not be so used
when prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. The provisions of this
section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor
to newspapers.
A. Every applicant for a permit under this article shall file with the
Licensing Officer a written application signed and verified by the
applicant, on a form supplied by the Licensing Officer.
B. The application shall state:
(1) The name and permanent home address of the applicant.
(2) The place of applicant's residence or residences during and for
each of the three years preceding the filing of the application.
(3) The name and address of the business or commercial enterprise
that has engaged the applicant to distribute the commercial
advertising matter.
(4) The number of days for which the applicant seeks the permit.
A. After due investigation, and upon being satisfied that the applicant is of
good moral character and that the business or commercial enterprise
for which he proposes to distribute commercial advertising matter is
free from fraud, the Licensing Officer shall thereupon issue the permit
upon the payment of the permit fee prescribed in § 159-6 hereof. The
permit shall specify the number of days for which it shall be effective.
B. The permittee shall carry said permit with him while engaged in
distributing any commercial advertising matter and shall exhibit it to
any policeman or other person upon request.
§ 159-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 159-8
159:266
§ 159-8. Distribution where sign posted.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial advertising
matter in or upon any private premises if:
§ 159-9. Depositing on vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial advertising matter in
or upon any private premises, which are temporarily of continuously
uninhabited or vacant.
§ 159-10. Depositing on vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial advertising matter in or
upon any vehicle.
§ 159-11. Distributing in public places.
No person shall hand out or distribute any commercial advertising matter in
any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be deemed unlawful for
any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof,
in any sidewalk, street or other public place, any noncommercial handbill to
a person willing to accept it.
§ 159-12. Violations and penalties.78
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
A. Requested by anyone in or upon such premises not to do so.
B. There is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the
entrance thereof a sign bearing the words "No Trespassing," "No
Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice
indicating that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be
molested or have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such
handbills left upon such premises.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-8 LITTERING § 159-12
159:267

ARTICLE II
General Littering Regulations
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Ch. 132 of the 1982
Code]
§ 159-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LITTER — Any printed or written matter or wastepaper of any kind, any
sample or device, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original of any matter of literature which
advertises for sale any merchandise, produce, commodity or thing or directs
attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or
other activity for the purpose of promoting the interest thereof by sales
or which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical or other
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee
is charged for the purpose of providing gain or profit or which, while
containing written matter other than advertising matter, is essentially an
advertisement and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes; or
any garbage, refuse, rubbish and all other waste material which, if thrown
or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health,
safety and welfare.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active
or passive recreation.
§ 159-14. Littering prohibited.
§ 159-15. Depositing litter in receptacles. [Amended 6-19-1989 by
Ord. No. 12-1989]
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent its being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property. All persons are hereby prohibited from sweeping
onto or depositing in any gutter, street, catch basin or other place any
accumulation of litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Any
person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in front of
A. No person shall throw or deposit or cause to be thrown or deposited
litter, as herein defined, in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place or upon private property within the city, except in public
receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official
city dumps.
B. Open or overflowing commercial, industrial or residential waste
disposal bins are hereby prohibited. [Added 6-19-1989 by Ord. No.
12-1989]
§ 159-13 LITTERING § 159-15
159:269
his or her premises free of litter and shall collect all sweepings and properly
containerize said sweepings for disposal.
§ 159-16. Throwing litter from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon private
property.
§ 159-17. Placement of handbills restricted.
No person shall throw, fasten or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle,
utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building within
the city limits or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.79
§ 159-18. Location of receptacles; responsibility to service
receptacles. [Added 6-19-1989 by Ord. No. 12-1989]
§ 159-19. Violations and penalties.81
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
A. Litter receptacles and their servicing shall be at the following public
places within the City of Pleasantville: sidewalks used by pedestrians in
active commercially zoned areas, such that at a minimum there shall be
no single linear quarter-mile without a receptacle; buildings held out
for use by the public, including schools, government buildings and
railroad and bus stations; parks; drive-in restaurants; all street vendor
locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites;80 gasoline
service station islands; shopping centers; parking lots; campgrounds
and trailer parks; marinas; boat moorage and fueling stations; boat
launching areas; public and private piers operated for public use;
beaches and bathing areas; and at special events to which the public is
invited, including sporting events, parades, carnivals, circuses and
festivals.
B. The proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and servicing the receptacles such that
adequate containerization is available.
79.Editor's Note: See also Art. I, Distribution of Commercial Advertisements, of this chapter.
80.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 105, Building Materials, Art. II, Placement of Construction
Waste.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 159-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 159-19
159:270
Chapter 163
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 123.
Parental responsibility — See Ch. 180.
Parks and playgrounds — See Ch. 187.
Pleasantville Shopping Center — See Ch. 197.
Pool and billiard parlors — See Ch. 203.
§ 163-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location, including the
concept of spending time idly; to be dilatory; to linger; to stay; to saunter;
to delay; to stand around; and shall also include the colloquial expression
"hanging around."
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the general public has access and
a right to resort for business, entertainment or other lawful purpose, but
does not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It
shall also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant,
tavern or other place of business and also public grounds, school areas or
parks.
§ 163-2. Loitering prohibited; police order to disperse.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, loaf, wander, stand or
remain idle, either alone or in consort with others, in a public place in
such manner so as to:
(1) Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any
other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending
to hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles,
traffic or pedestrians.
(2) Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing
which is an obstruction or interference to the free and
uninterrupted use of property or with any business lawfully
conducted by anyone in or upon or facing or fronting on any such
public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other public
place or building, all of which prevents the free and uninterrupted
ingress, egress and regress therein, thereon and thereto.
B. When any person causes or commits any of the conditions enumerated
in § 163-2A herein, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall
§ 159-19 LOITERING § 163-2
163:271
§ 163-3. Open alcohol containers restricted.82
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or have in his possession any
open package, vessel or container of alcohol or spirits of any nature in a
public place as defined in § 163-1 of this chapter, excepting and excluding
those places and premises upon which alcohol, beer, wine and spirits are
sold and dispensed pursuant to the issuance of a license for the same.
§ 163-4. Obscene actions.83
It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a lewd, lascivious or indecent
manner or to expose any portions of his or her body in an obscene or
licentious manner.
§ 163-5. Violations and penalties.84
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment
not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of community service not exceeding
90 days. Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense on each
successive day continued.
Chapter 166
MOBILE HOMES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 90.
Private campgrounds — See Ch. 115.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 207.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 235.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 255.
Storage of recreational vehicles — See Ch.
281, Art. III.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
order that person to stop causing or committing such conditions and
to move on or disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such
orders shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
82.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 84, Alcoholic Beverages, Art. II, Consumption and Use in
Public.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 175, Obscene Materials.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 163-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 163-5
166:272
ARTICLE I
Trailer Coaches
§ 166-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILER or TRAILER COACH — Any vehicle or structure so designed and
constructed as to permit occupancy thereof for residential purposes or
living quarters for one or more persons or for the conduct of any business or
profession, occupation or trade and so designed that it may be mounted on
wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or may be established upon
a concrete foundation. The term "trailer" or "trailer coach" shall include the
term "mobile home" as defined in § 166-7 hereof.
§ 166-2. Parking for residential purposes restricted.
No person shall park, locate or establish upon any land in the city a trailer
coach or trailer to be used by any person or persons as a temporary or
permanent residence or living quarters, except in a duly licensed mobile
home park, as defined in § 166-7 and as provided for by Article II of this
chapter.
§ 166-3. Emergency parking or stopping.
Emergency or temporary parking or stopping of any trailer coach or trailer
may be permitted on any street, avenue or highway of this city for not
longer than one hour and subject to any other and further regulations or
limitations imposed by statute, the Code of the City of Pleasantville or any
other ordinance of the city.85
§ 166-4. Parking in private garage or rear yard.
Parking of one unoccupied trailer coach or trailer in an accessory private
garage, building or in a rear yard in any district is permitted, provided
that no living quarters or residence shall be maintained or any business
practiced or transacted in said trailer coach or trailer while the same is so
parked or installed.
§ 166-5. Construction; location; anchorage; conflicts.
A. Any mobile unit placed on a permanent foundation or on foundation
piers shall be designed and constructed to comply with all of the
requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code for on-site and
prefabricated construction.
B. Residential mobile units shall be of approved design and constructed in
accordance with the applicable ordinances and statutes. All other
85.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 278, Vehicles and Traffic, § 278-6C.
§ 166-1 MOBILE HOMES § 166-5
166:273
§ 166-6. Violations and penalties.86
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
mobile units shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code.
C. Each parking space for mobile units shall be provided with devices for
anchoring the unit to prevent overturning or uplift. The owner of the
parking space shall anchor or cause to be anchored all mobile units
located on the parking space. Where concrete platforms are provided
for the parking of the units, anchorage may be by eyelets embedded in
the concrete with adequate anchor plates or hooks or other suitable
means. The anchorage shall be adequate to withstand wind forces and
uplift as required in the State Uniform Construction Code for buildings
and structures, based upon the size and weight of the units.
D. Nothing in this article shall be construed to repeal, modify or constitute
an alternative to those provisions of the State Uniform Construction
Code applicable to mobile units. In case of conflict between this article
or any other ordinance, code or statute applicable, the most rigid
requirements shall apply.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 166-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 166-6
166:274
ARTICLE II
Mobile Home Parks
§ 166-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE HOME OR UNIT — A movable or portable year-round dwelling
built on a chassis, designed without a permanent foundation, connected to
utilities and containing a flush toilet, bath or shower and a kitchen sink.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile
homes or mobile units used for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located.
MOBILE HOME SPACE — A plot of ground within a mobile home park
designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.
NATURAL OR ARTIFICIAL BARRIER — Any river, pond, canal, railroad,
levee, embankment, fence or hedge.
PARK — A mobile home park.
§ 166-8. License required.
No person shall maintain or operate a mobile home park within the limits of
the city unless such person shall first obtain a license therefor as provided
in this article.
§ 166-9. Application for license; issuance; transfer.
A. An application for a mobile home park license shall be filed in triplicate
with the City Clerk.
B. Each application shall be in writing and signed by the applicant and
shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The location and legal description of the park.
(3) A complete plan of the park showing compliance with § 166-11 of
this article.
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements
constructed or to be constructed within the park.
(5) Such further information as may be requested by City Council to
enable it to determine if the proposed park will comply with legal
requirements.
C. The City Clerk shall immediately forward one copy of the accompanying
plans and specifications each to the City Council, City Building Subcode
Official, Chief of Police and Planning Board. Each shall investigate the
applicant for the park license and inspect the location proposed
§ 166-7 MOBILE HOMES § 166-9
166:275
§ 166-10. License fees.
§ 166-11. Park plan requirement.
The mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements:
therefor and inspect the proposed plans and specifications. The
applicant shall be required to obtain site plan approval. If the applicant
is found to be of good moral character and it is determined that the
proposed park will be in compliance with all provisions of this article
and all other applicable ordinances and statutes, the Council may, in
its discretion, approve the application. Upon completion of the park
according to the plans, the Council may issue the license.
D. Upon application for a transfer of the license, the Council shall issue a
transfer, if the Chief of Police shall report that the transferee is of good
moral character.
A. The annual license fee for each mobile home park shall be the sum of
$150, to be paid in advance, plus the sum of $1.50 per calendar week or
any part thereof for each mobile home parked in said park. All of said
fees are hereby expressly declared to be imposed for revenue.
B. Payment of said weekly license fees shall be made quarterly by the
licensee to the City Clerk. There shall be submitted in writing by the
licensee, together with the payment, a statement, duly sworn to,
showing in detail the number of mobile homes parked in the park
during the preceding quarter, together with the number of calendar
weeks or parts thereof in which the mobile homes were parked.
A. The park shall be located upon a site, properly graded and acceptable
to the City Engineer as to drainage and health conditions.
B. A mobile home space shall be provided, consisting of a minimum of 630
square feet for each space, which shall be at least 21 feet wide and
clearly defined. Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space that
there shall be at least a fifteen-foot clearance between mobile homes.
No mobile home shall be located closer than 15 feet to any property line
bounding the park.
C. All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a driveway of not less than 20
feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street,
alley or highway. All driveways shall be kept in good condition, wellmarked
in the daytime and lighted at night with twenty-five-watt lamps
at intervals of 100 feet located approximately 10 feet from the ground.
D. Walkways not less than two feet wide shall be provided from the mobile
home spaces to the service buildings. The walkways shall be kept in
good condition, well-marked in the daytime and lighted at night with
twenty-five-watt lamps at intervals of 100 feet located approximately 10
feet from the ground.
§ 166-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 166-11
166:276
§ 166-12. Location.
Mobile home parks may be permitted in such location or locations within
the limits of the city as are approved by the Council.
§ 166-13. Water supply.
An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall
be supplied to meet the requirements of the park. The water supply shall be
obtained from faucets only. No common drinking cups shall be permitted.
Cold-water supply faucets shall be located on each mobile home space. An
adequate supply of hot water shall be provided at all times in all service
buildings for bathing, washing and laundry facilities.
§ 166-14. Sanitary facilities.
Each park shall be provided with toilets, baths or showers, slop sinks
and other sanitation facilities which shall conform to the following
requirements:
E. Each park shall provide service buildings to house toilet facilities,
bathing facilities, laundry facilities and other sanitary facilities as
hereinafter more particularly described.
F. An electrical outlet supplying at least 110 volts shall be provided for
each mobile home space.
A. Toilet facilities for men and women shall be either in a separate building
at least 20 feet apart or shall be separated, if in the same building, by a
soundproof wall.
B. Toilet facilities for women shall consist of not fewer than two flush
toilets for every 10 mobile home spaces or portion thereof, one shower
or bathtub for every 10 mobile home spaces or portion thereof and two
lavatories for every 10 mobile home aces or portion thereof. Each toilet,
shower and bathtub shall be in a private compartment.
C. Toilet facilities for men shall consist of not fewer than one flush toilet
for every 10 mobile home spaces or portion thereof, one shower or
bathtub for every 10 mobile home spaces or portion thereof, two
lavatories for every 10 mobile home spaces or portion thereof and one
urinal for every 10 mobile home spaces or portion thereof. Each toilet,
shower or bathtub shall be in a private compartment.
D. Service buildings housing the toilet facilities shall be permanent
structures complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes
regulating buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and
sanitation systems and shall be located not closer than 10 feet to nor
farther than 200 feet from any mobile home space.
E. Each service building shall contain at least one slop sink for each sex,
located in a separate compartment.
§ 166-11 MOBILE HOMES § 166-14
166:277
§ 166-15. Laundry facilities.
Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double laundry tub
and electric outlet for ironing boards for every 20 mobile home spaces. An
ironing board shall be provided for occupants of mobile homes desiring to
use an electric iron in the service building. Drying spaces shall be provided
sufficient to accommodate the laundry of the mobile home occupants. The
service building housing the laundry facilities shall be a permanent
structure complying with all applicable ordinances and statutes regulating
buildings, electrical installations and plumbing and sanitation systems.
§ 166-16. Sewage and refuse disposal.
Waste from showers, bathtubs, toilets, slop sinks and laundries shall be
discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable
ordinances or into a private sewer and disposal plant or septic tank or
cesspool system of such construction and in such manner as will present no
health hazard. All kitchen sinks, washbasins, bath- or shower tubs in any
mobile home harbored in any park may empty into a sanitary sink drain
located on the mobile home space.
§ 166-17. Garbage receptacles.
Tightly covered metal garbage cans or garbage or refuse incinerators shall
be provided in quantities adequate to permit disposal or destruction of
all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans or incinerators shall be located at
convenient and easily accessible places from any mobile home space. The
cans or incinerators shall be kept in sanitary condition at all times. Garbage
and rubbish not burned or destroyed shall be collected and disposed of as
frequently as may be necessary to ensure that the garbage or rubbish shall
not be permitted to accumulate.
F. The service buildings shall be well-lighted at all times of the day or
night, shall be well-ventilated with screened openings, shall be
constructed of such moistureproof material, including painted
woodwork as shall permit repeated cleaning and washing, and shall be
maintained at a temperature of at least 68º F. during the period from
October 1 to May 1. The floors of the service buildings shall be of waterimpervious
material and shall slope to a floor drain connected with the
sewage system of the city or other approved sewage disposal system;
provided, however, that where a service building in a mobile home park
has heretofore been constructed without a sloping floor and a floor
drain and its operation has been and is acceptable to the city, the
requirement that a sloping floor to a floor drain connected to the
sewage system of the city shall be installed is hereby dispensed with.
§ 166-14 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 166-18
166:278
§ 166-18. Fire protection.87
Every park shall be equipped at all times with one fire extinguisher in good
working order for every 10 mobile home spaces, located not farther than
200 feet from each mobile home space. No open fires shall be permitted
at any place which would endanger life or property. No fires shall be left
unattended at any time.
§ 166-19. Animals.88
No owner or person in charge of any dog, cat or other pet shall permit it to
run at large or commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home
park.
§ 166-20. Register of occupants.
§ 166-21. Licenses to be posted.
The license certificate shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the
premises of the mobile home park at all times.
§ 166-22. Revocation of licenses.
The Council may revoke any license to maintain and operate a park when
the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of
violating any provision of this article or of Chapter IX, Mobile Home Parks,
of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code. After such conviction, the license
may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been
A. It shall be the duty of the licensee to keep a register containing a record
of all mobile home owners and occupants located within the park. The
register shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of each occupant.
(2) The make, model and year of all automobiles and mobile homes.
(3) The license number and owner of each mobile home and
automobile by which it is towed.
(4) The state issuing such licenses.
(5) The dates of arrival and departure of each mobile home.
B. The licensee of the park shall keep the register available for inspection,
at all times, by law enforcement officers, public health officials and
other officials whose duties necessitate acquisition of the information
contained in the register. The register records shall not be destroyed for
a period of three years following the date of registration.
87.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 135, Fire Prevention.
88.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 90, Animals.
§ 166-18 MOBILE HOMES § 166-22
166:279
remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance
with the law.
§ 166-23. Violations and penalties.89
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 166-22 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 166-23
166:280
Chapter 167
MOTORBUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Buses at Pleasantville Shopping Center — See
Ch. 197, Art. II.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 278.
§ 166-23 MOTORBUSES § 166-23
167:281

ARTICLE I
Licensing
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Ch. 139 of the 1982
Code]
§ 167-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORBUS — An autobus as defined in N.J.S.A. 48:4-1, as amended, and in
N.J.S.A. 48:16-23.
§ 167-2. Consent to operate required.90
No motorbus shall be operated or run while carrying passengers for hire,
wholly or partly along any street in the city, whether such operation is over
a route wholly or partly within the territorial limits of the city until the
person owning the motorbus or possessing the right to use the same shall
obtain the consent of the Council for such operation, in accordance with
the provisions of this article. The Council may approve and grant consent,
subject to such terms and conditions as convenience and safety of the
inhabitants of the city shall demand.
§ 167-3. Application for operation.
§ 167-4. Insurance requirements; power of attorney.
No municipal consent to operate a motorbus shall be effective and no such
operation shall be permitted until the owner of such motorbus shall furnish
and keep in force the insurance and the power of attorney as provided for
and required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-24 and N.J.S.A. 48:4-36 to 48:4-39.
A. Every person applying for a consent to operate a motorbus shall make
written application, under oath, for such consent addressed to the
Council and file same with the City Clerk. Such application shall state,
among other things, the route and hours of service wherein and during
which it is proposed to operate such motorbus, the terminal point of the
route, the streets to be traveled in reaching the terminal point and the
description and passenger-carrying capacity of the motorbus. The
application shall furnish such other information as the Council may
request.
B. At the direction of the Council, the City Clerk shall refer said
application to the Chief of Police for his investigation, recommendation
and report to the Council.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-1 MOTORBUSES § 167-5
167:283
§ 167-5. Revocation of consent.
Subject to law, any consent for the operation of a motorbus may be revoked
by the Council after notice and hearing whenever it shall appear that
the holder thereof has failed to comply with or has violated any law or
regulation of this state; or any regulation, term or condition imposed by the
Council when the consent was granted; or the provisions of this article and
the rules and regulations made pursuant thereto.
§ 167-6. Operator's license required.
No person shall drive any motorbus operating under a consent issued by the
city unless he is:
§ 167-7. Rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police, subject to approval of the Council, by resolution, shall
have the authority to promulgate such rules and regulations as he may
deem necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. Such authority
of the Chief, however, shall not include the power to change or regulate
terminals or starting or stopping points for the purpose of improving the
efficiency of handling the traffic or otherwise as may be for the best
interests of the traveling public, such power being hereby reserved to the
Council.
§ 167-8. Enforcement; inspection.
Subject to the supervision and direction of the Chief of Police, the Police
Department shall have general supervision of motorbuses operated in the
City. It shall enforce compliance with the provisions of this article and the
regulations made thereunder, as well as the state laws and state rules and
regulations applicable to motorbuses. Members of the Police Department
shall have free access to any motorbus for the purpose of making
inspections.
§ 167-9. Violations and penalties.91
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
A. The holder of a currently valid driver's license issued by the Director of
the Division of Motor Vehicles as provided in N.J.S.A. 39:3-10.
B. The holder of a currently valid special license issued by said Director, as
provided in N.J.S.A. 39:3-10.1, for transportation of passengers for hire.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 167-9
167:284
ARTICLE II
Parking on Public Streets
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II of Ch. 150 of the
1982 Code]
§ 167-10. Unlawful parking on city streets and highways.
It shall be unlawful for the buses, commercial buses, buses for hire and
charter buses to park at any time upon the public streets and highways of
the City of Pleasantville.92
§ 167-11. Violations and penalties.93
Any person, individual, corporation, entity, agent, servant and/or employee
of any corporation or entity violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject toa fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
92.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 278, Vehicles and Traffic, § 278-6C.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 167-10 MOTORBUSES § 167-11
167:285
Chapter 171
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hours of jukebox operation — See Ch. 87, Art.
II.
Crying of wares by peddlers and
hawkers — See Ch. 195, Art. I.
Noise at Pleasantville Shopping Center — See
Ch. 197, Art. III.
Noise associated with storage of inoperable
vehicles in residential areas — See Ch. 281,
Art. II.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
§ 171-1. Legislative findings and determinations.
§ 171-2. Unreasonable noise restricted.
Noise of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the
life or health of any individual is prohibited. Subject to the provisions of this
chapter, the creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noise in the city is prohibited.
§ 171-3. Unlawful acts enumerated.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but such enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive:
A. Council finds and determines that the making, creating or maintaining
of loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged
are detrimental to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety,
welfare and well-being of the residents of the City of Pleasantville.
B. Council declares that the provisions of this chapter are, as a matter of
legislative determination and public policy, in pursuance of and for the
purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare and well-being of the residents of the City
of Pleasantville and for the purpose of maintaining the peace and quiet
within the city during the normal hours of rest.
A. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger
signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if
in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied
and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of
any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and
the sounding of such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period
of time.94
§ 167-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 171-3
167:286
B. The playing of any radio, television, phonograph or musical instrument
in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours
between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of
residence.95 [Amended 10-5-2009 by Ord. No. 30-2009]
C. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or longcontinued
barking or other noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose
of any person in the vicinity.96
D. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded, or by racing, gunning and revving the motor thereof, or in such
manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or
other noise.
E. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning
of a fire or danger, and except as a curfew blown by or in behalf of the
city.
F. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle or motor boat
engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
G. The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless
the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced.
H. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school,
church, institution of learning or judicial court while the same is in
session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with
the workings of such institution, provided that conspicuous signs are
displayed indicating that the same is a school, hospital, church or court
street.
I. The creation of a loud or excessive noise in connection with loading or
unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates and containers.
J. The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises,
particularly during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., which
disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof.
[Amended 10-5-2009 by Ord. No. 30-2009]
K. The unnecessary or prolonged blowing or sounding of any, horn,
whistle, bell or other device attached to any train or locomotive while
passing through the city or while loading passengers or freight within
the city.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 278, Vehicles and Traffic.
95.Editor's Note: See Ch. 87, Amusement Devices, Art. II.
96.Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Animals, Art. I, for nuisance barking by dogs.
§ 171-3 MOTORBUSES § 171-3
167:287
§ 171-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 175
OBSCENE MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment at places serving
alcohol — See Ch. 84, Art. I.
Obscene actions — See Ch. 163, § 163-4.
Obscene language as violation of public
peace — See Ch. 180.
Adult bookstores and peep shows — See Ch.
290.
§ 175-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL DISPLAY — The exhibition of obscene material to the senses
of another person for valuable consideration, whether the valuable
consideration is paid by the recipient of the exhibition or by another. Where
obscene material is exhibited incident to another commercial transaction, it
is a "commercial display," whether or not the parties state that the valuable
consideration is paid in part for the obscene exhibit.
COMMERCIAL DISTRIBUTION — Any transfer or possession of obscene
material, whether permanent or temporary, for any valuable consideration,
whether the valuable consideration is paid by the recipient of the obscene
material or by another. Where obscene material is transferred incident to
another commercial transaction, it is a "commercial distribution," whether
or not the parties state that the valuable consideration is paid in part for the
obscene material.
§ 175-2. Distribution and display restricted.
The commercial distribution or commercial display of obscene materials or
acts to anyone, including consenting adults, is hereby prohibited.
L. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other
moving vehicles for advertising or other purposes, except where a
specific license is received from the Police Department.
§ 171-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 175-3
175:288
§ 175-3. Enumeration of obscene materials and acts.
§ 175-4. Review Committee.
A. Films and moving pictures. A film or moving picture is obscene if, when
considered as a whole, its calculated purpose or dominant effect is:
(1) Substantially to arouse sexual desires, whether natural or
unnatural, and if the probability of this effect is so great as to
outweigh whatever other merits the film may possess.
(2) To portray acts of sexual immorality or lewdness as profitable,
desirable, acceptable or proper behavior.
(3) To advocate the illegal use of narcotics or habit-forming drugs.
B. Photographs, paintings, illustrations. A photograph, painting or
illustration is obscene if it portrays human sexual intercourse,
homosexual acts, sadistic sexual acts, sexual acts between man and
beast or human sexual organs. (Breasts shall not be considered sexual
organs for the purpose of this subsection.) Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a photograph, painting or illustration which portrays human
sexual organs is not obscene if it is a part of a medical textbook; if it is a
work of art, the original or a copy of which has been displayed by a
museum receiving public funds, or (if by a less-renowned artist) the
subject of which is the human body as a whole without particular
emphasis on its sexual parts and, if considered as a whole, its calculated
purpose or dominant effect is not to substantially arouse sexual desires,
whether natural or unnatural, so as to outweigh whatever other merits
it may possess.
C. Books and magazines. A book or magazine containing photographs,
paintings or illustrations of the type defined as obscene in Subsection B
is obscene if, considered as a whole, its calculated purpose or dominant
effect is substantially to arouse sexual desires, whether natural or
unnatural, and if the probability of this effect is so great as to outweigh
whatever other merits it may possess. A book or magazine containing
no photographs, paintings or illustrations shall not be considered
obscene for purposes of this chapter.
D. Objects. An object is obscene if it is by itself a recognizable
reproduction of a sexual organ, including breasts, or if some part of it
consists of a recognizable reproduction of sexual organs substantially
exaggerated in size or appearance.
E. Acts. An act is obscene if it involves the naked display of sexual organs,
including breasts, or if it is explicitly suggestive of sexual acts or if it
involves sexual acts.
A. Any person desiring to make commercial distribution or commercial
display of a film or moving picture which he has reason to believe may
be obscene shall first submit it for inspection by the Review Committee,
§ 175-3 OBSCENE MATERIALS § 175-4
175:289
§ 175-5. Violations and penalties.97
Anyone having violated § 175-2 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of community service not
consisting of the Mayor, a consenting elected or appointed officer of
the City of Pleasantville and a consenting resident of said city who is
registered to vote therein, the latter two to be appointed by and to serve
at the pleasure of said Mayor without compensation, which Review
Committee shall act by a majority of the members thereof.
B. The applicant shall give the Review Committee written notice of his
intention to submit any film or moving picture for inspection. Said
notice shall be delivered to the Review Committee or to the City Clerk
and shall contain the applicant's name, address within the city and
telephone number where he can be reached during business hours.
Within 24 hours (Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted) of receipt
of said notice the Review Committee shall make itself available to said
applicant during business hours for the purpose of inspecting the film
or moving picture. The Review Committee shall reasonably notify the
applicant of the appointed time either by telephone or by written notice
left at the address within the city stated by the applicant. (The failure of
the applicant to cooperate in any way in arranging a time for inspection
within said 24 hours shall not relieve said applicant of the duty to
submit the film or moving picture for inspection as soon thereafter as
possible and prior to any commercial distribution or commercial
display.) The applicant shall bring the film or moving picture, together
with any necessary projector, screen and operating personnel, to the
Review Committee or City Clerk at the City Hall of the City of
Pleasantville, whereupon the applicant shall show the film or moving
picture for the inspection of the Review Committee. Within 72 hours
(Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted) of the termination of said
inspection, the Review Committee shall either inform the applicant in
writing that the commercial distribution or commercial display of said
film or moving picture has been refused and that the city will seek to
have the same enjoined if necessary because of its obscene character;
or that said film has been approved.
C. It shall be a violation of this section to make commercial distribution or
commercial display of any obscene film or moving picture prior to the
expiration of said seventy-two-hour period. Nothing herein shall
prevent the applicant from making commercial distribution or
commercial display of said film or moving picture after the end of said
seventy-two-hour period, subject to any judicial restraints imposed, and
further subject to any penalties under § 175-5 of this chapter should
said film or moving picture ultimately be adjudged obscene by a court of
law.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 175-5
175:290
exceeding 90 days. Anyone having violated § 175-4 of this chapter, and the
film or moving picture having been adjudged obscene in a court of law in
the same or a separate proceeding, shall be subject to a separate penalty
of imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days or a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of community service for not more
than 90 days. Each separate film, moving picture, photograph, painting,
illustration, book, magazine, object or act, and each issue of them, which
is commercially distributed or commercially displayed shall constitute a
separate offense under this chapter. Each separate commercial distribution
or commercial display, whether to different persons or to the same person,
shall constitute a separate offense under this chapter.
§ 175-6. Interpretation and enforcement.
Notwithstanding any other section, clause or provision of this chapter to
the contrary, the definitions of "obscene" and "obscenity," for all purposes
of interpretation and enforcement of this chapter shall be construed in
accordance with and in no event more strictly than the criteria set forth
in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-2 et seq., as same shall be from time to time amended
or supplemented, as well as in accordance with and not more strictly
than judicial interpretations thereof pursuant to the Constitution of the
United States and of the State of New Jersey finally concluded in courts of
jurisdiction sufficient to render decisions on constitutional questions having
general application.
Chapter 178
PARADES AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 178-1. Purpose.
This chapter establishes the standards for the issuance of a permit for
parades, athletic events, and other special events in the City of Pleasantville
in order to recover the full cost of such events to the City and to preserve
and protect the public health and safety.
§ 178-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person or organization who seeks a special event permit
from the City Administrator to conduct or sponsor an event governed by this
chapter. An applicant must be 18 years of age or older.
ATHLETIC EVENT — An occasion in which a group of persons collectively
engage in a sport, or form of physical exercise, and which is conducted
on any City street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way or other
property owned or controlled by the City which obstructs, delays, impedes,
impairs or interferes with the usual, normal and free pedestrian or vehicular
§ 175-5 PARADES AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS § 178-2
178:291
use or does not comply with traffic laws and controls. Athletic events
include bicycle and foot races.
BLOCK PARTY — A festive gathering on a residential street requiring
a closure of a street, or portion thereof, to vehicular traffic and use of
the street for the festivity, including barbecues, picnics, music, games or
dances.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police or his authorized deputy.
CONTROLLER — Ex-officio Treasurer of the City.
EVENT — A parade, athletic event, or other special event.
FREE SPEECH ROUTE — A route (course of travel) along designated
streets, sidewalks or other street rights-of-way which are preestablished by
the Chief of Police for use by special events whose primary purpose is First
Amendment expression.
OTHER SPECIAL EVENT — Street fair, art and craft show, carnival, block
party, or other neighborhood activity, picnic, dance, rally, promotional or
fund-raising activities, community celebrations and observances, and other
special events which occur on any City street, sidewalk, alley, or other
public right-of-way or other property owned or controlled by the City or
any event so as to impede, obstruct, impair, delay, or interfere with the
usual, normal and free pedestrian or vehicular use, or which requires, in
the judgment of the Chief of Police, the deployment of peace officers for
crowd control. See § 178-4C for application of permit requirement to First
Amendment events.[Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No. 24-2003]
PARADE — Includes a parade, march, procession, pageant, review,
ceremony, or exhibition consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, or a
combination thereof, which is conducted in or upon or along any portion
of any City street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way or other
property owned or controlled by the City which obstructs, delays, impedes,
impairs or interferes with the usual, normal and free pedestrian or vehicular
use or does not comply with traffic laws or controls.
PERMIT APPLICATION FEE — The fee to be paid by the special event
permit applicant at the time the application is filed with the City
Administrator. A fee schedule shall be authorized or established by
resolution of the Council and shall cover the actual full costs (or a portion
thereof) of processing and investigating special event applications.
PERMITTEE — Any person or organization who has been issued a special
events permit by the City Administrator.
§ 178-3. Permit required. [Amended 7-21-2003 by Ord. No.
24-2003]
Any person desiring to conduct or sponsor a parade, athletic event, or other
special event on public property in the City shall first obtain a special event
permit from the City Administrator. A special event permit is not required
for the following:
§ 178-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 178-3
178:292
§ 178-4. Application procedure/fee.
§ 178-5. Contents of application form.
The application for a special event permit shall provide the following
information:
A. Parades, athletic events or other special events which occur exclusively
on City property under the jurisdiction of the City Department of Parks
and Recreation. Those events are governed by Chapter 187 of this
Code.
B. Funeral processions.
C. Any event that involves expressive activity protected by the First
Amendment that does not require the closure of a City sidewalk, street,
alley other public right-of-way or other property owned or controlled by
the city.
A. Any person desiring to sponsor a parade, athletic event, or other special
event not exempted by § 178-3 shall apply for a special event permit by
filing a verified application with the City Administrator on a form
supplied by the City Administrator. If the application is for a parade or
other event along a route preestablished by the Chief of Police pursuant
to § 178-13D or a free speech route pursuant to § 178-13E, the
application should be filed not less than 22 days nor more than 90 days
before the date on which the event is to occur. All other applications
shall be submitted not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days before
the event date.
B. Upon a showing of good cause, the Controller shall consider an
application which is filed after the filing deadline if there is sufficient
time to process and investigate the application and obtain police
services for the event. Good cause can be demonstrated by the
applicant showing that the circumstances which gave rise to the permit
application did not reasonably allow the participants to file within the
time prescribed and that the event is for the purpose of exercising the
right of free speech.
C. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
permit application fee in the amount determined by the Controller and
authorized by resolution of the Council.
A. All events:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and an
alternate contact person.
(2) If the event is proposed to be sponsored by an organization, the
name, address and telephone number of the organization and the
authorized head of the organization. If requested by the Controller,
§ 178-3 PARADES AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS § 178-5
178:293
§ 178-6. Action on application.
The City Administrator shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny an
application for the grounds specified in § 178-7. Such action shall be taken
written authorization to apply for the special event permit by an
officer of the organization.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
present and in charge of the event on the day of the event.
(4) The nature/purpose of the event.
(5) Date and estimated starting and ending time of the event.
(6) Location of the event, including its boundaries.
(7) Estimated number of participants in the event.
(8) The type and estimated number of vehicles, animals, and structures
which will be used at the event.
(9) Description of any sound amplification equipment which will be
used at the event.
(10) Whether any food or beverages will be sold at the event.
(11) Whether monitors or private security will be employed at the event.
(12) Parking requirements for the event.
B. Additional information required for parades, races, and other events
occurring along a route:
(1) The assembly point for the event, the time at which units of the
parade or other event will begin to assemble.
(2) The route to be traveled.
(3) Whether the parade or other event will occupy all or only a portion
of the streets proposed to be traversed.
(4) The intervals of space to be maintained between units of a parade
or other event.
(5) The number, types, and size of floats.
(6) Material and maximum size of any signs or banners to be carried
along the route.
C. Supplemental information. Any supplemental information which the
City Administrator shall find reasonably necessary, under the particular
circumstances of the special event application, to determine whether to
approve, or conditionally approve, a special event permit pursuant to
§§ 178-7 and 178-8.
§ 178-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 178-6
178:294
no later than 10 days after receiving a completed application for an event
along a preestablished route pursuant to § 178-13D or free speech route
pursuant to § 178-13E. Action on all other special event applications shall be
taken no later than 15 days after receiving a completed application. If the
application is denied, or conditionally approved, the Controller shall inform
the applicant of the grounds for denial in writing, or the reason for a change
in the date, time, route, or location of the event, and his right of appeal. If
the City Administrator relied on information about the event other than that
contained in the application, he shall inform the applicant what information
he considered. The applicant shall be notified of any permit conditions at
the time the application is approved and of his right of appeal of the permit
conditions. If the City Administrator refuses to consider a late application
under § 178-4B, the City Administrator shall inform the applicant of his
reason for the refusal and of his right of appeal.
§ 178-7. Grounds for denial of application or revocation of a special
event permit.
A. The City Administrator or his designee shall approve an application for
a special event permit unless he determines from a consideration of the
application, or other pertinent information, any of the following which
shall also be justification for the City Administrator to revoke a
previously issued permit:
(1) Information contained in the application, or supplemental
information requested from the applicant, is found to be false in
any material detail.
(2) The applicant fails to complete the application form within five
calendar days after having been notified of the additional
information or documents required.
(3) The sole purpose of the event is advertising of any product, good,
ware, merchandise or event and is designed to be held solely for
private profit and not for First Amendment expression.
(4) Another special event permit application has been received prior in
time, or has already been approved, to hold another event at the
same time and place requested by the applicant or so close in time
and place as to cause undue traffic congestion or the Police
Department is unable to meet the needs for police services for both
events; or
(5) The time, route, or size of the event will substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event site or
route or disrupt the use of a street at a time when it is usually
subject to great traffic congestion; or
(6) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the site of
the event, or the assembly and disbanding areas around an event,
§ 178-6 PARADES AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS § 178-7
178:295
§ 178-8. Permit conditions.
The Chief of Police may also condition the issuance of a special events
permit by imposing reasonable requirements concerning the time, place,
and manner of the event and such requirements as are necessary to protect
the safety of persons and property and the control of traffic, provided such
conditions shall not unreasonably restrict the right of free speech. Such
conditions include:
will prevent proper police, fire, or ambulance services to areas
contiguous to the event; or
(7) The size of the event will require diversion of so great a number of
police officers of the City to insure that participants stay within the
boundaries or route of the event or to protect participants in the
event as to prevent normal protection to the remainder of the City.
Nothing herein authorizes denial of a permit when additional peace
officers would be available to the City under applicable state law or
mutual aid plans if requested by the City in advance of the event.
Nothing herein authorizes denial of a permit because of the need to
protect participants from the conduct of others if reasonable
permit conditions can be imposed to allow for adequate protection
of event participants with the number of police officers available to
police the event.
(8) The parade or other event moving along a route will not move from
its point of origin to its point of termination in three hours or less.
(9) The location of the event will substantially interfere with any
construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon or
along the City streets or along any public right-of-way or where
construction work is scheduled in connection with a previously
granted encroachment permit.
(10) The event shall occur at a time when a school is in session at a
route or location adjacent to the school or class thereof and the
noise created by the activities of the event would substantially
disrupt the educational activities of the school or class thereof.
B. When the grounds for denial of an application for permit specified in
Subsections A(4) through A(10) above can be corrected by altering the
date, time, duration, route, or location of the event, the City
Administrator shall, instead of denying the application, conditionally
approve the application upon the applicant's acceptance of conditions
for permit issuance. The conditions imposed shall provide for only such
modification of the applicant's proposed event as are necessary to
achieve compliance with Subsections A(4) through A(10) above.
A. Alteration of the date, time, route or location of the event proposed on
the event application;
§ 178-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 178-8
178:296
§ 178-9. Appeal procedure.
An appeal or review from a denial to grant a permit shall be to the Public
Safety Committee and the procedure contained in this article shall govern,
unless otherwise specified in this Code. The Chairperson of the Public
Safety Committee shall act as the hearing officer hereunder unless he/she
specifically appoints another to act in such capacity.
B. Conditions concerning the area of assembly and disbanding of parade
or other events occurring along a route;
C. Conditions concerning accommodation of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, including restricting the event to only a portion of a street
traversed;
D. Requirements for the use of traffic cones or barricades;
E. Requirements for provision of first aid or sanitary facilities;
F. Requirements for use of event monitors and providing notice of permit
conditions to event participants;
G. Restrictions on the number and type of vehicles, animals, or structures
at the event and inspection and approval of floats, structures, and
decorated vehicles for fire safety by the Pleasantville Fire Department;
H. Compliance with animal protection ordinances and laws;
I. Requirements for use of garbage containers, cleanup and restoration of
City property;
J. Restrictions on use of amplified sound;
K. An application for a special event permit to conduct a block party may
be conditioned on notice and approval by 50% of the residents of
dwellings along the affected street(s).
L. Compliance with any relevant ordinance or law and obtaining any
legally required permit or license.
A. Filing notice of appeal.
(1) An appeal shall be filed in writing in duplicate with the City Clerk
within 15 calendar days after the service of the denial. The appeal
shall be addressed to the Chairperson of the Public Safety
Committee and shall contain the following:
(a) A caption reading "Appeal of ," giving the name and address
of the appellant;
(b) A brief description of the function the applicant is seeking to
conduct;
(c) A statement of the relief sought;
§ 178-8 PARADES AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS § 178-9
178:297
(d) The reasons why such relief should be granted;
(e) The affidavit of the appellant or his/her declaration "under
penalty of perjury" that the facts stated in the appeal are true
of the appellant's own knowledge, except as to matters which
are not within the appellant's knowledge and are not of public
record, and as to those matters that the appellant believes the
facts stated to be true.
(2) Upon a showing of good cause, the hearing officer may, in his/her
discretion, permit the filing of an appeal, or an amended appeal,
after 15 calendar days, in which case the appeal shall be
considered in the same manner as if it had been timely filed.
B. Amendment of appeal. If, in the opinion of the City Clerk, the appeal or
an amended appeal fails to comply substantially with the requirements
of Subsection A(1)(a) through (e) above, the City Clerk may give written
notice of such insufficiency to the appellant at any time within 15
calendar days after the appeal is presented, stating with particularity
the defects or omissions therein. Failure of the appellant to file an
amended appeal within 15 calendar days of the date of service of such
notice of insufficiency shall constitute a waiver of the appeal. Failure of
the City Clerk to give notice of any insufficiency within 15 calendar days
shall result in the appeal being heard on its merits, without regard to
any insufficiency.
C. Hearing date; notice. Upon receipt of an appeal or, if notice of
insufficiency is given in accordance with Subsection B above, upon
receipt of an amended appeal within the time specified in Subsection B,
the City Clerk shall cause one copy to be stamped indicating the date of
receipt thereof and shall immediately forward the other copies to the
City Administrator, to the Chief of Police, Chief of the Fire Department
and the Director of Public Works. The City Clerk shall set the appeal for
hearing and shall give to the appellant and to the Public Safety
Committee and to the City Administrator, to the Chief of Police, Chief of
the Fire Department and the Director of Public Works not less than 15
calendar days' written notice of the date, time, and place of hearing.
The appellant, or his/her authorized representative, may waive the
fifteen-calendar-days' written notice so long as said waiver is in writing
and received by the City Clerk.
D. Hearing on appeal.
(1) Upon the date set therefor, the Public Safety Committee shall hold
a hearing on the appeal, except that, either orally at the same time
for the hearing or in writing prior to the time set for the hearing,
he/she may, in his/her discretion, continue the matter to another
date certain. The City Administrator shall present evidence in
support of the findings or reasons upon which the denial was
based. The appellant, or any individual authorized in writing to
represent him/her, may then present evidence in support of the
§ 178-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 178-9
178:298
§ 178-10. Permit issuance.
The City Administrator shall issue the special events permit once the
application has been approved and the applicant has agreed in writing
to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit and the following
sections of this chapter have been complied with:
§ 178-11. Indemnification agreement.
Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the permit applicant and
authorized officer of the sponsoring organization (if any) must sign an
agreement to reimburse the City of Pleasantville for any costs incurred
by it in repairing damage to City property occurring in connection with
the permitted event proximately caused by the actions of the permittee/
sponsoring organization, its officers, employees, or agents, or any person
who was under the permittee's/sponsoring organization's control insofar
as permitted by law. The agreement shall also provide that the permittee/
sponsoring organization shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the City
of Pleasantville, its officials, members, agents and employees against any
claims, costs, damages, demands, liability and notices, or any of these,
arising or resulting from any damage or injury proximately caused by
actions of the permittee/sponsoring organization in connection with the
permitted event, regardless of whether the City is actively negligent or
passively negligent, except for those claims, costs, damages, demands,
liability and notices, or any of these, caused solely by the negligence or
willful misconduct of the City. Persons who merely join in a parade or event
contentions made in the notice of appeal. The hearing shall be
informally conducted and the technical rules of evidence shall not
apply, except that irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall
be excluded. The Public Safety Committee shall render a decision,
at the conclusion of the hearing, or in writing within 10 working
days thereafter. The Public Safety Committee may affirm, reverse,
modify, or may delete or impose such conditions as the facts and
law warrant. All decisions of the Public Safety Committee shall be
final.
(2) If the appellant fails to appear for the hearing at the time and place
noticed, the Public Safety Committee, in his/her discretion, may
conduct the hearing to a conclusion or may dismiss the appeal. If
the appeal is dismissed, the order, citation, decision, or
determination appealed from shall become final as if no appeal had
been filed. Upon a showing of good cause, the Public Safety
Committee may, in his/her discretion, set aside the default by the
appellant and reschedule the appeal for hearing.
A. Section 178-11 pertaining to indemnification.
B. Section 178-12 pertaining to insurance.
C. Section 178-14 pertaining to cleanup deposits (when applicable).
§ 178-9 PARADES AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS § 178-11
178:299
are not considered by that reason alone to be under the control of the
permittee/sponsoring organization.
§ 178-12. Insurance.
§ 178-13. Traffic control fees; use of preestablished event routes.
A. The applicant/sponsor of an event must possess or obtain public liability
insurance to protect against loss from liability imposed by law for
damages on account of bodily injury and property damage arising from
the event. Such insurance shall name on the policy or by endorsement
as additional insured the City of Pleasantville, its officers, employees,
and agents. Insurance coverage must be maintained for the duration of
the event. Coverage shall be as follows:
(1) Commercial general liability: $1,000,000.
(2) Automobile liability: $1,000,000.
(3) Workers compensation: Statutory requirements.
B. A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance, along with all
necessary endorsements, must be filed with the City Administrator no
less than five days before the date of the event unless the City
Administrator for good cause waives the filing deadline. The special
event permit shall not be issued by the City Administrator until after the
insurance policy or certificate of insurance, along with necessary
endorsements, have been filed by the applicant/sponsor and approved
by the City Administrator.
C. The insurance requirements of Subsections A and B above shall be
waived by the City Administrator for nonathletic events if the following
conditions are satisfied:
(1) The applicant or an officer of the sponsoring organization signs a
verified statement that he believes the event's purpose is First
Amendment expression and that he has determined that the cost of
obtaining insurance is so financially burdensome that it would
constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of First Amendment
expression or that it has been impossible to obtain insurance
coverage. The statement shall include the name and address of one
insurance agent or other source for insurance coverage contacted
to determine insurance premium rates for insurance coverage.
(2) The City Administrator may, in his discretion, determine to require
the applicant/sponsor to apply for insurance coverage for the event
under a policy containing the insurance requirements of
Subsections A and B above. The applicant/sponsor must provide
any information pertinent to qualifying for the insurance coverage.
The premium for the insurance coverage may be paid by the City
rather than the applicant/sponsor.
§ 178-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 178-13
178:300
§ 178-14. Cleanup deposits for certain special events.
A. Prepayment of fees. Upon approval of an application for a special event
permit, the Chief of Police shall provide the applicant with a statement
of the estimated cost of providing overtime police officers for crowd and
traffic control at the event. The applicant/sponsor of the event shall be
required to prepay the crowd and traffic control fees prior to the
issuance of a special event permit. Traffic and crowd control by officers
includes clearing the event route or site of unauthorized vehicles,
diversion of traffic around the event, and directing pedestrian and
vehicular traffic along the route of an event.
B. Computing traffic control fees. The traffic control fees will be computed
by determining the number of police officers who will be required for
crowd and traffic control in addition to those who would otherwise be
on duty at that time, the number of hours the officers will be on duty for
the event, and the City's full cost of providing officers on an hourly basis
as established by the Police Department fee schedule. In determining
crowd and traffic control fees, the Council shall establish fees upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police based on the applicant/sponsor's
use of monitors for the event.
C. Refunds or underpayments. If the actual cost for crowd and traffic
control on the date of the event is less than the estimated cost pursuant
to Subsection A above, the applicant/sponsor will be promptly refunded
the difference by the Controller. Should the actual full cost to the City
by reason of the event exceed the estimated cost, the applicant/sponsor
shall pay the balance upon demand by the Controller.
D. Preestablished event routes and fees. The Chief of Police shall
preestablish several event routes within the City of Pleasantville. The
routes shall specify the number of officers assigned for police traffic
control on those routes. The preestablished routes and the fee schedule
for police crowd and traffic control services shall be made available to
the public.
E. Free speech routes and waiver of fees. Crowd and traffic control fees
will be waived by the Chief of Police for nonathletic events if the
following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The applicant/sponsor signs a verified statement that he believes
the event's purpose is First Amendment expression and that the
cost of crowd and traffic control fees is so financially burdensome
that it would constitute an unreasonable burden on the right of
First Amendment expression;
(2) The applicant or sponsor selects one of the preestablished free
speech routes for a parade or other event established by the Chief
of Police.
§ 178-13 PARADES AND OTHER SPECIAL EVENTS § 178-14
178:301
§ 178-15. Duties of permittee/sponsor of event.
§ 178-16. Unlawful to sponsor or participate in an event without a
permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sponsor or conduct a parade, athletic
event or other special event requiring a special event permit under § 178-4
unless a permit has been issued for the event. It is unlawful for any person
to participate in such an event with the knowledge that the sponsor of
the event has not been issued the required permit; nor shall any person
interfere with or disrupt a lawful parade, athletic event, or other special
event.
§ 178-17. Unlawful to exceed scope of permit.
The special event permit authorizes the permittee/sponsor to conduct only
such event as is described in the permit and in accordance with the terms
A. The applicant/sponsor of an event involving the sale of food or
beverages, erection of structures, horses or other large animals, or
water aid stations shall be required to provide a cleanup deposit prior
to the issuance of a special event permit. The cleanup deposit shall be in
the amount established in the master fee resolution.
B. The cleanup deposit shall be returned to the applicant/sponsor after the
event if the area used for the permitted event has been cleaned and
restored to the same condition as existed prior to the event.
C. If the property used for the event has not been properly cleaned or
restored, the applicant/sponsor shall be billed for the actual cost
incurred by the City for cleanup and restoration, and the cleanup
deposit, or a portion thereof, shall be applied toward payment of the
bill. If the applicant/sponsor disputes the bill, he may appeal to the City
Controller within five days after receipt of the bill. Should there be any
unexpended balance on deposit after completion of the work, this
balance shall be refunded to the applicant/sponsor. Should the amount
of the bill exceed the cleanup deposit, the difference shall become due
and payable to the City upon the applicant's receipt of the bill.
A. The applicant/sponsor of an event shall comply with all terms and
conditions of the special event permit.
B. Each permittee/sponsor of an event shall ensure that the person leading
a parade or other event along a route or the person in charge of any
other event shall carry the special event permit on his person for the
duration of the event.
C. Each permittee/sponsor of an event shall ensure the area used for the
permitted event is cleaned and restored to the same condition as
existed prior to the event immediately following the completion of the
event.
§ 178-14 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 178-17
178:302
and conditions of the permit. It is unlawful for the permittee/sponsor to
willfully violate the terms and conditions of the permit or for any event
participant with knowledge thereof to willfully violate the terms and
conditions of the permit.
§ 178-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person willfully violating any provision of the Parade and Other Special
Events chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 for
each violation of the chapter. Such violations may also be addressed by civil
action, and any violator shall be liable for the actual full cost to the City for
having provided police services for or because of the event.
Chapter 180
PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sale of alcoholic beverages to minors — See
Ch. 84, Art. I.
Curfew - See Ch. 123.
Loitering — See Ch. 163.
Purchasing secondhand articles from
minors — See Ch. 231.
§ 178-17 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 178-18
180:303

ARTICLE I
Responsibility for Actions of Minors
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 148 of the
1982 Code]
§ 180-1. Purpose.
The Council does find that far too many minors are contributing breaches
of the public peace which, in significant part, are occasioned by a lack
of responsibility on the part of the parents of the minors. Although the
existing statutes do afford a means to alert parents to their responsibilities
to both the minor and society in general, it is considered the opinion and
legislative judgment of the Council that further legislation is necessary to
encourage greater parental concern and responsibility and to fill the void
where traditional parental control is inadequate. This article, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, is intended to fill this void.
§ 180-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — Either or both parents of a minor, the legal guardians of such
minor or any other person(s) having the care or custody of the minor
committing the violation of the public peace. However, the term "parent"
shall not apply to parents, legal guardians or other persons whose custody
and control over such minor has been removed by court order, decree or
judgment or military service or marriage of such minor.
VIOLATION OF PUBLIC PEACE — Any of the following acts: defacing,
damaging or destroying public property or the private property of another
within the City of Pleasantville; committing an assault or assault and battery
upon another in the city; consuming and/or possessing alcoholic beverages
in a public place in the city; breaking and entering, or entering without
breaking into the property of another with or without the intent to steal or
remove property without the permission of the owner; threatening another
with the intention of extorting money or anything of value to the owner;
possession and/or use of a controlled dangerous substance, as the same
shall be defined under Title 24 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey;98
behaving in such a manner as to create a real or implied threat of harm
to another individual by threatening gestures and/or words that denote
physical threat; the use of abusive or obscene language; the use of one's
voice, instrument or device in a manner so as to deprive one of quiet
enjoyment; harassment of any individual, family or business in the city
(harassment: to trouble by repeated attacks; incursions; to disturb
persistently); or, while on public property, the operating of or riding upon
any minibike, motorcycle or other motor vehicle for which the operator
98.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 24:1-1 et seq.
§ 180-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 180-2
180:305
does not have in his possession a current registration, a valid driver's
license or a current insurance card as required by N.J.S.A. 39:3-29; or to
demand, request or encourage another or others to commit any of the
aforementioned acts or violations or any other act covered by N.J.S.A.
2A:14-1 et seq. relating to juvenile behavior.
§ 180-3. Violation notice.
In order for a parent to violate § 180-4 of this article utilizing the
terminology "allow," "permit" or "suffer" where a minor is apprehended
and convicted of a violation of the public peace, the Chief of Police in
the city or his designated agent shall forthwith serve written notice of
the act and conviction on the parent, a copy of which shall be forwarded
to the Pleasantville Juvenile Conference Committee. If at any time within
180 days of the giving of such notice such minor shall again be charged
and thereafter be subsequently convicted of the same classification of the
violation of the public peace, it shall be rebuttably presumed that the parent
allowed, permitted or suffered said minor to commit a violation of the public
peace.
§ 180-4. Parental involvement in unlawful acts prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any parent to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit, suffer
or encourage a minor to commit a violation of the public peace as defined
herein, either by overt act, by failure to act or by lack of supervision and
control over such minor.
§ 180-5. Violations and penalties.99
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
§ 180-6. Cumulative remedies.
The remedy provision of this article shall not be exclusive, and the state or
any other person shall have the right to proceed under any other legally
available remedies.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 180-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 180-6
180:306
ARTICLE II
Civil Liability
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II of Ch. 148 of the
1982 Code]
§ 180-7. Purpose.
The Council of the City of Pleasantville finds that malicious acts of
vandalism by youths are increasing at an alarming rate; that such acts are
frequently attributable to lack of care, custody and control exercised by
the parent; that parents should have some responsibility for the conduct of
their children; and that while there is a reluctance to charge a child with
juvenile delinquency there should be some legal deterrent to juvenile acts
of vandalism and to parental neglect of child supervision.
§ 180-8. Supervision and control of minors.
Any parent, guardian or other person having legal custody of a minor
16 years of age or under who fails or neglects to exercise responsible
supervision and control of the conduct of such minor shall be liable in a civil
action for the willful, malicious or unlawful injury or destruction by such
minor of the real or personal property of another.
§ 180-9. Civil damages imputed to parents.
The act of misconduct as set forth in § 180-8 hereof shall be imputed for all
purposes of civil damages to the parent, parents or legal guardian having
custody of the minor.
§ 180-10. Actual damages limited.100
The joint and several liability of one or both parents or of the legal guardian
for any one act of willful misconduct under this article shall be limited to
actual damages.
§ 180-11. Cumulative remedies.
The remedy provisions of this article shall be cumulative, not exclusive, and
the state or any other concerned person shall have the right to proceed
under any other legally available remedies.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 180-7 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 180-11
180:307
Chapter 187
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 84.
Animals — See Ch. 90.
Bicycles, skateboards and scooters — See Ch.
95.
Regulations at the Municipal Boat
Harbor — See Ch. 99.
Private campgrounds — See Ch. 115.
Firearms — See Ch. 131.
Littering — See Ch. 159.
Loitering — See Ch. 163.
Noise — See Ch. 171.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 195.
§ 180-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 180-11
180:308
ARTICLE I
Recreation Center
[Adopted 2-21-1996 by Ord. No. 4-1996]
§ 187-1. Identification card required.
All persons using the Pleasantville Recreation Center shall be required to
possess and present a valid Pleasantville Recreation Center identification
card.
§ 187-2. Card fees; duration.
§ 187-3. Main gymnasium rental by organized leagues.
A. At the time that any person receives a Pleasantville Recreation Center
identification card, such person will pay a fee for the preparation of the
identification card. The fee for a Pleasantville Recreation Center
identification card shall be $2 per year for persons under the age of 18
and $5 per year for persons 18 years of age and older.
B. Pleasantville Recreation Center identification cards will be issued on a
calendar-year basis.
A. Any organized league which is not sponsored by the City of
Pleasantville and which wishes to utilize the main gymnasium in the
Recreation Center shall pay a daily fee of $200. This fee entitles the
members of the league to utilize the main gymnasium and locker
facilities for a period of up to three hours. In the event that the league
extends utilization of the gymnasium beyond three hours, an additional
fee of $15 for each additional 1/2 hour, or portion thereof, shall be paid.
A security deposit of 50% is required upon application. [Amended
3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 8-2005; 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 37-2006]
B. All time reserved for such leagues shall be paid in advance and shall be
reserved for a minimum of six weeks. The Superintendent of Recreation
may accept reservations for periods of time greater than six weeks in
his or her discretion. [Amended 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 37-2006]
C. All league members shall secure a Pleasantville Recreation
identification card as described above.
D. Any organization or individual (not sports related) wishing to utilize the
gymnasium must follow the above provisions. In addition, he, she or it
must file a certificate of insurance with the Superintendent of
Recreation showing $1,000,000 public liability coverage and naming
the City of Pleasantville as additional insured. [Added 2-17-1999 by
Ord. No. 6-1999; amended 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 37-2006]
§ 187-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 187-4
180:309
§ 187-4. Room rentals. [Amended 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 37-2006]
A fee of $50 is hereby established for the rental of meeting rooms. A fee of
$100 is hereby established for the rental of the multipurpose (west wing)
room. These rentals will be for a period of up to five hours. In addition to
the rental fee, a security deposit will be paid in an amount of 50%, due upon
application. Upon vacation of the room, all or part of the deposit may be
refunded depending upon the condition and cleanliness of the room, which
decision shall be in the discretion of the Superintendent of Recreation.
§ 187-5. Rental agreements required.
The rental of the main gymnasium, meeting rooms or multipurpose room is
conditional upon the execution of a rental agreement between the City and
the individual, league or organization utilizing the facilities in a form and
containing such provisions as are acceptable to the City.
§ 187-6. Summer camp fees. [Amended 6-1-1998 by Ord. No.
11-1998; 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
Fees for child participation in the Pleasantville Recreation Center Summer
Camp Program are set by a resolution of the City Council from time to time,
as needed, and filed in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 187-7. Aerobics class fees.
A fee of $20 per month is established for aerobics classes. A person wishing
to take a single aerobics class shall pay a fee of $3.
§ 187-8. Boxing fees. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
In addition to the Pleasantville Recreation Center card fee referred to
in the sections above, all persons who participate in and train in boxing
programs shall pay an additional fee. The additional boxing fee shall be
$30 for Pleasantville residents who are amateur boxers, $40 for nonresident
amateur boxers, $150 for Pleasantville resident professional boxers and
$200 for nonresident professional boxers. Fees will be paid annually, in
advance, on a calendar-year basis.
§ 187-8.1. Weight room fees. [Added 6-18-2001 by Ord. No.
17-2001; amended 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 37-2006]
In addition to the Pleasantville Recreation Center card fee referred to in
the sections above, all persons who use the weight rooms shall pay an
additional fee. The additional fee shall be $30 for Pleasantville residents and
$75 for nonresidents. Fees will be paid annually, in advance, on a calendaryear
basis.
§ 187-9. Field rental fees. [Added 5-20-1996 by L.L. No. 10-1996]
§ 187-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 187-9
180:310
A. Business-sponsored leagues: $1,500 (12 weeks at $125 per week).
[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 8-2005]
B. Non-business-sponsored leagues: $600 (12 weeks at $50 per week).
[Amended 3-21-2005 by Ord. No. 8-2005]
C. Additional weeks are based on availability. [Added 2-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 6-1999]
D. Any individual or group wishing to utilize the picnic area behind the
Recreation Center shall pay a daily fee of $200. This fee entitles the
members of the group to utilize the picnic area and indoor restroom
facilities for a period up to five hours. Any use of barbeque grills will
require a fire permit. A security deposit of 50% is required upon
application. [Added 10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 37-2006]
§ 187-9 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 187-9
180:311

ARTICLE II
Park and Playground Rules and Regulations
[Adopted 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
§ 187-10. Purpose. [Amended 11-1-1999 by Ord. No. 42-1999;
6-4-2001 by Ord. No. 12-2001]
Restrictions and limitations are for the safety and welfare of the general
public, especially the children.
A. Following are the locations of City parks and playgrounds: [Amended
11-17-2008 by Ord. No. 29-2008]
Location Name Block/Lot
701 West Park Avenue Max Manning Complex 18/25
800 Cresson Avenue Abraham Lincoln Green
Park
443/2
1300 Clematis Avenue Clematis Avenue Park 4/2
318 Woodland Avenue Woodland Avenue Park 171/14
1517 South Main Street
(rear)
J.B. Smith Park 348/37
201 East Leeds Avenue George and John English
Park
307/2
100 South Main Street Bus Station Park 75/4
110 Tilton Road South Pleasantville Little
League
35/26
127 Tilton Road Tilton Avenue Park 3/15
141 Walnut Avenue North Pleasantville Little
League
274/35
350 South Hampden
Court
Joker Football Field 258/3.01
Bayview Avenue Yacht Basin 446/1
411 Brighton Avenue Recreation Center 378/6.02
333 South Franklin
Avenue
Veteran's Memorial Park 251/1
From Milan Avenue and
Second Street, southerly
to the Northfield City line
Bike Path No. 1 R.O.W. 20 - 30
feet at various
intervals
From Milan Avenue and
Second Street, westerly
to the Egg Harbor
Township line
Bike Path No. 2 R.O.W. 20 - 30
feet at various
intervals
§ 187-10 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 187-11
180:313
§ 187-11. Rules and regulations.
The following rules and regulations are hereby established, and it shall be
unlawful to violate any of said rules and regulations.
A. No alcoholic beverage shall be consumed in or about the City's parks,
playgrounds and recreational areas, except in situations where the City
Council gives a special permit for a particular event.101
B. No person shall be permitted in or about a City park, playground or
recreational area while under the influence of intoxicating beverages,
drugs or narcotics.
C. No camping shall be permitted in any park, playground, or recreation
area without being specifically permitted by the City Council.
D. No person, other than Recreation Department or Public Works
personnel and/or other Public Safety personnel, while performing their
prescribed duties, shall drive or move any vehicle on any park,
playground or recreation area without specific authorization from the
City Administrator.
E. No person shall build, start or maintain a fire within any City park,
playground or recreation area except in those areas where a grill,
fireplace or fire has been provided and is maintained for such purpose.
F. No person shall discharge any firearm, bow and arrow or weapon
within, in or on any of the City parks, playgrounds or recreation
areas.102
G. No person shall play golf or practice golf within or on any of the City
parks, playgrounds or recreational areas.
H. No person shall take upon or use any mopeds or motorized bikes of any
description on or within any of the parks, playgrounds or recreation
area of the City.
I. No person shall operate any bicycle on or within any park, playground
or recreation area within the City.103
J. No person shall disport or behave in a noisy and boisterous manner,
emitting loud cries or other noises, so as to inconvenience others or
otherwise disturb or disrupt the peace and dignity within the parks,
playgrounds and recreational areas.104
K. No person shall deposit or leave any cans, ashes, paper or other refuse
within a City park, playground or recreational area, except in those
101. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 84, Alcoholic Beverages.
102. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 131, Firearms.
103. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 95, Bicycles, skateboards and scooters.
104. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 171, Noise.
§ 187-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 187-11
180:314
§ 187-12. Hours.
The City parks and playgrounds are open from 10:00 a.m. until dusk. Parks
and playgrounds with lights are permitted to stay open at the discretion of
the Recreation Director.
§ 187-13. Permit required for park usage.
Persons wishing to use a park or playground for a family picnic and park
area must obtain a permit from the Recreation Department. This permit
will be issued without charge, upon application by one person over the
age of 18 years who shall indicate the names, ages and relationship to the
applicant of all persons in the applicant's group. The permit shall be issued
upon showing that at least 50% of the persons in the applicant's group are
Pleasantville residents.
containers specifically provided and designated for such use by the
Public Works Department.105
L. No person shall pick any flowers or foliage or cut or break or dig up or
in any way mutilate or injure any of the trees, shrubs, plants, grass,
railings, seats, fences, structures or any other objects with a City park,
playground or recreational area.
M. No person shall sell or solicit for sale any goods, merchandise or
services from any park, playground or recreational area.106
N. No person shall allow their dog or other pet to defecate on any park,
playground or recreational area. If this occurs, the owner must remove
such animal defecation immediately from said area and dispose of it in a
proper manner.107
O. No person shall loiter, loaf, wander, stand or remain idle, either alone or
in consort with others in City parks.108 [Added 11-1-1999 by Ord. No.
42-1999]
P. No person shall urinate or defecate on any park, playground or
recreational area. [Added 11-1-1999 by Ord. No. 42-1999]
Q. No person, group or organization shall use any field for organized
activity without a permit from the Recreation Department. [Added
10-2-2006 by Ord. No. 37-2006]
105. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 159, Littering.
106. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 195, Peddling and Soliciting.
107. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 90, Animals.
108. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 163, Loitering.
§ 187-11 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 187-14
180:315
§ 187-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 187-14 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 187-14
180:316
ARTICLE III
Smoking
[Adopted 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 10-2014]
§ 187-15. Smoking prohibited.
The smoking and use of tobacco products including e-cigarettes is hereby
banned in all City-owned playgrounds and parks in the City of Pleasantville,
which areas are hereafter designated as "Smoke and Tobacco Free Zones."
Accordingly, it shall be unlawful for any person, regardless of age, to smoke
or use a tobacco product in any City-owned playground or park or to possess
in open view a cigarette, cigar or any other tobacco product, an opened
cigarette pack, opened carton or other opened container (as evidenced by a
broken seal) holding a tobacco product.
§ 187-16. Signage required.
A sign shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at every
property where smoking is prohibited by this article. The sign(s) shall state
"Smoke Free Zone" or "This Public Property is 100% Smoke Free," or
substantially similar language, written in lettering that is not less than two
inches in height, and shall contain the international no-smoking sign or
symbol.
§ 187-17. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the City of Pleasantville Police Chief, Fire
Chief, Construction/Code Official, and/or Superintendent of Public Works
and their designees.
§ 187-18. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, penalties against persons
violating the provisions of this article shall be imposed in accordance with
the provisions of § 187-14.
§ 187-15 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 187-18
180:317
Chapter 191
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 187-18 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 187-18
180:318
ARTICLE I
Television and Radio Reception Interference
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II of Ch. 155 of the
1982 Code]
§ 191-1. Unlawful reception; exceptions.
§ 191-2. Conflicts with federal or state laws.
The provisions of this article shall not be held or construed to embrace
or cover the regulation of any transmitting, broadcasting or receiving
instrument, apparatus or device used or useful in interstate commerce
or the operation of which instrument, apparatus or device is licensed or
authorized by or under the provisions of any act of the Congress of the
United States or of the Legislature of this state.
§ 191-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-19-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
A. No person shall knowingly and wantonly install, use, maintain, operate
or cause to be operated any machine, device, apparatus or instrument
of any kind whatsoever, within the limits of the city, the operation of
which shall cause reasonably preventable interference with television
or radio reception within the city.
B. No person shall repair or cause to be repaired any machine, device,
apparatus or instrument of any kind in such manner that reasonably
preventable interference with television or radio reception results from
such repairs.
C. The provisions of Subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to
X-ray pictures, medical examinations or treatments made at any time or
to electrotherapy treatments administered if the machines or apparatus
used therefor are properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or
reasonably preventable interference with television or radio reception
and are not negligently operated.
§ 191-1 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 191-3
180:319

ARTICLE II
Interference with Television Coaxial, Microwave Radio and
Community Antenna Systems
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. V of Ch. 155 of the
1982 Code]
§ 191-4. Interference prohibited.
No person shall willfully or maliciously, without the consent of the owner
thereof, tamper with, break, injure or otherwise destroy or damage in any
way any of the posts, poles, cables, wires, fixtures, antennas, amplifiers
or other apparatus, materials, equipment or appliances of any television
coaxial cable system or microwave radio system or community antenna
television system or tap or connect, directly or indirectly, by wire or any
other means whatsoever into, to or with any such television coaxial cable
system or microwave radio system or community antenna television system
so as to make use of, hear, observe or be in a position to make use of,
hear, observe or enable any other person to make use of, hear, observe or
be in a position to make use of, hear or observe for any use or purpose
whatsoever any message, picture or signal going over any such cable or
system aforementioned or to receive or enable or assist any other person
to receive any unauthorized service over any such cable or system
aforementioned.
§ 191-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville, be
punished for each offense by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000, imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days in the county jail,
or in any place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners,
and/or a period of community service for a period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 191-4 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 191-5
180:321

ARTICLE III
Trespassing, Fishing, Crabbing, Etc.
[Adopted 11-1-1999 by Ord. No. 44-1999]
§ 191-6. Prohibited acts. [Amended 10-18-2010 by Ord. No.
14-2010]
Trespassing, fishing, crabbing, netting and swimming be and is hereby
prohibited on Ansley Boulevard and on the right-of-way of Tunis Avenue,
extending from Block 257, Lot 2, to the Egg Harbor Township boundary.
§ 191-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
§ 191-6 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY § 191-7
180:323
Chapter 195
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk collectors — See Ch. 151, Art. II.
Mercantile licensing — See Ch. 155, Art. I.
Distribution of commercial
advertisements — See Ch. 159, Art. I.
Garage, closeout and yard sales — See Ch.
223.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 231.
Sidewalk obstructions — See Ch. 255, Art. III.
§ 191-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 191-7
195:324
ARTICLE I
Peddlers and Hawkers
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 158 of the
1982 Code]
§ 195-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Any person traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or in or
upon any other type of vehicle or conveyance, from house to house, store
to store or street to street, carrying with him any wares, merchandise or
goods for the purpose of offering and exposing the same for sale; or making
sales and delivering any of the said articles to purchasers. A peddler shall
also mean and include a person who, without traveling from place to place,
sells or offers for sale wares, merchandise or goods from a wagon, motor
vehicle or any other type of vehicle or conveyance. The word "peddler"
shall include the words "hawker," "huckster" and "vendor." Any person who
solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers
as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall
be deemed a peddler.
§ 195-2. License required.
No person shall engage in or carry on the business of a peddler without first
obtaining a license from the Licensing Officer as provided by this article.
§ 195-3. Scope; persons exempt.
The provisions of this article shall be held not to apply to the following
persons who are hereby expressly exempted:
§ 195-4. License application.
Each application for a license shall be:
A. Any person selling fruit, vegetables and farm products raised on the
seller's premises.
B. Any honorably discharged soldier, sailor, marine, nurse or army field
clerk of the United States, who has obtained a veteran's peddler's
license, as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9a.
C. Any person who is a resident of this state and who is an exempt member
of a volunteer fire department, a volunteer fire engine, hook and ladder,
hose or supply company or salvage corps of any municipality or fire
district in this state, as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9b.
A. Made upon an application form provided by the city.
B. Signed and sworn to by the applicant.
§ 195-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 195-4
195:325
§ 195-5. Application forms; information.
§ 195-6. Investigation of application.
The Licensing Officer shall examine each application and investigate the
facts stated therein and shall then approve or reject the application based
upon his findings as to the moral character and business responsibility of
the applicant.
§ 195-7. License fee.
At the time of filing the application prescribed by § 195-4 and § 195-5, a
license fee of $300 shall be paid to the Licensing Officer.
§ 195-8. Application approval; issuance.
If, as a result of the investigation required by § 195-6, the moral character
and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory,
the Licensing Officer shall issue the license to the applicant to conduct the
business of peddling and hawking.
§ 195-9. License term and expiration date.
Each license issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid until
December 31 of the year in which the license is issued.
C. Filed with the Licensing Officer of the city.
A. The application forms for licenses shall request the following specific
information and items:
(1) Name of applicant.
(2) Permanent home residence.
(3) Name and address of firm represented.
(4) Names and addresses of the persons from whom goods making up
the stock were or are to be purchased.
(5) Three personal references.
(6) Place or places of residence of the applicant for the preceding three
years.
(7) Length of time for which the license is desired.
(8) Description of the wares to be offered for sale.
(9) Number of arrests or convictions for crimes and the nature of the
offenses for which arrested or convicted.
B. A letter shall be attached to the application, from the firm for which the
applicant purports to work, authorizing him to act as its representative.
§ 195-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 195-10
195:326
§ 195-10. License to be carried and exhibited.
Every person holding a license under this article is required to carry such
license with him at all times while engaged in the business licensed. He
shall produce the license at the request of any official of the city.
§ 195-11. Metal plate to be affixed to vehicle.
§ 195-12. Transfer of licenses restricted.
Neither the license nor the metal plate issued under the provisions of this
article shall be transferable.
§ 195-13. Business hours and conduct restricted.
§ 195-14. License revocation and suspension.
A. The Licensing Officer shall issue to every peddler and hawker, in
addition to the license provided by § 195-8, a metal plate bearing the
words "Licensed Vendor, City of Pleasantville," together with the
numbers of the license and the year for which it is issued.
B. All automobiles, carts or other vehicles used for peddling and required
to be licensed shall have said metal plate affixed to some conspicuous
part of said automobile, cart or vehicle.
A. No person authorized to conduct the business of being a peddler shall
disturb the public by crying out his wares or by creating a nuisance.109
B. Peddling and hawking shall be conducted only between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked,
after hearing, by the Mayor for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as peddler or as hawker.
(3) Any violation of this article.
(4) Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business of peddling or hawking in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
109. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 171, Noise.
§ 195-10 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 195-14
195:327
§ 195-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999; 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 7-2000]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville, be punished
for each offense by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. Any person pleading guilty may
pay a fine of $100 to the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be given to the person receiving the
license, mailed to him by registered or certified mail to his last known
address or to the address stated in his application, specifying the
provisions of this article of the ordinance or statute which the licensee
is alleged to have violated. The Mayor, in his discretion, may suspend
the operation of the license pending the hearing.
§ 195-14 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 195-15
195:328
ARTICLE II
Solicitors and Canvassers
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II Ch. 158 of the
1982 Code]
§ 195-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOLICIT BUSINESS or SOLICITING BUSINESS and CANVASS BUSINESS
or CANVASSING BUSINESS — When done by personal approach, shall
include the following:
SOLICITOR'S PERMIT or CANVASSER'S PERMIT — The permit issued
under this article.
§ 195-17. Exemptions.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, nothing contained in this
article shall be construed to apply to any of the following acts:
Seeking or endeavoring to sell any goods, wares, securities,
merchandise or services whatsoever by sample, description or
otherwise.
A.
Taking orders for such goods, wares, securities, merchandise or
services for either present or future delivery with or without a payment
in whole or in part.
B.
Advertising goods, wares, securities, merchandise or services for sale
by passing or circulating handbills.
C.
A. Soliciting done by the legal owner, lessee or agent of same upon the
property owned or leased by the solicitor.
B. Soliciting done for purpose of sale of personal property at wholesale to
retailers in such articles.
C. Delivery of newspapers, advertising circulars or goods in the regular
course of business or the collection of payments therefor.110
D. The services of public utilities and their duly authorized agents or
representatives, provided that such exemption for public utilities shall
not apply to the selling of other than public utility services.
E. Soliciting by any religious or charitable organization, provided that any
such organization register with the Chief of Police by providing the
items specified at § 195-19B(1) through (5) before commencing
solicitation.
110. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 159, Littering, Art. I, Distribution of Commercial
Advertisements.
§ 195-16 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 195-17
195:329
§ 195-18. Permit required.
No person shall solicit business or canvass business in the city without first
having obtained a solicitor's permit in accordance with the provisions of this
article.
§ 195-19. Permit applications. [Amended 10-7-1991 by Ord. No.
15-1991]
F. Soliciting by persons lawfully exempt by state statute or federal law
from the permit requirements set forth herein or by persons lawfully
entitled to conduct a business wherein a license or certificate has been
granted by any department, board, commission or agency of the State
of New Jersey or of the city.
A. Applicants for permits required by this article shall file with the City
Clerk a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be
provided by the City Clerk.
B. The application shall supply the following information and items:
(1) Name, sex, height, weight and birth date of the applicant.
(2) Permanent home address and temporary local address of the
applicant.
(3) Brief description of the nature of the business and of the goods to
be sold or services to be performed.
(4) Name and address of the applicant's employer, if he is employed,
together with the credentials establishing the exact relationship
between them.
(5) Length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(6) Place where the goods proposed to be sold or orders taken for the
sale thereof are manufactured or produced, the place where such
goods or products are located at the time said application is filed
and the proposed method of delivery.
(7) Photograph of the applicant taken within 60 days immediately prior
to the date of filing of the application. The photograph shall be two
inches by two inches and shall show the head and shoulders of the
applicant in a clear and distinctive manner.
(8) Statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the
offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
§ 195-17 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 195-20
195:330
§ 195-20. Investigation fee.
At the time of filing the application prescribed by § 195-19, a fee of $5 shall
be paid to the City Clerk to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated
in the application.
§ 195-21. Investigation; endorsement by Chief of Police.
§ 195-22. Application approval; permit completion; records.
A. Upon receipt of the application prescribed by § 195-19, the original
thereof shall be referred by the Clerk to the Chief of Police, who shall
cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral
character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the
public good.
B. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory due to fraud,
misrepresentation or false statements in the application or in the
course of carrying on business as a solicitor or canvasser or for
conviction of a felony involving moral turpitude within five years of the
date of receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall endorse on
such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same and
return the application to the City Clerk, who shall notify the applicant
that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued.
[Amended 10-7-1991 by Ord. No. 15-1991]
A. If, as a result of the investigation required by § 195-21A, the character
and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory,
the Chief of Police shall endorse his approval on the application and
shall complete the permit form stating:
(1) Name and address of the applicant.
(2) Kind of goods to be sold or services to be performed.
(3) Date of issuance.
(4) Length of time for which the permit shall be valid.
(5) Vehicle license number and other identifying description of any
vehicle to be used in soliciting or canvassing.
B. The Chief of Police shall attach the photograph of the applicant to the
permit, sign and seal the permit and return the same, together with the
application, to the City Clerk.
C. The Clerk shall file the application and deliver the permit to the
applicant.
§ 195-20 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 195-23
195:331
§ 195-23. Records to be maintained by Clerk.
The Clerk shall make and maintain a permanent record of every permit
approved by the Chief of Police.
§ 195-24. Permit term and expiration date.
Each permit issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on
December 31 of the year in which issued unless granted a shorter time, in
which event it shall expire on the date specified in the permit.
§ 195-25. Permit to be exhibited on request.
All persons obtaining permits as solicitors and canvassers shall exhibit their
permits when so requested by any citizen or police officer.
§ 195-26. Permits not transferable.
Permits issued under the provisions of this article shall not be transferable.
§ 195-27. Permit suspension and revocation.
§ 195-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999; 4-17-2000 by Ord. No. 7-2000]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville, be punished
for each offense by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
A. Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked, after
hearing, by the Mayor for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the permit.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his business as solicitor or as canvasser.
(3) Any violation of this article.
(4) Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business of soliciting or of canvassing in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
B. Written notice of the hearing shall be given to the person receiving the
permit, mailed to him by registered or certified mail to his last known
address or to the address stated in his application, specifying the
provisions of this article or of the ordinance or statute which the
permittee is alleged to have violated. The Mayor, in his discretion, may
suspend the operation of the permit pending the hearing.
§ 195-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 195-28
195:332
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. Any person pleading guilty may
pay a fine of $100 to the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 195-28 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 195-28
195:333

ARTICLE III
Transient Merchants or Itinerant Vendors111
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. III Ch. 158 of the
1982 Code]
§ 195-29. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRANSIENT MERCHANTS or ITINERANT VENDORS — Persons, whether
principal or agent, who engage in a merchandising business in the city, with
intent to close out or discontinue such business within one year from the
date of commencement, including those who, for the purpose of carrying
on such business, hire, lease or occupy any building, structure or railroad
car for the exhibition and sale of goods, wares and merchandise. Nothing
in this definition shall be construed to apply to or affect the sale of fruits,
vegetables and farm products, such as meat, poultry, butter and eggs.
§ 195-30. No solicitation on posted properties. [Added 10-7-1991 by
Ord. No. 15-1991]
No person shall solicit or canvass any household, business, place or
property on which a "No Solicitation" sign or notice is posted.
§ 195-31. License required.
No transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall sell or dispose of or offer to
sell or dispose of any goods, wares or merchandise within the city unless he
has obtained a license as hereinafter provided in this article.
§ 195-32. Licensing exemptions.
A. Nothing in this article be construed to require the obtaining of a license
by any charitable or religious society that shall conduct sales of
personal property, when the proceeds thereof shall be applied to the
payment of the expenses thereof and to the charitable or religious
object for which the society exists.
B. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the obtaining of a
license by any art, antique or historical society that conducts an
exhibition and sale of art objects, pictures, paintings, prints, historical
articles and furniture generally known and designated as antiques and
kindred objects.
C. Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the obtaining of a
license by any agricultural show, fair or garden society selling or
closing out certain of their exhibits, if such society was an incorporated
association not for pecuniary profit of this state prior to March 26,
111. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 223, Sales, Special, Art. II, Closeout Sales.
§ 195-29 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 195-32
195:335
§ 195-33. License application.
Each application for a license required by this article shall be:
§ 195-34. Application contents.
Each application for a license shall state:
§ 195-35. Bond.
Before a license shall be issued, the applicant shall execute and deliver to
the City Clerk a good and sufficient bond with good and sufficient surety, to
be approved by the Licensing Officer, equal in amount to 25% of the value
of the stock of personal property shown in the declarations and disclosures
required under the provisions of this article. In no event shall said bond be
less than $1,000 in amount. The bond shall remain in force for one year
and shall be conditioned to indemnify and pay the city any penalties or
costs incurred in the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article and
the statutes of New Jersey and to indemnify or reimburse any purchaser
of such personal property in a sum equal to at least the amount of any
payment such purchaser may have been induced to make through the
misrepresentation as to the kind, quality or value of such personal property,
whether the said misrepresentations were made by the owners or their
servants, agents or employees, either at the time of making the sale or
1935, or, if incorporated subsequent thereto, such society shall have a
bona fide membership of at least 100 persons.
D. Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to or affect the sale of
fruits, vegetables and farm products, such as meat poultry, butter and
eggs.
A. Made upon an application form furnished by the city.
B. Signed and sworn to by the applicant.
C. Accompanied by execution and delivery of the bond required by
§ 195-35, by a declaration of intention under oath as provided by
§ 195-36 and by payment of the license fee prescribed by § 195-38.
D. Filed with the Licensing Officer.
A. Name and residence of the owner or person in whose interest such
business is conducted.
B. Average quantity and kind, as nearly as can be determined, and the
value of the personal property intended to be sold or exposed for sale in
the city.
C. Names and post office addresses of the persons from whom goods
making up the stock were or are to be purchased.
D. Three business references.
§ 195-32 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 195-35
195:336
through any advertisement printed or circulated with reference to such
personal property or any part thereof.
§ 195-36. Declaration of goods for sale.
A transient merchant or itinerant vendor, before offering for sale any goods,
wares, merchandise or bankrupt stock, shall make, under oath, a
declaration to the Licensing Officer of the number of days he proposes to
engage in such business, together with a true invoice or detailed statement
of the amount of such personal property he proposes to offer for sale within
the city and a specific statement as to the location of such personal property
by street and number and whether on the premises from which it is to be
sold or in warehouses or storage.
§ 195-37. Agent for service of process.
§ 195-38. Investigation; fee; term of license.
A. Before a license shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the
Licensing Officer an instrument, in writing, nominating and appointing
the Licensing Officer his true and lawful agent with full power and
authority to acknowledge service or notice of process for and on behalf
of said applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out
of the license and the bond given as required by the provisions of
§ 195-35 of this article or for the performance of the conditions of the
bond or for any breach thereof. It shall also contain recitals to the effect
that the applicant consents and agrees that service of any notice or
process may be made upon said agent and, when so made, shall be as
valid as if personally served upon the applicant according to the laws of
this or any other state and waiving all claim or right of error by reason
of such acknowledgment of service or manner of service.
B. The Licensing Officer shall keep a record of all notices and processes
served upon him pursuant to the provisions of Subsection A of this
section, showing the date of such service. The Licensing Officer shall
forthwith notify the licensee of such service, by registered or certified
mail addressed to the licensee at the residence address or registered
office shown on the licensee's application. Such notification shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
A. Before a license shall be issued, the Licensing Officer shall investigate
the moral character and business responsibility of the applicant, and,
after such investigation, the Licensing Officer shall either approve or
reject the application.
B. If the Licensing Officer approves the application and the applicant pays
to him the license fee of $500 and complies with all other provisions of
this article, the Licensing Officer shall issue and deliver to the applicant
a license to conduct the business of a transient merchant or itinerant
vendor.
§ 195-35 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 195-38
195:337
§ 195-39. Separate license for each location.
A separate license shall be obtained for each branch, establishment or
separate place of business in which the occupation of a transient merchant
or itinerant vendor is carried on. Each license shall authorize the licensee
to carry on, pursue or conduct the business of a transient merchant or
itinerant vendor only at the location indicated therein.
§ 195-40. License not transferable.
The license required by this article, when issued, shall not authorize any
person except the licensee designated therein to engage in the business of
a transient merchant or itinerant vendor.
§ 195-41. Posting of license.
Every licensee under this article is required to have the license posted in
a conspicuous place at his place of business while he is engaged in the
business of a transient merchant or itinerant vendor.
§ 195-42. Cancellation and surrender of bond.
If the business of the transient merchant or itinerant vendor is conducted
continuously for more than one year, the bond required under § 195-35 shall
be released and surrendered for cancellation upon payment of the license
fee prescribed by § 195-38.
§ 195-43. Violations and penalties.112
Any transient merchant or itinerant vendor who fails to comply with the
requirements of this article or any part thereof or makes a false or
fraudulent representation in any statement required by this article to be
filed by him or falsely represents, by advertising or otherwise, that such
personal property is in whole or in part damaged goods saved from fire or
makes any false statement as to the previous history or character of such
personal property shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90
days.
C. The license shall be in effect, in favor of the person to whom it is issued,
for the period of 180 days from the day of issuance.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 195-38 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 195-43
195:338
ARTICLE IV
Charitable Solicitations in Roadways
[Adopted 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 37-1997]
§ 195-44. Charitable solicitations permitted.
The City of Pleasantville shall permit charitable organizations as defined in
Section III of P.L. 1994, c. 16 (N.J.S.A. 45:17A-20), to solicit contributions in
the roadways and highways of the City of Pleasantville in accordance with
the provisions contained herein.
§ 195-45. Filing of request; information required.
All charitable organizations herein who wish to solicit contributions in the
roadways and highways of the City of Pleasantville shall file a request with
the City Clerk specifying the following information:
§ 195-46. Review of request.
Said request shall be reviewed by the Chief of Police and City Administrator,
and they shall make a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council of the
City of Pleasantville as the the relative aspects of the request, including a
review of the safety procedures and/or methods to be employed by the said
charitable organization. Said Chief of Police and City Administrator shall
thereafter forward a report to the Mayor and City Council of the City of
Pleasantville as to their opinion on the granting, rejecting or modification of
any proposed charitable solicitation.
A. Name of organization.
B. Address of organization.
C. Telephone number of organization.
D. Contact person of organization.
E. Location of proposed charitable solicitation.
F. Dates and times of proposed charitable solicitation.
G. If said request involves a county roadway and/or highway, a copy of an
authorization from the Atlantic County Board of Chosen Freeholders to
permit said charitable solicitation.
H. If said request involves a state roadway and/or highway, a copy of an
authorization from the State of New Jersey Commissioner of
Transportation to permit said charitable solicitation.
I. List of all proposed safety regulations, safety devices and training
individuals who shall participate in the charitable solicitation and/or a
report as to the procedures to be used to ensure the safety of the
members of the public who will be traversing the roadways and/or
highways of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 195-44 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 195-47
195:339
§ 195-47. Age restrictions.
In no event shall any charitable organization requesting authorization from
the City of Pleasantville for said charitable solicitation use any individual
under the age of 18 years to perform any function to task associated with
the said charitable solicitation in any roadway.
§ 195-48. Compliance with statute.
Any charitable organization requesting authorization from the City of
Pleasantville for said charitable solicitation shall comply with all of the
terms and conditions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, as amended by P.L. 1997, Chapter
82, approved April 30, 1997.
§ 195-49. Statutory authorization.
This article is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-60, as amended by P.L.
1997, Chapter 82, approved April 30, 1997.
§ 195-50. Violations and penalties.113
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 195-47 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 195-50
195:340
Chapter 197
PLEASANTVILLE SHOPPING CENTER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 163.
Parking of buses on streets — See Ch. 167,
Art. II.
Shopping carts — See Ch. 239.
§ 195-50 PLEASANTVILLE SHOPPING CENTER § 195-50
197:341

ARTICLE I
Fire and Emergency Vehicular Zones
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Ch. 108 of the 1982
Code]
§ 197-1. Parallel parking prohibited.
All parallel parking shall be prohibited in the Pleasantville Shopping Center
in that area of the parking lot within 25 feet of the sidewalk immediately
in front of any store or other establishment in the Pleasantville Shopping
Center.
§ 197-2. No-parking signs.
Signs clearly indicating the prohibited parking area shall be erected in
sufficient locations to give notice of the prohibited parking areas.
§ 197-3. Violations and penalties.114
Any vehicle parked in said prohibited parking area shall be towed at the
owner's expense. Anyone convicted of a violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 197-1 PLEASANTVILLE SHOPPING CENTER § 197-3
197:343

ARTICLE II
Parking of Charter and Commercial Buses
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 150 of the
1982 Code]
§ 197-4. Parking by buses prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for charter or commercial buses or buses for hire to
park at any time in the Pleasantville Shopping Center.
§ 197-5. Violations and penalties.115
Any person, individual, corporation, entity, agent, servant and/or employee
of any corporation or other entity violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 197-4 PLEASANTVILLE SHOPPING CENTER § 197-5
197:345

ARTICLE III
Conduct
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 155 of the
1982 Code]
§ 197-6. Premises described; declaration.116
Pursuant to the statute in such case made and provided, the owner and
operator of the Pleasantville Shopping Center, and for the purpose of
preserving public peace, health and safety, the entire premises of the
Pleasantville Shopping Center, as more particularly described on the map
on file in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby declared to be a public
place. The aforesaid entire premises of the Pleasantville Shopping Center
as shown on the aforesaid map is bounded on the southeast side by Doughty
Road, on the southwest side by Black Horse Pike, on the northeast side
by the northeast boundary thereof as indicated on said map, and on the
northwest side by the boundary thereof, as shown by said map, together
with means of ingress thereto and egress therefrom, which property
consists of stores and shops as shown upon said map, together with the
black paved area to the southwest and northeast of said buildings used for
parking.117
§ 197-7. Maintenance of good order.118
The owner, lessee or operator of any store or shop and all customers,
patrons and all other persons therein shall maintain quiet and good order
upon the premises described in § 197-6, including the black paved portion
thereof, and shall not permit disorderly or immoral conduct or loitering
thereon, nor shall they or any of them permit any noise or nuisance either
in the stores or shops or on the parking area above referred to, whereby the
quiet and good order of the said shopping center are disturbed.
§ 197-8. Motor vehicle noises restricted.
No person on the premises of said shopping center as described in § 197-6,
or in any area in the shopping center, including the paved area thereof as
shown on the map, shall race the motor of any motor vehicle, start suddenly
or bring to a sudden stop any motor vehicle accompanied by loud noise,
blow any horn of any motor vehicle or cause to be made any other loud or
unseemly noise, nuisance or disturbance whereby the quiet and good order
of the premises or the neighborhood or patrons of the stores and shops are
disturbed.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
117. Editor's Note: The map of the premises of the Pleasantville Shopping Center originally
accompanied and was declared to be a part of Ord. No. 775, adopted on July 6, 1965.
118. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 163, Loitering, and Ch. 171, Noise.
§ 197-6 PLEASANTVILLE SHOPPING CENTER § 197-9
197:347
§ 197-9. Unlawful use of vehicles on premises.
No person shall enter the premises described in § 197-6 or any part thereof
in a vehicle of any kind and use said premises or any part thereof for
cruising or racing as a shortcut to another street or annoy or endanger any
person or other vehicle lawfully on the premises.
§ 197-10. Loitering and assembling restricted.119
§ 197-11. Signs to be posted.
It shall be the duty of the operator of said shopping center to post on the
premises, in conspicuous locations, one or more signs bearing the following
legend:
CRUISING IN OR CONGREGATING AND LOITERING OUTSIDE OR
INSIDE OF A MOTOR VEHICLE IS UNLAWFUL ON THESE PREMISES.
NO UNOCCUPIED VEHICLES MAY BE LEFT ON THE PREMISES UNLESS
ENGAGED IN LAWFUL BUSINESS IN THE SHOPPING CENTER.
§ 197-12. Violations and penalties.120
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
A. No person shall:
(1) Together with any other person congregate on the premises
described in § 197-6 so as to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
(2) Loiter at any location on any part of said premises so as to obstruct
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to patrons of stores or
persons having the written permission of the owners thereof.
119. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 163, Loitering.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 197-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 197-12
197:348
Chapter 199
PLOT PLANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 139.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 255.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
§ 199-1. Plot plan required prior to issuance of building permit.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for residential structures, the
applicant therefor shall submit to the City Construction Official's office, to
be forwarded to the City Engineer for his approval, a detailed site plot plan
prepared by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor.
§ 199-2. Contents of plan.
Each plot plan so submitted must contain the following:
A. Existing contour lines of the plot plan upon which the dwelling
structure is to be constructed, with corner elevations.
B. The final elevations proposed for the corners of the plot.
C. Finished floor elevation of the proposed structure to be erected upon
the plot.
D. All location and setback dimensions of the proposed building from the
street line and property lines.
E. The total plot square footage.
F. The total proposed structure square footage.
G. The percentage of lot coverage.
H. The existing and/or proposed utility locations.
I. The existing and/or proposed sidewalk and curb and the material for its
construction.
J. The required parking area and the materials for its construction.121
K. Existing or proposed landscaping. As a minimum, such landscaping
shall include grading and seeding or other equivalent suitable ground
cover and a minimum of five plantings. [Added 12-19-1983 by Ord.
No. 16-1983; 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
121. Editor's Note: Former Subsection K, regarding sidewalk and curbing, which immediately
followed this subsection, was deleted 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999. See now § 199-5.
§ 197-12 PLOT PLANS § 199-3
199:349
§ 199-3. Review and recommendation.
Upon receipt of said plot plan the City Engineer shall review the plan
and determine whether or not it meets certain acceptable engineering
standards, including but not limited to improvements. After making such
determination, the City Engineer shall forward the site plan to the City
Construction Official with his approval. If a subdivision, said plot plan shall
conform to N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.10, known as the "Map Filing Law."
§ 199-4. Form and filing of plan.
When required by the City Construction Official, there shall be submitted a
plot plan in a form and size designated by the Construction Official for filing
permanently with the permit record, drawn to scale, with all dimensions
figured, showing accurately the size and exact location of all proposed
buildings or structures on the same lot and other buildings or structures on
the same lot and other buildings or structures on adjoining property within
10 feet of the property lines.
§ 199-5. Sidewalk and curbing. [Added 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
§ 199-6. Demolition.
In case of demolition, the plot plan shall show the buildings or structures to
be demolished and the buildings or structures on the same lot that are to
remain. Common walls should be shown on the plot plan.
§ 199-7. As-built plot plan required prior to issuance of certificate
of occupancy. [Added 2-7-1983 by Ord. No. 2-1983; amended
12-19-1983 by Ord. No. 16-1983]
Before a certificate of occupancy can be issued, the homeowner or
contractor must submit an as-built plot plan showing final elevations of
corners of the lot, final elevations of finished floor levels and the location
and setback dimensions of the building from the street line and the property
lines, including in-place landscaping. The applicant shall submit this to the
City Construction Official, who shall forward same to the City Engineer for
the Engineer's final approval. After the Engineer makes final determination
A. Sidewalk and curbing shall be constructed as part of the plot where it
does not already exist. Its construction shall be in conformance with
Chapter 255, Streets and Sidewalks, of the Code of the City of
Pleasantville. [Amended 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 8-2001]
B. The elevation of the lot must be within six inches of sidewalk elevation.
The lot cannot be lower than six inches below the sidewalk elevation.
C. Growth of new landscaping must take place before a certificate of
occupancy (CO) can be issued. A temporary CO can be issued at the
discretion of the Construction Official.
§ 199-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 199-7
199:350
and approval, he must forward the as-built plot plan to the Construction
Official marked "final approval."
§ 199-8. Fees. [Added 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 39-1986; amended
9-16-1996 by Ord. No. 23-1996]
§ 199-9. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 203
POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusement devices — See Ch. 87.
Mercantile licensing — See Ch. 155, Art. I.
Loitering — See Ch. 163.
§ 203-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC POOL OR BILLIARD ROOM — Any place or premises in the city
open to the general public and containing one or more pool or billiard tables
for the use of which a fee is charged.
§ 203-2. License required.
No person shall operate a public pool or billiard room unless he first obtains
a license therefor from the Licensing Officer,122 who shall issue such license
upon payment of the required fee prescribed in this chapter and upon
approval by the Chief of Police after due investigation.
§ 203-3. Application; contents.
A. Review fee. At the time of the submission of the plot plan to the City
Construction Official's office, pursuant to § 199-1, the applicant shall
pay to said office the nonrefundable fee of $80.
B. Curb stakeout fee. When the application requires a curb stakeout, the
applicant must pay the fee of $350 to the Construction Official's office.
122. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Art. I, Licensing, Mercantile.
§ 199-7 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 203-3
203:351
§ 203-4. Fee; term.
§ 203-5. License issuance; requirements.
§ 203-6. Proximity to church or school.
No license shall be granted covering any location within 100 feet of the
property line of a school or house of worship.
A. An application for a license under this chapter shall be made in writing
and filed with the Licensing Officer upon forms furnished by the city
and shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in § 203-4A hereof. It shall
be signed by the applicant and shall contain the following information:
(1) Name of applicant.
(2) Residence of applicant.
(3) Date and place of birth of applicant.
(4) Place where the applicant's business is to be conducted and
description thereof.
(5) Place of residence of applicant for the past three years.
(6) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime or
disorderly persons offense or violation of an ordinance involving
gambling and, if so, the nature of the offense and date and place of
the conviction.
B. The information requested by foregoing Subsection A(1) through (6)
shall be furnished with respect to each director and officer in the case
of a corporate applicant and to each partner in the case of a partnership
applicant.
A. The license fee for each pool or billiard table in every public pool or
billiard room is $10.
B. The term of the license shall commence on June 1 of each year, and each
license shall expire at 12:00 midnight on May 31 of the year following
issuance of the license.
A. Every individual applicant for a license shall be at least 21 years of age,
shall be of good moral character and shall be the actual owner of the
business for which he seeks a license.
B. In the case of a partnership or corporate applicant, the requirements of
Subsection A of this section shall apply to each partner, officer and
director of the applicant.
§ 203-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 203-7
203:352
§ 203-7. License to be posted.
Each licensee shall post and display his license in a conspicuous place in the
premises licensed under this chapter.
§ 203-8. Opening and closing hours.
No person owning, keeping or having the management or control of any
public room or place wherein the games commonly known as "pool" or
"billiards" or games of similar nature are played shall permit such game or
games to be played therein at any time between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 8:00 a.m. During these hours such public room or place shall be closed.
§ 203-9. Unobstructed view of interior of premises required.
The view of the interior of the public room or place where pool or billiards
or similar games are played shall be open and unobstructed by curtains,
venetian blinds, paint or other substance so that at all times there shall be a
clear and unobstructed view from the sidewalk of the whole of the interior
of said public room or place.
§ 203-10. Lawful operation; minimum age of occupants and players.
Each licensee shall maintain good order, prohibit gambling, observe
existing laws and shall not harbor or allow persons under 16 years of age to
congregate or play in the licensed premises.
§ 203-11. License revocation or suspension.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 203-12, any license may be
revoked for violation of the provisions of this chapter or for other good
cause, after notice and hearing before the Council. Pending such hearing,
the license may be suspended.
§ 203-12. Violations and penalties.123
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 203-7 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 203-12
203:353
Chapter 205
PROPERTY, ABANDONED AND VACANT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 115.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 207.
Rental housing — See Ch. 208.
§ 203-12 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 203-12
203:354
ARTICLE I
Vacant Property Registration, Maintenance and Compliance
Monitoring
§ 205-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as "Vacant and Abandoned
Property Registration, Administration and Management."
§ 205-2. Article title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as "Vacant Property
Registration, Maintenance and Compliance Monitoring."
§ 205-3. Purpose.
§ 205-4. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this
chapter are defined as follows:
ABANDONED PROPERTY LIST — Inventory and identification of abandoned
property. P.L. 1996 c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55). A qualified municipality that
has designated or appointed a public officer pursuant to Section 3 of P.L.
A. It is the intent of this chapter and articles to, through the adoption of
this chapter, establish a vacant property management system and
authorize new, and changes to existing, policies and procedures for the
registration, maintenance and compliance monitoring of vacant
properties as a mechanism to protect and preserve the public health,
safety, welfare, security, neighborhood vitality, economic vitality and
the quiet enjoyment of residents, by:
(1) Requiring all property owners, including lenders, trustees and
service companies, to properly maintain vacant, unimproved and/or
foreclosing properties; and
(2) Regulating the maintenance of vacant, unimproved and/or
foreclosing properties in order to prevent unsecured unsafe
structures in neighborhoods and neighborhood blight.
B. In addition to any other remedies in law or equity not set forth herein,
enforcement authority shall be vested in the Code Enforcement
Department, including but not limited to the Code Enforcement
Department and their respective inspectors. The Construction
Department, County Health Department, Police Department, Fire
Department and the Department of Public Works shall also have
enforcement authority with respect to this chapter. The Mayor, with the
advice and consent of Council, may also designate, when necessary,
additional enforcement duties for other City departments to protect
neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate
maintenance and security of vacant properties.
§ 205-1 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 205-4
203:355
1942, c. 112 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5), may adopt an ordinance directing the
public officer to undertake an inventory of abandoned property in those
areas designated for redevelopment pursuant to the "Local Redevelopment
and Housing Law," P.L. 1992, c. 79 (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.). The
ordinance may direct the public officer to exclude from the inventory of
abandoned property that property for which the expense to the municipality
of determining the cost of environmental remediation required under state
or federal law would be excessive, in the judgment of the municipal
governing body. Each item of abandoned property on the inventory shall
include the tax block and lot number, the name of the owner of record, if
known, and the street address of the lot. In those municipalities in which
an inventory has been conducted, the public officer shall maintain a list
of abandoned property, to be known as the "abandoned property list." An
abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned property list if
rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner.
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Any property that has not been legally
occupied for a period of six months and which meets any one of the
following additional criteria may be deemed to be abandoned property upon
a determination by the Public Officer that:
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY — A property that is accessible through direct
access, a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc.
ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE — A structure/building that is unsecured and/
or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by
unauthorized persons.
AGREEMENT — Any agreement or written instrument, which provides that
title to a property, shall be transferred or conveyed from one owner to
another owner after the sale, trade, transfer or exchange.
APARTMENT — Portion of a dwelling unit, rented or offered for rent for
living and dwelling purposes, to one individual or family unit, together
with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and
The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment of
the Public Officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during that sixmonth
period;
A.
Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued prior
to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy, and no
construction has taken place for at least six months as of the date of a
determination by the Public Officer pursuant to this section;
B.
At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and delinquent
on that property in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 54 of the Revised
Statutes (see N.J.S.A. 54:4-1 et seq.) as of the date of a determination
by the Public Officer pursuant to this section; or
C.
The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the Construction
Official.
D.
§ 205-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 205-4
203:356
improvements connected with the use occupancy of such portion of the
property.
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO A TENANT(S) — Fit to habitation as defined by
the Statutes of the State of New Jersey, and the Codes and Ordinances of
the City of Pleasantville.
BENEFICIARY — An entity under a note secured by a mortgage, deed of
trust or similar document.
BUYER — Any person, copartnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary
who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property
described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this section.
CITY — City of Pleasantville.
DANGEROUS BUILDING — Any building/structure that is violation of any
condition referenced in Chapter 111, Buildings, Unfit, of the City Code.
DAYS — Consecutive calendar days.
DEED IN LIEU OF FORECLOSURE — A recorded document that transfers
ownership of a property from the fee owner to a mortgagor, lien holder, or
beneficiary of the deed of trust.
DEED OF TRUST — An instrument by which title to real estate is
transferred to a third-party trustee as security for a real estate loan
definition applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust (i.e., second trust
deed, third deed, etc.).
DEFAULT — The failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or
conditional.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall include that portion of a building or structure
rented or offered for rent to one or more tenants or family units. A room
or series of connected rooms designed for permanent residency, containing
living, cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities. The dwelling unit shall be
self-contained and shall not require the use of outside stairs (other than
those required for initial access to the structure), passage through another
dwelling unit or other indirect route to get to any portion of the dwelling
unit. Any cottage, bungalow, room or group of rooms in occupying all or part
of a floor or floors in a building, with housekeeping facilities for dwelling
purposes.
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY — The Code Enforcement Department and
their respective inspectors, including, but not limited to, the Construction
Department, Atlantic County Health Department, Police Department, Fire
Department and Department of Public Works, shall also have enforcement
authority with respect to this chapter. The Mayor, with the advice and
consent of Council, may also designate, when necessary, additional
enforcement duties for other City departments.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY —
Any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions
present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is
A.
§ 205-4 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 205-4
203:357
FORECLOSURE — The process by which property, placed as security for
a real estate loan, is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower
defaults.
INITIATION OF THE FORECLOSURE PROCESS — Any of the following
actions taken by a mortgagee against the borrower or mortgagor of a
property:
INTERESTED PARTY — Any person, copartnership, association,
corporation, or fiduciary authorized by the owner of record to act on the
owner's behalf.
LOCAL — Within 10 road/driving miles' distance of the subject property.
MORTGAGE — A lien against real estate granted to serve an obligation,
including a deed of trust.
MORTGAGEE — An individual, individuals or business entity to which a
property is mortgaged, including but not limited to the creditor, service
companies, lenders in a mortgage agreement and any agent, servant or
employee of the mortgagee, or any successor in interest and/or assignee
vacant or has the potential to become vacant. Such conditions include
but are not limited to a property that is under a current notice of
default and/or notice of Sheriff's sale and/or pending tax lien sale or
has been foreclosed upon by the mortgagee or has been conveyed to
the mortgagor, beneficiary or trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure;
overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers and/or mail; past-due utility notices and/or
disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris; the
absence of window coverings, such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters;
the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with
residential habitation; statements by neighbors, passerby, delivery
agents, or government employees that the property is vacant.
An unoccupied property, apartment or dwelling unit that the owner
or responsible party intends to make available for rent to tenant(s)
shall be considered a vacant property subject to the requirements
of this chapter herein defined until which time the municipal Code
Enforcement Official or designee has deemed the unit habitable by the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy and the owner or responsible
party has properly registered the unit and paid rental registration fees
as defined in the City of Pleasantville Rental Registration Ordinance.124
B.
A. Taking possession of the property;
Delivering a mortgagee's notice of intention to foreclose to the
borrower;
B.
Commencing a foreclosure action or filing a lis pendens in the Superior
Court of New Jersey.
C.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 208, Rental Housing.
§ 205-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 205-4
203:358
of the mortgagee's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage
agreement.
MORTGAGOR — The person who has borrowed money and pledged his/
her real property as security for the debt, i.e., granted a mortgage or gives
property as security.
NEIGHBORHOOD STANDARD — Those conditions that are present on a
simple majority of properties within a one-hundred-yard radius of an
individual property. A property that is the subject of a neighborhood
standard comparison, or any other property within the one-hundred-yard
radius, shall be counted toward the simple majority.
NOTICE OF DEFAULT — A recorded notice that a default has occurred
under a mortgage or deed of trust and that the mortgagee or beneficiary
intends to proceed with a foreclosure proceeding.
OUT OF AREA — In excess of 10 road/driving miles distance of the subject
property.
OWNER — Every mortgagor, mortgagee, trustee, agent, real estate agency,
property manager or interested party, who alone or severally with others:
OWNER OF RECORD — The person having recorded title to the property
at any given point in time as set forth in the records recorded with the
Registrar of Deeds of Atlantic County.
PROPERTY — Any unimproved or improved real property, real estate,
residential property, commercial property or portion thereof, located in
the City of Pleasantville, including buildings or structures situated on the
Has legal or equitable title to any dwelling, dwelling unit, mobile
dwelling unit or parcel of land, vacant or otherwise; or
A.
Has care, charge or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or parcel
of land, vacant or otherwise, in any capacity including but not limited
to agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or
guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title; or
B.
C. Is a mortgagee in possession of any such property; or
Is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts and vested
with possession or control of any such property; or
D.
Is an officer or trustee of the association of unit owners of a
condominium. Each such person is bound to comply as if he were
the owner. However, this chapter shall not apply to any condominium
association or co-op that forecloses or initiates the foreclosure process
for unpaid assessments due or owing the association; or
E.
F. Every person who operates a rooming house; or
Is a trustee who holds, owns or controls mortgage loans for mortgagebacked
securities transactions and has initiated the foreclosure
process.
G.
§ 205-4 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 205-4
203:359
property regardless of condition. For the purposes of this section only,
"property" does not include property owned by or subject to the control
of the City or any of its governmental bodies or agencies including, but
not limited to, property owned or controlled by the Federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
QUALITY OF LIFE — Shall encompass the City of Pleasantville Resolution
33-2015.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — Any improved real property or portion thereof,
situated in the City, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes,
and shall include the buildings and structures located on such improved
real property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade,
transfer, or exchanges as "residential" whether or not it is legally permitted
and/or zoned for such use.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any property that contains one or more
dwelling units used, intended or designed to be occupied for living
purposes.
SECURING — Such measures as may be directed by the City Code
Enforcement Officer or his or her designee that assist in rendering the
property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to
the repairing or replacement of fences and walls, chaining/padlocking of
gates, and the repair, replacement or boarding of door, window and/or other
openings. Boarding shall be completed to a minimum of the current HUD
securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or required.
TRUSTEE — The person, firm or corporation holding a deed of trust on a
property.
TRUSTOR — A borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a
trustee as security for the payment of a debt.
VACANT — A building, structure, property or unimproved land that is
unoccupied or not legally occupied.
§ 205-5. Recordation of transfer of loan/deed of trust/assignment of
rents.
Within 10 days of the acquisition of title by deed in lieu of foreclosure
or Sheriff sale by the mortgagor/trustee or interested party, such party
shall record, with the City of Pleasantville Code Enforcement Department,
documents that list the name of the corporation, and/or individual, the
mailing address and contact phone number of the new owner/beneficiary/
trustee responsible for receiving payments associated with the mortgage/
deed of trust.
§ 205-6. Registration.
A. Any mortgagor, mortgagee, trustee or owner, who holds a deed or a
mortgage on a vacant property located within the City of Pleasantville,
must register the property with the Code Enforcement Department and
perform an inspection of the property. If the property is found to be
§ 205-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 205-6
203:360
vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, by the mortgagor, mortgagee,
trustee, owner or enforcement authority, it is, by this chapter, deemed
vacant and each of the mortgagor, mortgagee, trustee, or owner shall,
within 30 days of the inspection, register the property with the Code
Enforcement Department on forms provided by the City.
B. All registrations must state the mortgagor, mortgagee, trustee, owner,
agent, property manager or other interested parties that are
responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the
property, direct name, phone number and mailing address. The mailing
address may not be a P.O. box. This registration must also certify that
the property was inspected and identify whether the property is vacant
at the time of filing.
C. If the property is vacant, the mortgagor, mortgagee, trustee, owner,
agent, property manager or other interested parties must designate
and retain an individual, property management company or interested
party responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. This
designation must state the individual, property Management Company
or interested parties' direct name, phone number and mailing address.
The mailing address may not be a P.O. box. If the property is in the
process of foreclosure, then the registration must be received within
seven days of the "initiation of the foreclosure process" as defined in
§ 205-4, Definitions, hereinabove. If the enforcement authority
determines that the property is vacant and the foreclosure proceedings
have not been initiated, the registration must be received within 30
days of the enforcement authority's first notice of violations or
summons for improper security and/or maintenance.
D. The registration shall include the insurance certificate required under
§ 205-11, Maintenance requirements, as defined therein, as well as any
additional information that the enforcement authority may reasonably
require. Each property having a separate tax block and lot number shall
be registered separately.
E. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City against the owner
or owners of the property.
F. A registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The fee and
registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of
the calendar year in which the registration was initially required. All
fees are nonrefundable. In the event that the property remains vacant,
subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year and
must be received no later than March 31 of the year due.
G. This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of
a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
deed of trust or mortgage and any properties transferred under a deed
in lieu of foreclosure.
§ 205-6 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 205-6
203:361
§ 205-7. Exceptions.
A property, apartment or dwelling unit that the owner or responsible party
legally occupies for summer seasonal use beginning on May 15 and ending
September 15 is exempt from paying vacant property registration fees.
The owner or responsible party must register the property, apartment or
dwelling unit as a vacant property and are subject to all other requirements
of this chapter as defined herein.
§ 205-8. Annual escalating fee schedule.
§ 205-9. Use and distribution of collected liens and registration
fees.
H. Properties subject to this chapter shall remain under the annual
registration requirement and security and maintenance standards of
this section as long as such properties remain vacant.
I. Once the property is no longer vacant or is sold or otherwise
transferred, the owner must provide proof of sale, transfer or
occupancy to the Code Enforcement Department within 30 days of sale,
transfer or occupancy.
J. No governmental agency is required to pay the annual registration fee.
Governmental agencies are required to follow § 205-11, Maintenance
requirements, § 205-12, Security requirements, and § 205-13,
Additional authority, hereinafter defined.
K. Any person, firm or corporation that has registered a property under
this chapter must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
A. The initial fee for registering a vacant property shall be $500. The
initial registration fee shall be prorated at a rate of $41.66 per month or
the initial registration fee divided by 12 multiplied by the remaining
number of months in the initial registration calendar year. The fee for
the first renewal is $1,000 and the fee for the second renewal is $2,000.
The fee for any subsequent renewal beyond the second renewal is
$3,000.
B. The vacant property registration fee schedule shall be as follows:
(1) Initial registration: $500.
(2) First renewal: $1,000.
(3) Second renewal: $2,000.
(4) Any subsequent renewal: $3,000.
A. To assist in a broad strategy designed to stabilize and vitalize the City's
neighborhoods and to attract home buyers and businesses, no less than
75% of any money collected of the annual fees and liens shall be set
§ 205-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 205-9
203:362
§ 205-10. Issuing rules and regulations.
The Code Enforcement Officer may issue rules and regulations for the
administration of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 205-11. Maintenance requirements.
aside in an account to be utilized by the municipality for municipal
code enforcement, housing, community and economic development
purposes.
B. The funds in the account may be used:
(1) To abate problem and or nuisance properties that have become
neglected, deteriorated, and has become a blighted property in
need of demolition; and
(2) For facade and landscaping projects that complement
neighborhood aesthetics and facilitate adjoining property owners'
ability to regain some of the lost equity that downturns in housing
values have stripped from them and increase housing values; and
(3) To support the administration and management of the
municipality's efforts to monitor, administer, and manage vacant
and abandoned properties in the City;
(4) To support the City's activities and allow greater flexibility with
future code enforcement, housing, community and economic
development initiatives.
A. Properties subject to the requirements of this article must be
maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local
laws, rules and regulations. The mortgagor, mortgagee, trustee, owner,
agent, real estate agency, property manager and/or other interested
parties must inspect the property twice a month for the duration of the
vacancy.
B. Properties subject to this article shall be, in comparison to the
neighborhood standard, kept free of weeds; dry bush; dead vegetation;
trash; junk; debris; building materials; unregistered vehicles; internal
combustion engine vehicles; any accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local
law; discarded personal items, including but not limited to, furniture,
clothing, and large and small appliances; printed material; or any other
items that give the appearance that the property is vacant.
C. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that
matches the color of the exterior of the structure.
D. Front, rear and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the
neighborhood standard at the time registration was required.
§ 205-9 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 205-11
203:363
§ 205-12. Security requirements.
E. "Landscape" includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers,
bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or
artificial turf/sod designed especially for residential or commercial
installation.
F. "Maintenance" includes, but is not limited to the removal or repair of,
gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting,
mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material; in addition to
regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required
landscape and removal of all trimmings.
G. Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so that the water remains
clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry. In either
case, properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum
security fencing requirements of the City.
H. Insurance certificates. The owner of any vacant property shall acquire
or otherwise maintain liability insurance, in an amount of not less than
$300,000, for buildings designated primarily for use as residential units
and not less than $1,000,000 for any other building, including, but not
limited to, buildings designated for manufacturing, industrial, storage
or commercial uses, covering any damage to any person or any
property caused by any physical condition of or in the building. Any
insurance policy acquired or renewed after the building has become
vacant shall provide for written notice to the Code Enforcement
Department within 30 days of any lapse, cancellation or change in
coverage. The owner shall attach evidence of the insurance to the
owner's registration statement. Any registration form submitted that
does not include such evidence shall not be deemed to be a valid
registration.
I. Adherence to this section does not relieve the mortgagor, mortgagee,
real estate agency, trustee, owner, agent, property manager or
interested parties of any obligations set forth in any the laws of the
State of New Jersey, any applicable regulations of any state agency
having jurisdiction, the Code of the City of Pleasantville, covenants,
conditions and restrictions set forth in any deed, and/or homeowners'
association rules and regulations which may apply to the property.
A. Properties subject to this article shall be maintained in a secure manner
so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
B. "Secure manner" includes but is not limited to the closure and locking
of windows, doors (walkthrough, sliding and garage) gates and any
other opening of such size that it may allow a child to access the interior
of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken windows,
"securing" means the re-glazing or boarding of the window.
§ 205-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 205-12
203:364
§ 205-13. Additional authority.
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in Chapter 207 of the
City Code, the Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee shall have
the authority to require any mortgagor, mortgagee, trustee, owner and/
or owner of record of any property affected by this article, to implement
additional maintenance and/or security measures including but not limited
to, securing any/all door, window or other openings, installing additional
security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an
on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to
arrest the decline of the property.
§ 205-14. Adoption by reference.
C. If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out-of-area mortgagor,
mortgagee, trustee or owner, a local property management company or
individual shall be contracted to perform biweekly inspections to verify
that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are
being met.
D. The property shall be posted with name and a twenty-four-hour contact
phone number of the local property management company or interested
party. The posting shall be 8.5 inches by 11 inches and shall contain
along with the name and twenty-four-hour contact number the words
"THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR
CONCERNS CALL." The posting shall be placed on the interior of a
window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from
the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the
street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or if no
such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a
location that is visible from the street to the front of the property but
not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior postings must be constructed
of and printed with weather-resistant materials. The local property
management company or responsible party shall inspect the property
on a biweekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with
the requirements of this chapter.
A. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1, the New Jersey
State Housing Code, N.J.A.C. 5:10 (2013), as approved by the
Department of Community Affairs, is adopted as a standard governing
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to making dwellings safe, sanitary and fit for human
habitation, occupancy or use, and governing the condition of dwellings.
B. In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 207, the Property
Maintenance Code of the City of Pleasantville is adopted as a standard
governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to making dwellings safe, sanitary and fit for
human habitation, occupancy or use, and governing the condition of
dwellings.
§ 205-12 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 205-15
203:365
§ 205-15. Inspections.
At any time after filing a registration form or renewal of registration form,
the owner of any vacant property shall provide access to the enforcement
authority to conduct exterior and interior inspections of the building to
determine compliance with municipal codes, on reasonable notice to the
property owner or interested party and to issue summonses for any
violations.
§ 205-16. Enforcement.
§ 205-17. Violations and penalties.
A. The Construction Code Official in the Code Enforcement Department, in
addition to all other City officials empowered by the City Code or
general law to take enforcement action or issue summons for violations
of state statutes and/or the provisions of the City Code are hereby
authorized to enforce this chapter and issue summons for violations of
any section of this chapter.
B. Any mortgagor, mortgagee, trustee, owner and/or owner of record who
fails to register a vacant property under the provisions of this chapter
shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting at the
building, any and all notices of code violations and all processes in an
administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions
concerning the property.
A. Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense,
regardless of intent. Any person, firm and/or corporation that violate
any portion of this chapter shall be subject to prosecution,
administrative enforcement and or placement of the property on the
City of Pleasantville abandoned properties list. Any person who shall
violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine not less than $300 and not more than $1,000 for each
offense or be subject to imprisonment in the county jail for a period of
90 days or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense. Fines assessed under this chapter shall be recoverable
from the owner and shall be a lien on the property.
B. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Department of Public
Works, in a case of an unregistered or delinquent registered vacant
property, from cleaning up the property on an as-needed basis and
imposing a lien against the property for associated costs as set forth in
Subsection C.
C. Any fine(s) or cost(s) associated with cleaning up the property that
remains uncollected or unpaid shall, by resolution of the City Council,
become a lien upon the property, which lien shall hereafter form part of
the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon said lands, the same to
bear interest at the same rate as taxes to be collected and enforced by
§ 205-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 205-17
203:366
the same officers and in the same manner as taxes in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.14 and Chapter 261, Taxation, of the
Code of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 205-17 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 205-17
203:367

ARTICLE II
Abandoned Property List
§ 205-18. Article title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as "Abandoned Property
List; Maintenance and Compliance Monitoring."
§ 205-19. Purpose.
§ 205-20. Establishment of abandoned property list.
The Public Officer as designated herein is hereby directed to identify
abandoned properties within the municipality, place said properties in an
abandoned property list as provided in Section 36 of P.L. 1996, c. 62
(N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 et seq.), as amended by Section 28 of P.L. 2003, c. 210,
and provide such notices and carry out such other tasks as are required to
effectuate an abandoned property list as provided by law.
§ 205-21. Abandoned property list coverage area.
The abandoned property list shall apply to the entire City of Pleasantville.
A. It is the intent of this article to, through the adoption of this article,
establish an abandoned property list and management system, and
authorize new, and changes to existing, policies and procedures for the
inventory, identification, maintenance and compliance monitoring of
abandoned properties as a mechanism to protect and preserve the
public health, safety, welfare, security, neighborhood vitality, economic
vitality and quiet enjoyment of residents, by:
(1) Managing the process of returning abandoned improved and
unimproved properties as viable assets in the City; and
(2) Regulating the maintenance of abandoned, improved and
unimproved properties in order to prevent unsecured unsafe
structures in neighborhoods and neighborhood blight.
B. In addition to any other remedies in law or equity not set forth herein,
enforcement authority shall be vested in the Code Enforcement
Department and their respective inspectors, including, but not limited,
to the Construction Department and Atlantic County Health
Department, Police Department, Fire Department and Department of
Public Works, which shall also have enforcement authority with respect
to this chapter. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of Council, may
also designate, when necessary, additional enforcement duties for other
City departments to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted
through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned
properties.
§ 205-18 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 205-22
203:369
§ 205-22. Designation of Public Officer.
The Construction Official/Zoning Officer and the City Administrator in the
City of Pleasantville are hereby designated as the Public Officer for the
purpose of carrying out the responsibilities established by this chapter, and
shall have all the responsibilities and powers provided by law.
§ 205-23. Designation of rehabilitation entity.
The Public Officer as designated herein shall exercise the authority granted
the municipality pursuant to Section 13 of P.L. 2003, c. 210, to designate
qualified rehabilitation entities to act as a designee of the municipality with
respect to provisions of that section.
§ 205-24. Reporting.
The Public Officer shall provide a report to the governing body every six
months, with respect to the number and location of properties on the
abandoned property list, the status of those properties, and any actions
taken by the City or by any qualified rehabilitation entity designated
pursuant to the authority granted the Public Officer with respect to any
property on the list or any other abandoned property within the City of
Pleasantville.
§ 205-25. Maintenance requirements.
Properties subject to this article shall be required to comply with the
standards set forth in §§ 205-11 and 205-13 above.
§ 205-26. Security requirements.
Properties subject to this article shall be maintained in accordance with the
requirements of § 205-12 set forth above.
§ 205-27. Duties of the Public Officer.
A. The Public Officer shall identify all properties within the municipality
which are deemed abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.
B. Each item of abandoned property shall be identified by tax block and lot
number, the name of the owner of record (if known), and the street
address of the lot.
C. Upon identification of abandoned property, the Public Officer shall
create and maintain a list of such property to be called the "abandoned
property list." Properties may be added to the list at any time or deleted
from the list at any time the Public Officer finds that the property no
longer meets the definition of an abandoned property. An interested
party may request that a property be included on the abandoned
property list following the procedure set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-105.
§ 205-22 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 205-27
203:370
§ 205-28. Power of municipality.
The City of Pleasantville, through its appropriate officials, including, but
not limited to, the Public Officer, shall have all powers afforded to the
municipality, and its agents, servants and employees, under the Abandoned
Properties Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78, including, but not limited,
the power to transfer possession and control of an abandoned property
in need of rehabilitation to a municipality, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-84,
subject, nevertheless, to the procedural requirements for same set forth
in said Act; the power to enter, secure, stabilize, repair or inspect the
D. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of the
rehabilitation work authorized by those permits. A property on which
an entity other than the municipality has purchased or taken
assignment from the municipality of a tax sale certificate, which has
been placed on the abandoned property list, may be removed from the
list in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-103.
E. The Public Officer, within 10 days of the establishment of the
abandoned property list, or any additions thereto, shall send a notice,
by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail, to the
owner of record of every property included on the list and shall cause
the list to be published in the official newspaper of the municipality,
which publication shall constitute public notice. The published and
mailed notices shall identify the property determined to be abandoned,
setting forth the owner of record (if known), the tax lot and block
number, and street address. The Public Officer, in consultation with the
Tax Collector, shall also send out a notice by regular mail to any
mortgagee, servicing organization, or property tax processing
organization that receives a duplicate copy of the tax bill pursuant to
Subsection d of N.J.S.A. 54:4-64. When the owner of record is not known
for a particular property and cannot be ascertained by the exercise of
reasonable diligence by the Tax Collector, notice shall not be mailed but
instead shall be posted on the property in the manner provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7. The mailed notice shall indicate the factual basis for
the Public Officer's finding that the property is abandoned property as
that term is defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81, and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder, specifying the information relied upon in
making such finding. In all cases, a copy of the mailed or posted notice
shall also be filed by the Public Officer in the office of the Atlantic
County Clerk. This filing shall have the same force and effect as a notice
of lis pendens under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6.
F. The Public Officer shall seek reimbursement for the postage costs and
search fees associated with providing notice from the authority (as
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4), or its subsidiaries, in accordance with
procedures and rules promulgated by the Department of Community
Affairs.
§ 205-27 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 205-28
203:371
property under N.J.S.A. 55:19-86; the power to exercise its rights to further
rehabilitation and reuse the property under N.J.S.A. 55:19-90 et seq.; the
power to impose liens upon, undertake improvements to, and borrow funds
to facilitate powers delegated to municipalities under said Act, in
accordance with said Act; and all such powers and authority delegated to
municipalities under said Act, as well as those set forth at N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3
et seq., all of which statutes are incorporated herein and made a part hereof
by reference.
§ 205-29. Effect on other provisions.
The remaining provisions of the City Code shall continue in full force and
effect to the same extent as if herein fully repeated.
§ 205-28 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 205-29
203:372
Chapter 207
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 111.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 135.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Junk dealers and collectors — See Ch. 151.
Littering — See Ch. 159.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 281.
§ 205-29 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 205-29
203:373

ARTICLE I
Minimum Standards
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 164 of the
1982 Code]
§ 207-1. Policy declaration. [Amended 2-6-1989 by Ord. No. 2-1989]
This article shall apply where it is found that there exists in the City of
Pleasantville premises which are or may become substandard with respect
to the site, structure, equipment or maintenance or, further, that such
conditions, including but not limited to structural deterioration, lack of
maintenance, deteriorating appearance of the structure or premises,
infestation and existence of fire or other hazards, are generally a menace to
health, safety and the general welfare or when it is further found that such
premises, due to their lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration,
have the additional effect of creating blighting influences and initiating
deterioration and that, if the same are not curtailed or removed, the
aforesaid conditions will grow and spread to affect premises and
neighborhoods in standard condition and will necessitate the expenditure of
public funds to correct and to eliminate the same by reason of regulations
and restrictions as contained herein, whereby the growth of slums and
the spread of blight can be prevented and the neighborhood and property
values thereby maintained, the desirability and amenities enhanced and the
public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
§ 207-2. Purpose. [Amended 2-6-1989 by Ord. No. 2-1989]
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition and occupancy of real property; to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners, operators and occupants; to
authorize procedures for the inspection of real property; to fix penalties
for the violation of this article; to provide for the right of access across
adjoining premises to permit repairs; and to provide for the repair of
premises unfit for occupancy or use. This article is hereby declared to be
remedial and essential for the public interest.
§ 207-3. Definitions.
The following terms, wherever used in this article, shall have the respective
meanings assigned to them unless a different meaning clearly appears from
the content:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure the use of which is incidental to
that of the main building and which is located on the same lot.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground but
having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
§ 207-1 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 207-3
203:375
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to
permanent or continuous occupancy or use.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground and
having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
EXPOSED TO PUBLIC VIEW — Any premises, or any part thereof, or any
building or part thereof which may be lawfully viewed by the public from a
sidewalk, street or alleyway or from any adjoining or neighboring premises.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Open space on the premises outside of
any building therein.
EXTERMINATION — The control or elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as food or by any other recognized
and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Health Officer.
FIRE HAZARD — Any device or condition likely to cause fire and which
is so located as to endanger either persons or property; the creation,
maintenance or continuance of any physical condition through which there
exists a use, accumulation or storage of combustible or explosive material
sufficient in amount or so located or in such a manner as to put in jeopardy,
in event of ignition, either persons or property; and the obstruction to or of
fire escapes, ladders which may be used as escapes, stairways, aisles, exits,
doors, windows, passageways or halls likely, in the event of fire, to interfere
with the operations of the Fire Department or in the safe and ready egress
of the occupants.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 125
INFESTATION — The presence of any insects, rodents, vermin or other
pests.
NUISANCE — Any public annoyance known at public law or in equity
jurisprudence or as provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey or
in the ordinances of the City of Pleasantville, including the following:
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of children, whether in a building, on the premises or upon an
unoccupied lot. This includes but is not limited to abandoned wells,
shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators or
motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fences or structures; lumber,
trash, fences, debris or vegetation, such as poison ivy, oak or sumac,
which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
A.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist.
B.
125. Editor's Note: The definition of "hotel (cf motel)," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999.
§ 207-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 207-3
203:376
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or
a part thereof.
OWNER — Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others shall
have the legal title to any property with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof or shall have charge, care or control of any property
as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such
person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with
the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto to the same extent as if he were the owner.
PLUMBING — Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets,
sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed
clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any similar
supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping.
RUBBISH — Any combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, including the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, grass trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust.
SEMIPUBLIC OCCUPANCY — Churches, private schools and veterans' and
other clubs which serve the public but which are privately rather than
publicly operated.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction for
occupancy or use, including, among others, buildings, stadiums, gospel
and circus tents, reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers,
Overcrowding of a room with occupants in violation of any code of the
City of Pleasantville.
C.
Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of any code of the
City of Pleasantville.
D.
Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation of
any code of the City of Pleasantville.
E.
Unsanitary conditions or anything offensive to the senses or dangerous
to health in violation of any code of the City of Pleasantville.
F.
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the
health of human beings.
G.
H. Fire hazards.
§ 207-3 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 207-3
203:377
radio towers, water tanks, trestles, piers, wharves, open sheds, coal bins,
shelters, fences and display signs.
VENTILATION — The supply and removal of air by natural or mechanical
means to and from any space. 126
WASHROOMS — Enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs or
showers, or both, and which shall also include toilets, lavatories or fixtures
serving similar purposes.
WEATHERING — Deterioration, decay or damage caused by exposure to the
elements.
§ 207-4. Word usage.
§ 207-5. Applicability.
A. Whenever the words "accessory structure," "building," "premises,"
"room," "rooming unit" or "structure" are used in this article, they shall
be construed, unless expressly stated to the contrary, to include the
plurals of these words and as if they were followed by the words "or any
part thereof."
B. The word "shall" shall be applied retroactively as well as prospectively.
A. Compliance required. Every premises situated in the City, whether used
or intended to be used for residential, commercial, semipublic or
industrial occupancy, shall comply with the provisions of this article,
whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered or
repaired before or after the enactment of this article and irrespective of
any permits, certificates of occupancy or licenses which shall have been
issued for the use or occupancy of the building or premises and for the
construction or repair of equipment or facilities prior to the effective
date of this article. This article establishes minimum standards for the
initial and continued occupancy and use of all such buildings and does
not replace or modify standards otherwise established for the
construction, repair, alteration or use of the building, equipment or
facilities contained herein, except as provided in Subsection B.
[Amended 2-6-1989 by Ord. No. 2-1989]
B. Higher standard to prevail in case of conflict with other laws or
ordinances. In any case where the provisions of this article impose a
higher standard than set forth in any other ordinances of the City or
under the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standard as set forth
herein shall prevail, but if the provisions of this article impose a lower
standard than any other ordinances of the City or of the laws of the
State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in any such
other ordinance or law shall prevail.
126. Editor's Note: The definitions of "ventilation, mechanical" and "ventilation, natural,"
which immediately followed this definition, were deleted 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999.
§ 207-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 207-5
203:378
§ 207-6. Responsibilities and duties of owners, operators and
occupants.
C. Issuance and renewal of other permits and licenses. After the date of
enactment hereof, all licenses and permits wherever applicable shall be
issued upon compliance with this article as well as compliance with the
ordinances under which licenses and permits are granted.
D. Enforcement of and compliance with other ordinances. No license or
permit or other certification of compliance with this article shall
constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinance of the
City applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision
herein relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with
any such other provision nor any official of the City from enforcing any
such other provision.
A. Owner and operator. Owners and operators shall have all the duties and
responsibilities as prescribed herein and the regulations promulgated
pursuant thereto, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any
such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any
charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is
also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
B. Occupant. Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed herein and all the regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto, and the occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and
responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation
thereof by reason of the fact that the owner or operator is also
responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
C. Contract not to alter responsibilities. Unless expressly provided to the
contrary in this article, the respective obligations and responsibilities of
the owner and operator on one hand, and the occupant on the other,
shall not be altered or affected by any agreement or contract by and
between any of the aforesaid or between them and other parties.
D. Duties and responsibilities of owner and operator.
(1) Maintenance of exterior of premises. The exterior of the premises
and all structures thereon shall be kept free of all nuisances and
any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and other
persons utilizing the premises and free of unsanitary conditions,
and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated by
the owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator
to keep the premises free of hazards, which include but are not
limited to the following:
(a) Refuse: brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris.
(b) Natural growth: dead and dying trees and limbs or other
natural growth in rotting or deteriorating condition or storm
§ 207-5 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 207-6
203:379
damaged which constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity
thereof. Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to prevent
such conditions.
(c) Overhangings: loose and overhanging objects, such as signs,
awnings and accumulations of ice and snow, in locations above
ground level constituting a danger of falling on persons in the
vicinity thereof.
(d) Ground surface hazards or unsanitary conditions: houses,
excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, icy conditions,
uncleared snow and the excretions of pets and other animals
on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas and
other parts of the premises which are accessible to and used by
persons on the premises, and broken or damaged sidewalks or
driveways, parking lots and parking areas. All such holes,
ponding water and excavations shall be filled and repaired,
walks and steps replaced and other conditions removed where
necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with
reasonable dispatch upon their discovery. [Amended
2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
(e) Recurring accumulations of stormwater. Adequate runoff
drains shall be provided and maintained in accordance with
the requirements of the City of Pleasantville to eliminate any
such recurrent or excessive accumulation of stormwater.
(f) Sources of infestation.
(2) Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects
and damage and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
(3) Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be
maintained structurally sound, free from defects and so maintained
as to capably perform at all times the functions for which they were
designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing
equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output
of the connected equipment and shall be structurally safe, durable,
smoke-tight and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases.
(4) Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall
be provided with banisters or railings properly designed and
maintained to minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be
kept structurally sound, in good repair and free from defects.
Handrails must be gripable and installed 32 inches to 36 inches
above the nose of the tread. Guardrails must be a minimum of 36
inches high for a one story and 42 inches minimum for two story or
over 10 feet height above grade. Ballisters must have a maximum
opening of four inches. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
E. Appearance of exterior of premises and structures.
§ 207-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 207-6
203:380
(1) The exterior of the premises and the condition of all structures
shall be so maintained that their appearance shall reflect a high
level of maintenance, a standard physical condition and shall not
constitute a blighting influence on adjoining property owners nor
any element leading to the deterioration and downgrading of the
neighborhood or the reduction of property values.
(2) Where the premises are landscaped, lawns, hedges, bushes,
planter tubs or other containers shall be kept trimmed, free from
becoming overgrown and unsightly and generally in a healthy,
attractive condition. Six inches is the maximum height for grass.
[Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999; 4-4-2005 by Ord.
No. 11-2005]
(3) All signs as permitted by Ch. 290, Zoning and Land Use, and the
Building Code127 shall be maintained in a state of good repair. Any
signs which are weathered or faded, have cracked or peeling paint
or members in a state of disrepair and broken or nonoperative
electrical signs shall be repaired or shall be removed in their
entirety. In relation to stands or any other seasonal businesses that
are closed during the off-season period, their signs shall be
professionally lettered on durable material and shall be solidly
affixed in their position.
(4) All windows that are exposed to public view shall be kept clean and
free of marks and foreign substances. No storage of materials,
stock or refuse shall be permitted in window display areas exposed
to public view unless said areas are first screened from the public
view by drapes, blinds or other suitable material which renders the
windows opaque to the public view. All screening of windows shall
be maintained in a clean and attractive manner and in a state of
good repair.
(5) All store structures and stands shall be kept in good repair, painted
where required and shall not constitute a safety hazard, nuisance
or blighting influence on adjoining properties or in the
neighborhood generally. In the event that repairs to a store or stand
become necessary, such repairs shall be made with the same or
similar materials used in the construction of the structure in such a
manner as to permanently repair the deteriorated or damaged
area. Any cornice visible above a storefront shall be kept painted,
where required, and in a state of good repair.
(6) Except for "for rent" and "for sale" signs, any temporary sign or
other paper advertising material glued or otherwise attached to a
window or windows or otherwise exposed to public view shall be
removed at the expiration of the event or sale for which it was
prepared or within 60 days after its display, whichever shall take
place sooner.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 207-6 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 207-6
203:381
(7) Any awning or marquee and its accompanying structural members
which extend over any street, sidewalk or other portion of the
premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not
constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event that such
awnings or marquees are not properly maintained in accordance
with the foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting
members, be removed forthwith. In the event that said awnings or
marquees are made of cloth, plastic or of similar materials, said
cloth or plastic, where exposed to public view, shall be maintained
in good condition and shall not show evidence of excessive
weathering, discoloration, ripping, tearing or other holes. Nothing
herein shall be construed to authorize any encroachment on
streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public domain.
(8) Any laundry or clothing that is hung outdoors must be on an
appropriate clothes drying line and is limited to the rear of
buildings. [Added 4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 11-2005]
F. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure, including fences,
signs and storefronts, shall be maintained in good repair, and all
surfaces thereof shall be kept painted where necessary for purposes of
preservation and appearance. All surfaces shall be maintained free of
broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive
peeling paint or other conditions reflective of deterioration or
inadequate maintenance to the end that the property itself may be
preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and adjoining properties
and the neighborhood protected from blighting influences.
(1) All reconstruction of walls and sidings shall be of standard quality
as permitted by the City's Building Code128 and of an appearance
commensurate with the character of the properties in the same
block and on both sides of the street on which the premises fronts,
such that the materials used will not be of a kind that their
appearance under prevailing appraisal practices and standards will
depreciate the values of neighboring and adjoining premises as
aforesaid.
G. All parts of the premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition so as to prevent infestation, be free of nuisance and be free of
hazards to health, safety and fire.
(1) No obstruction from garbage, refuse or rubbish shall be permitted
on common areaways, stairways, hallways, basements or cellars,
except that rubbish or garbage stored in proper containers may be
set out for removal pursuant to the requirements of the City of
Pleasantville.
(2) Removal of garbage or rubbish shall be the duty of the owner and
operator.
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 119, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 207-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 207-6
203:382
(3) Floors, interior walls and ceilings of every structure shall be in
sound condition and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
Floors shall be considered to be sound when they are capable of
safely bearing their imposed loads free from breaks, cracks and
other hazards.
(4) Washroom and bathroom. Floors shall be surfaced with waterresistant
material and shall be kept in a dry, clean and sanitary
condition at all times and adequately ventilated according to the
requirements of the City of Pleasantville.
H. Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for accumulated
garbage or refuse. Flammable or combustible liquids or other materials
may not be stored on the premises unless they are of a type approved
for storage by the regulations of the Fire Department and the City's
Building Code, and then only in such quantities and in such fireproof
storage containers as may be prescribed by the regulations.
I. All premises shall be properly connected to and provided with electrical
power through safety insulated conductors conforming to the
requirements of the City of Pleasantville.
J. The storage in areas zoned residential of any bulky household items,
such as appliances, furniture or mattresses, except in any fully enclosed
structure or during days designated for the collection of bulky items, is
hereby prohibited. [Added 6-19-1989 by Ord. No. 12-1989]
K. Any person or persons lawfully storing tires in any area zoned
residential shall be prohibited from doing so, except in a fully enclosed
structure. [Added 6-19-1989 by Ord. No. 12-1989]
L. Duties; violations and penalties.
(1) It shall be the duty of the owner, tenant or person in possession of
any land in the City to: [Added 9-4-2002 by Ord. No. 28-2002]
(a) Maintain and keep living trees in the road right-of-way of any
road in the City in a manner so as to keep the right-of-way safe
to preserve the public health, safety and general welfare and to
remove dead or dying trees and/or branches.
(b) Maintain and keep the right-of-way free of garbage, trash and
other debris for the purpose of preserving the public health,
safety and general welfare of the public.
(c) Maintain and repair any broken and/or damaged curb and
sidewalks in front of or adjoining said land.
(d) Install curb and/or sidewalk at all street frontages where the
existing structure is undergoing a renovation. [Added
4-3-2017 by Ord. No. 2-2017]
§ 207-6 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 207-6
203:383
§ 207-7. Administrative provisions. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord.
No. 6-1999]
[1] Maintain or install a hard surface (concrete/asphalt)
driveway in accordance with § 300-51B(2)(a)[1] through
(3) and § 300-55.
(2) If any condition exists that violates this subsection, the Code
enforcement official (Inspection Official) or his/her designee, shall
notify the owner, tenant or other person in possession of the
property of such condition or conditions, in writing, by regular mail
or personal delivery. The owner, tenant or person in possession of
the property shall have 14 days from the date of such written notice
to correct the condition or conditions so noticed. The Code
enforcement inspector shall reinspect the lands in question after
the fourteen-day period has expired to determine if the condition or
conditions have been abated or remedied.
(3) If the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question
fails to abate or remediate the condition or conditions noticed by
the Inspection Official within 14 days of the notice, the following
shall occur:
(a) A complaint shall be issued by the Inspection Official for the
violation or violations of this subsection, which complaint shall
be brought before the Municipal Court of the City of
Pleasantville.
(b) If it is necessary to preserve the public health, safety or
general welfare of the City, the Inspection Official shall cause
the condition or conditions complained about to be abated or
remedied and shall certify the cost of abatement or
remediation to the Council of the City of Pleasantville.
[Amended 11-6-2017 by Ord. No. 17-2017]
(c) If the said invoice is not so paid, the amount so charged shall
be added to and become a part of the taxes next to be assessed
upon the lands in question and shall bear interest at the same
rate as municipal real estate taxes, and shall be collected and
enforced by the same officer and in the same manner as
delinquent taxes.
(d) For each day the condition or conditions complained of
continue to exist after the fourteen-day period has expired, the
tenant, owner or person in possession shall be subject to one or
more of the following: a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days
or a period of community service not to exceed 90 days for
each and every day the condition or conditions exist.
§ 207-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 207-7
203:384
A. Inspecting Official to be inspecting officer. The Inspecting Official is
hereby designated to serve as the inspecting officer hereunder, and all
inspections, regulations, enforcement and hearings on violations of the
provisions of this article, unless expressly stated to the contrary, shall
be under his direction and supervision. He may appoint or designate
such other public officials or employees of the City to perform duties as
may be necessary to the enforcement of this article, including the
making of inspections and holding of hearings.
B. When inspections are to be made. All buildings and premises subject to
this article are subject to inspections by the enforcing officer. At the
time of such inspections, all parts of the premises must be available and
accessible for such inspections, and the owner and operator are
required to provide the necessary arrangements to enable such
inspections. Such inspections shall be made during regular business
hours unless the violation is of an emergency type which requires
abatement without delay.
C. Identification and conduct of inspectors. Inspectors shall be supplied
with official identification and, upon request, shall exhibit such
identification when entering any building, rooming unit or any part of
any premises subject to this article. Inspectors shall conduct
themselves so as to avoid intentional embarrassment or inconvenience
to occupants.
D. Where entry by inspectors is refused.
(1) Penalties. Where the Inspecting Official or his agent is refused
entry or access or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner
or operator from conducting an inspection of the premises, such
person shall be in violation of this article and subject to the
penalties hereunder.
(2) Search warrant or access warrant. In addition to the provisions of
§ 207-7D(1), the Inspecting Official may, upon affidavit, apply to the
Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville, or such other court
that may have jurisdiction, for a search warrant, setting forth
factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a
reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this
article exists on the premises, and, if the Judge is satisfied as to the
matter set forth in the said affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance
of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part
of the premises on which the nuisance or violation exists. Warrant
for access may be issued by the court having jurisdiction upon
affidavit of the Inspecting Official establishing grounds thereof.
E. Procedure where violation is discovered. Except as provided in
§ 207-7E(8), where a violation of this article or the regulations
hereunder is found to exist, a written notice from the Inspecting Official
shall be served on the person or persons responsible for the correction
thereof.
§ 207-7 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 207-7
203:385
(1) Contents of notice. The notice shall specify the violation or
violations committed, what must be done to correct same, a
reasonable period of time not to exceed 30 days to start to correct
or abate the violation and a reasonable time period to complete the
correction of said violation, the right of the person served to
request a hearing and that the notice shall become an order of the
public officer five working days after service unless a hearing is
requested pursuant to § 207-7E(3).
(2) Service of notice. Notice may be served personally or by certified
mail, with postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of
the person to be served. In the case of an occupant, notice may be
posted upon the door of his dwelling unit or rooming unit. Where it
is ascertained that the owner does not reside on the premises, the
last known address shall be the address of the owner as shown in
the office of the Tax Collector. If the last known address cannot be
ascertained, the notice may be posted on the outside front entrance
of the building. The Inspecting Official shall file and provide notice
to any owner, operator or occupant of any violation at any address
other than the last known address provided hereunder if such other
address is filed with the Inspecting Official personally or by
certified mail addressed to the Inspecting Official. Service upon an
owner, operator or occupant may also be attained by service of any
notice upon a member of the family of the owner, operator or
occupant. Date of service of the notice shall be determined where
service is by mail as the day following the day of mailing for notices
to addresses within the City and as the fourth day after the day of
mailing for notices to addresses outside the City. Where the day of
service would fall upon a Sunday or other day when mail is not
ordinarily delivered, then the day of service shall be the next
regular delivery day, notwithstanding any other provision herein
contained.
(3) Notice to become an order unless hearing requested. Within five
working days of the date of service of a notice, the notice shall
constitute a final order unless any person affected by the notice
requests a hearing thereon by serving a written request within the
five-day period in person or by certified mail on the Inspecting
Official. Such request for a hearing shall set forth briefly the
grounds or reasons on which the request for a hearing is based and
the factual matters contained in the notice of violation which are to
be disputed at the hearing. The Inspecting Official, upon receipt of
the request, shall within 30 days therefrom and upon five days'
notice to the party aggrieved set the matter down for hearing.
(4) Determination at hearing. At any hearing provided hereunder the
Inspecting Official shall be vested with all the powers provided by
law to compel the attendance of witnesses and parties in interest
by issuance and service of subpoena, to require by subpoena the
production of books, records or other documents at any such
§ 207-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 207-7
203:386
hearing which may be pertinent to matters to be determined by
him and to enforce any such subpoena or secure any order for
the enforcement of any such subpoena as provided by law.
Determination shall be made within 10 days of the completion of
the hearing. The Inspecting Official shall issue an order either
incorporating the determinations and directions contained in the
notice, modifying the same or withdrawing the notice.
(5) Extensions of time. The Inspecting Official may extend the time for
correction or abatement of the violations for an additional period of
time not to exceed 30 days, except where major capital
improvements or renovations are involved, in which instance the
time for completion may be extended for a period not to exceed 90
days beyond the expiration date of the original notice.
(6) Summary abatement in emergency; notice and hearing not
required. Where the violation or condition existing on the premises
is of such a nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and
limb unless abated without delay, the Inspecting Official may either
abate the violation or condition immediately or order the owner,
operator or occupant to correct the violation or condition within a
period of time not to exceed three days, and, upon failure to do so,
the Inspecting Official shall abate the condition immediately
thereafter.
(7) Referral of violations. Any violation of any related ordinance other
than this article discovered by an inspector shall be reported to the
Inspecting Official, who shall refer the alleged violation to the
official or agency responsible for the enforcement of such other
ordinance.
(8) Where the Inspecting Official, after hearing, shall determine that
there was a violation and a notice was served upon the owner,
operator or occupant, whether or not said violation was abated
prior to the issuance of an order, if thereafter within the space of
one year there shall be a second violation by the same owner,
operator or occupant of the same provision of this article
discovered on the same premises, the offender may be prosecuted
on the second violation without the Inspecting Official first giving
notice and opportunity for a hearing to the owner, operator or
occupant by the filing of a complaint by the Inspecting Official in
the Municipal Court. Where the Inspecting Official has on two
different occasions found violations by the same owner, operator or
occupant on the same premises and has issued notices on each and
has held at least one hearing and issued an order thereon, upon
discovering a third or subsequent violation by the same owner,
operator or occupant on the same premises within the space of one
year, whether of the same sections or of any other sections of this
article, he may thereupon prosecute the offender by filing a
complaint in the Municipal Court for the said third or subsequent
violation occurring within the said period of one year without first
§ 207-7 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 207-7
203:387
§ 207-8. Violations and penalties.
§ 207-9. Existing offenses and violations not discharged.
The repeal of any provisions of any other ordinances by this article shall not
affect any action for prosecution or abatement under any such ordinance or
any notice, complaint or order issued by any officer or agency of the City
prior to the effective date hereof or concerning which any prosecution or
other steps of enforcement have been taken or are being taken within any
administrative agency or in the Municipal Court for enforcement thereof.
§ 207-10. Inspector's powers and duties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by
Ord. No. 6-1999]
providing notice and opportunity for a hearing by the Inspecting
Official.
(9) Effect of notice on owner. For the purposes of enforcement of this
article, the service of a notice on an owner, whether or not the
owner is also the operator, shall constitute notice of violations set
forth therein until said violations are abated in conformity with this
article and the other applicable ordinances of the City of
Pleasantville.
A. Fines for violations. A violator of any section or subsection of this article
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $5,000 or 90 days in jail, at
the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court, for each violation
committed hereunder. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
B. Meaning of "each violation." Each violation of a section or subsection of
this article shall constitute a separate and distinct violation
independent of any other section or subsection. Each day's failure to
comply with any such section or subsection shall constitute a separate
violation.
C. Application to officers or agents. Where the defendant is other than a
natural person or persons, Subsections A and B shall also apply to any
agent, superintendent, officer, member or partner who shall alone or
with others have charge or control of the premises.
A. Adoption of rules and regulations by Inspecting Official. The Inspecting
Official is hereby authorized and empowered to promulgate such
written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper
interpretation and administration of the provisions of this article,
provided that such rules and regulations do not conflict with this article
and conform to the general standards prescribed by this article. The
Inspecting Official shall file copies of such rules and regulations with
the City Clerk, Health Officer, City Engineer and Fire Chief and shall
make available in the Inspecting Official's office a copy for inspection by
members of the public during regular business hours. Such rules and
regulations shall have the approval of the Health Officer, City Engineer
§ 207-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 207-10
203:388
and Fire Chief, respectively, where the provisions thereof relate to
matters which are also in the jurisdiction of and supervision of each
officer. In case of conflict, the rule or regulation may be promulgated
by direction of the Mayor. Such rules and regulations shall have the
same force and effect as the provisions of this article, and the violations
thereof shall be enforced as violations of the express provisions of this
article, as herein provided.
B. Premises located in area of expected public action. The Inspecting
Official shall have the power to modify the strict enforcement of this
article where premises subject to this article are contemplated for
acquisition or are within an area where acquisition is contemplated by a
public agency having the power of eminent domain, and there is a
reasonable likelihood that said premises will be acquired within a
period of two years, and the strict enforcement of the provisions of this
article would require repairs and improvements estimated to exceed
$5,000 in cost, and there is an alternative means satisfactory to the
Inspecting Official to be used which will eliminate violations of this
article constituting hazards to the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants of the premises and persons in the immediate vicinity
thereof; provided, however, that any waiver of the provisions of this
article permitted under this subsection shall be canceled, and the
Inspecting Official shall strictly enforce the article if it shall be
ascertained subsequent to the granting of the waiver that the premises
are in fact not to be acquired for any public use or purpose.
Notwithstanding the above, no such waiver granted shall be in violation
of any laws of the State of New Jersey or any other public body.
C. Right to hearing where application denied. Upon denial of any such
application, the owner, operator or occupant may request a hearing
with the Board of Appeals for the Building, Housing and Maintenance
Codes of the City of Pleasantville, which shall be held in accordance
with procedures of said Board.
(1) Application not to constitute a defense or stay. Such application
shall not constitute a defense of any violation of this article
concerning which any proceedings are pending in the Municipal
Court when the application is filed, nor shall any variance or
modification allowed hereunder constitute a vested right against
any ordinance enacted hereinafter by the City Council compelling
strict enforcement of any provisions of this article.
(2) Record of variations or modifications granted. Where variations or
modifications of any section of this article are approved by the
Board of Appeals for the Building, Housing and Maintenance Codes
of the City of Pleasantville, or by action of any court, a written
record thereof stating the name of the applicant, the address of the
premises, the variation or, modification approved, the date of
approval and the reasons therefor, satisfying the provisions
contained herein, shall be prepared by the Inspecting Official and
filed both under the section or sections of this article to which the
§ 207-10 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 207-10
203:389
variation or modification applies and under the address of the
premises, and such files shall be available for public inspection in
the office of the Inspecting Official during regular business hours.
D. Annual review of article provisions and related activity. The Inspecting
Official shall, in the month of December of each year, review with the
Fire Chief, Health Officer, City Engineer and the City Counsel, the
procedure and operation of this article and report to the Mayor and City
Council on or before January 1:
(1) Any recommended amendment, addition or modification of
provisions of this article consonant with the field experience of the
personnel charged with enforcement.
(2) A summary of the enforcement experience, indicating number of
violations abated, number of cases processed in the Municipal
Court, number of inspections made and such other and further
pertinent information as will provide the Mayor and City Council
with an annual account of progress in securing the standards
required by this article.
(3) Any further recommendation as to how this article and the
procedure and operations thereunder can be improved.
§ 207-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 207-10
203:390
ARTICLE II
Heating of Multiple Unit Dwellings
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II of Ch. 164 of the
1982 Code]
§ 207-11. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to safeguard and protect the public health,
promote the good government, order and protection of persons and
property and preserve the safety and welfare of the inhabitants of this City.
§ 207-12. Duty to provide heat under agreement.
Whenever the owners of buildings or apartments occupied or designed to
be occupied by more than two families have agreed to supply heat, they
shall provide heat for such buildings or apartments from the first day of
October in each year to the 15th day of May of the succeeding year, so that
the temperature of said buildings or apartments where one or more persons
reside shall always be kept at 70º F. or above, between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 12:00 midnight and kept at 65º F. or above, from 12:00 midnight
to 6:00 a.m.
§ 207-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 207-11 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 207-13
203:391
Chapter 208
RENTAL HOUSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 207.
Rent control — See Ch. 215.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
§ 208-1. Program established.
There is established in the City of Pleasantville, County of Atlantic, State of
New Jersey (hereinafter the "City") a Rental Housing Registration Program
which shall be governed by the provisions and regulations described herein.
§ 208-2. Enforcing agency.
It shall be the duty and the responsibility of the Construction/Code
Department (hereinafter the "Department") of the City of Pleasantville to
enforce the provisions and regulations herein.
§ 208-3. Definitions. [Amended 6-16-2008 by Ord. No. 13-2008;
4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 9-2009; 12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 22-2015]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — The individual designated by the owner who is authorized to
perform any duty imposed by these regulations.
CITY — The City of Pleasantville, County of Atlantic, State of New Jersey.
DEPARTMENT — The Construction/Code Department of the City of
Pleasantville.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER — Grandfather, grandmother, father,
mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle or aunt.
MULTIPLE-DWELLING UNIT — Two-family dwelling units or more, and
multiple single-family dwelling units where each unit has an independent
means of egress.
PERSON — A natural person, association, corporation, firm, partnership,
trust or other legal entity.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — A house, dwelling, apartment unit,
multiple-dwelling unit, boardinghouse, rooming house or any portion of a
structure used for human habitation or occupancy and rented, leased or
otherwise occupied or offered for occupancy for consideration that includes
in-kind or other services. When any person, partnership, firm, corporation
or other entity shall by means or use of signs, circulars, business cards,
newspapers, Internet, radio, television, word of mouth or other means of
§ 207-13 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 208-3
203:392
publication or communication advertise, offer or solicit a tenancy, whether
actively or passively, a presumption shall be created that the house,
dwelling, apartment unit, multiple-dwelling unit, boardinghouse, rooming
house or structure is being operated as a residential rental unit requiring
registration under the provisions of this Chapter 208. A unit previously
occupied or offered for occupancy as a residential rental unit but presently
vacant shall continue to require annual registration under this section until
or unless the owner takes affirmative action to remove the property from
the rental market, whether by sale, personal occupancy or otherwise.
§ 208-4. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of these regulations is to establish the standards and manner
by which residential rental units within the City shall be maintained and
occupied to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 208-5. Powers and duties of Department.
§ 208-6. Registration permit and fee.
A. These regulations shall not apply to hotels, motels, boardinghouses,
rooming services and other residential units which are generally
occupied by guests or tenants for less than 30 successive days.
B. These regulations shall not apply to residential rental units owned by or
managed by the Pleasantville Housing Authority.
A. The Department shall have those powers which are necessary to carry
out the intent and purposes of these regulations, including but not
limited to the following enumerated powers:
(1) To investigate the dwelling conditions within the City to determine
which apartments, dwellings or other structures have residential
rental units.
(2) To investigate those residential rental units to ensure compliance
with these regulations and Chapter 207, Property Maintenance, of
this Code.
(3) To delegate any of the functions and powers of the Department to
employees of the City as the Construction Official shall designate.
B. The Housing Inspector is authorized to enter any structure at
reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections and performing
duties under these regulations. If entry is refused, or not obtained, the
Housing Inspector may apply for an order from the Municipal Court or
any other court of competent jurisdiction authorizing entry. [Amended
6-16-2008 by Ord. No. 13-2008]
A. Each residential rental unit shall be registered annually on or before
March 31 of each year. Units newly placed on the rental market during
the registration term shall be registered prior to occupancy or within 14
§ 208-3 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 208-6
203:393
days of the date the unit is offered for rental, whichever occurs first.
The term of the registration shall be from January 1 to December 31
of each year. The registration fee shall be $50 per year. Units not
registered by March 31 shall pay a late fee of $25. Likewise, new rental
units not registered within 30 days of the date for registration, as set
forth above, shall pay a late fee of $25. [Amended 4-20-2009 by Ord.
No. 9-2009; 12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 22-2015]
B. Notwithstanding the fees and schedule established in Subsection A
above, the registration term for 2007 shall commence on April 1, 2007
and end on December 31, 2007. The annual registration fee for this
nine-month period in 2007 shall be $35 if applied for before May 31,
2007, and $55 if applied for thereafter. This reduction in fees and
altered schedule shall apply to calendar year 2007 only and such
adjustments are resulting from the fact that this chapter has been
adopted in the first quarter of 2007.
C. No residential rental unit shall be occupied unless it is registered with
the City and is occupied in compliance with these regulations and
Chapter 207, Property Maintenance, of this Code.
D. No registration permit shall be issued until the unit has been inspected
and found to be in compliance with these regulations and the Property
Maintenance Code. An inspection which results in a satisfactory rating
shall be valid for one year from the inspection date. However, the
Housing Inspector may reinspect any residential rental unit during the
year when he has reasonable grounds to believe that the unit is no
longer in compliance with these regulations.
E. The registration fee shall include the initial inspection and one
reinspection if required and the annual registration permit. Any other
reinspection required by the Housing Inspector, including cancellations
during the year, shall result in an additional charge of $25 per
inspection. If the landlord cancels the inspection more than once, it will
result in an additional fee.
F. Notwithstanding the above, if a residential rental unit has been the
subject of an occupancy inspection, and if such occupancy inspection
resulted in the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such unit, and
if such inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy has
occurred within the 60 days immediately preceding the filing of the
application for a registration permit, then, in that event, no inspection
is required. The application must still be filed and the permit fee must
be paid; however, the initial inspection that accompanies the
application for a registration permit shall be waived.
G. Any owner or operator of a residential rental unit subject to registration
under this chapter who does not obtain such registration within 60 days
of the time for registration as set forth in § 208-6A above shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in § 208-12. [Added 4-20-2009 by
Ord. No. 9-2009; 12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 22-2015]
§ 208-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 208-7
203:394
§ 208-7. Application information.
At the time that a residential rental unit is registered, an application shall
be completed which contains the following information:
§ 208-8. Designation of person to receive notice and correct
violations.
Each person who owns a residential rental unit within the City shall
designate a natural person or agent who resides within the county to
receive the notice of violation and to correct any violations of these
regulations or Chapter 207, Property Maintenance, of this Code. The
natural person or agent shall be named in the application when it is filed.
§ 208-9. Inspections.
Each residential rental unit shall be inspected annually. After completion of
the application and payment of the registration fee, the Housing Inspector
shall inspect the residential rental unit to ensure compliance with these
regulations and the Property Maintenance Code. The Housing Inspector
shall make a report promptly after each inspection.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the record owner or
owners of the premises. In the case of a partnership, this information
shall be provided for all general partners. In the case of a corporation,
this information shall be provided for the registered agent and all
corporate officers.
B. The address of the residential rental unit, the exact number of all
separate units at that address and the designation for each unit.
C. The exact number of sleeping rooms contained within each residential
unit and the total square footage for each sleeping room.
D. The exact number of people who occupy each residential unit and their
names, and in the case of children under 18 years of age, their ages
shall also be provided. If the residential rental unit is unoccupied at the
time that the application is completed, this information shall be
provided as soon as the unit is occupied.
E. The Department has the authority to amend the application to include
additional required information.
F. Subject to the provisions of § 208-10, if any of the information set forth
on the application in response to Subsections A through E above or to
§ 208-8 should change during the term of the registration, the owner
shall provide the updated and amended information to the City within
20 days of the change. [Added 4-20-2009 by Ord. No. 9-2009;
amended 12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 22-2015]
A. After the initial annual inspection, if the residential rental unit does not
comply with the aforesaid regulations, a notice of violation shall be
§ 208-7 POOL AND BILLIARD PARLORS § 208-9
203:395
§ 208-10. Tenants and leases.
If the residential rental unit is occupied at the time it is registered with
the Department, the owner or agent shall provide the Department with a
list containing the names of all occupants of the premises for the term of
the rental period. If the residential rental unit is unoccupied, the list shall
be provided as soon as the unit is occupied. A copy of this list shall be
maintained on the premises for inspection upon request. If the occupants
change during the year, a new list shall be submitted to the Department
within 20 days of the change.
served on the owner or agent in the form and manner prescribed by
the Property Maintenance Code. The Housing Inspector shall reinspect
the residential rental unit after the notice of violation has been served
and the time has expired for correction of the violations, or such time
as the owner advises the Housing Inspector that the corrections have
been made and that the owner is requesting a reinspection.
B. If violations still exist, any further reinspections of the residential rental
unit shall be at the discretion of the Housing Inspector, and a complaint
may be filed with the Municipal Court for enforcement of these
regulations and the Property Maintenance Code.
C. The registration permit shall not be issued until all violations have been
corrected.
D. If the residential rental unit is damaged by fire or other cause, the
reinspection shall be required to ensure compliance with these
regulations and the Property Maintenance Code.
E. All multiple dwellings including those occupied by the owner shall be
inspected.
A. Residential rental units shall not be occupied by more people than
permitted by the minimum area requirements. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor area. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
occupant thereof.
B. It shall be unlawful for an owner to knowingly rent and a tenant to
occupy a residential rental unit with occupants that exceed the number
allowed on the premises based on the available sleeping rooms and
square footage.
C. The lease for each residential rental unit shall contain language in it
which states that the lease is subject to these regulations. This
requirement shall apply to all leases executed after the adoption of
these regulations by the City.
D. The owner or agent of a residential rental unit shall inform the tenants
of these regulations, and shall require that each adult tenant sign a
§ 208-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 208-10
203:396
§ 208-11. Responsibility for tenant supervision; eviction.
Owners of residential rental units shall be held to standards of responsibility
in the selection of tenants and the supervision of rental properties. If
during any twelve-month period on three separate occasions, tenants of a
residential rental unit are convicted of criminal offenses, disorderly persons
offenses, or ordinance violations involving noisy or tumultuous behavior for
activities on the property or attributed to the occupancy of the property, the
owner is responsible for a violation of these regulations if he has not taken
legal action to evict the tenants.
§ 208-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-20-2009 by Ord. No.
9-2009; 12-7-2015 by Ord. No. 22-2015]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who provides
false information, forged or falsified documents or improperly reproduces
registration applications or registrations shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days for a first offense. For a second
or subsequent offense, the minimum fine shall be $250. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each day during which a violation occurs or
continues and for each unit subject to registration.
Chapter 215
RENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoke detectors in multiple dwellings — See
Ch. 80, Art. III.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
Chapter 219
SALE OF PUBLIC LANDS
§ 219-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to fix fees and establish procedures for the
orderly administration of city processes when private individuals solicit the
city to place municipally owned real estate, not needed for public use, up
for sale pursuant to the New Jersey Local Lands and Buildings Law.129 The
copy of the receipt form acknowledging that the tenant has received a
copy of these regulations. A copy of this document shall be filed with
the Department. This requirement applies to all existing tenants and
future tenants.
129. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:12-1 et seq.
§ 208-10 RENT CONTROL § 219-1
215:397
further purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the city is compensated
for its time and costs when private individuals petition the city to place up
for sale municipally owned property, not needed for public use, pursuant
to the provisions of the New Jersey Local Lands and Buildings Law, and
specifically N.J.S.A. 40A:12-13.
§ 219-2. Required form; fee.130
Any individual who seeks to have the City of Pleasantville place any cityowned
property, not needed for public use, up for sale pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:12-13 shall first obtain from the City Tax
Assessor's office a bid for city property form. The individual shall then
complete this form and return it to the Tax Assessor's office, together with
a fee in the amount of $100. The disposition of the fee shall be governed
exclusively by the provisions of § 219-3 below.
§ 219-3. Disposition of fee.131
When the municipally owned property sought to be sold is actually placed
up for sale by the city, disposition of the bid form fee shall be as follows:
A. In the event that the individual who paid the bid form fee does not bid,
and/or there are no other bidders, the bid form fee of $100 shall be
forfeited to the city to cover the costs incurred by the city in preparing
the necessary paperwork and in taking the necessary steps to place the
property up for sale.
B. In the event that the individual who paid the bid form fee bids on the
property and there are no other bidders, and said individual is
successful in purchasing the property, the initial bid form fee shall be
applied, at the time of settlement, to the final purchase price and/or any
other settlement costs. At the time of the actual bid, however, the bid
form fee shall not be applied against the required down payment to
ensure that all bidders will be equally treated at auction.
C. In the further event that an individual other than the person who has
paid the bid form fee is successful in purchasing the property, the bid
form fee of $100 will be returned by the Tax Assessor, thereafter, to the
individual who has paid that initial fee to the Tax Assessor.
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 219-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 219-3
219:398
Chapter 223
SALES, SPECIAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dealers in secondhand building
materials — See Ch. 105, Art. I.
Junk dealers and collectors — See Ch. 151.
Mercantile licensing — See Ch. 155, Art. I.
Transient merchants — See Ch. 195, Art. III.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 231.
Temporary signs — See Ch. 243.
§ 219-3 SALES, SPECIAL § 219-3
223:399

ARTICLE I
Garage and Yard Sales
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Ch. 113 of the 1982
Code]
§ 223-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALES — Include all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale,"
"attic sale," "rummage sale" or "flea market sale," or any similar casual sale
of tangible personal property, which is advertised by any means whereby
the public at large is or can be made aware of said sale.
GOODS — Include any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder and which is
owned by the licensee.
OCCUPANT — The owner or lessee of the premises.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations and joint ventures.
§ 223-2. Licenses and fees; number restricted.
§ 223-3. Information filed with Licensing Officer.
The information to be filed with the Licensing Officer pursuant to this article
shall be as follows:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the City
of Pleasantville without first filing with the Licensing Officer the
information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such Licensing
Officer132 a license so to do, to be known as a "garage sale license." The
fee for such license shall be and the same is hereby fixed at $5.133
B. Only two such licenses shall be issued to any one person within a
twelve-month period, and said license is only valid for a period of 30
days after the date of issuance, and no such license shall be issued for
more than four consecutive days; provided, however, that, for the
purposes of this section, all persons occupying the premises to which a
license has been issued shall be considered recipients of this license as
if they had received the license personally.
A. The name of the person, joint venture, firm, group, corporation,
association or organization conducting said sale.
B. The name of the owner or lessee of the property on which said sale is to
be conducted.
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 155, Licensing, Art. I.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 223-1 SALES, SPECIAL § 223-3
223:401
§ 223-4. Licensee's responsibilities.
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on
the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such persons shall
permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles
to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such
premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any member
of the Police or Fire Department of the City of Pleasantville in order to
maintain the public health, safety and welfare. All licensed premises shall
at all times be subject to such reasonable rules as may be made from time
to time by the Council of the City of Pleasantville and shall be subject to
inspection at all times by the Licensing Officer and Chief of Police or any
of their agents or any other duly authorized representative of the City of
Pleasantville.
§ 223-5. Notification of date of sale.
It is the responsibility of the applicant to notify the Chief of Police of the
date(s) of the sale.
§ 223-6. Signs.134
No signs for advertising or directing customers are to be posted on any
place other than the premises of the applicant. The sign is not to exceed two
feet by three feet in size and cannot be placed on the premises earlier than
one week prior to the sale and must be removed within 24 hours after the
sale has terminated.
§ 223-7. Sale hours restricted.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. only.
§ 223-8. Labeling and disinfecting mattresses and sofas.
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer for sale mattresses, bedsprings,
cots, lounges and sofas in any garage sale authorized under this article
without first complying with the appropriate section of N.J.S.A. 26:10-1
C. The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
D. The number of days of the sale.
E. The date and nature of any past sale.
F. A sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be so.
134. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 243, Signs, Temporary.
§ 223-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 223-8
223:402
through 26:10-18, with respect to the labeling, sterilizing and disinfecting
of said mattresses, bedsprings, cots, lounges and sofas.
§ 223-9. Persons and sales excepted.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 223-10. Licensing Officer's duties.
This article shall be enforced by the Licensing Officer. It shall be the
duty of the Licensing Officer to investigate any violations of this article
coming to his attention, whether by complaint or arising from his own
personal knowledge, and, if a violation is found to exist, he shall prosecute
a complaint before the local Municipal Court pursuant to the provisions
of this article. It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the City of
Pleasantville to bring to the attention of the Licensing Officer for further
investigation any violations of this article of which the Police Department
becomes aware during the course of its normal duties.
§ 223-11. Violations and penalties.136
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days
and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other business
establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would be
permitted by the zoning regulations of the City of Pleasantville135 or
under the protection of the nonconforming use section thereof, or any
other sale conducted by a manufacturer, dealer or vendor, which sale
would be conducted from properly zoned premises and not otherwise
prohibited in the Code of the City of Pleasantville.
E. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization; provided, however, that the
burden of establishing the exemption under this subsection shall be on
the organization or institution claiming such exemption.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 290, Zoning and Land Use.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 223-8 SALES, SPECIAL § 223-11
223:403
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punishable as such.
§ 223-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 223-11
223:404
ARTICLE II
Closeout Sales
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Ch. 176 of the 1982
Code]
§ 223-12. License required.
No person shall hold out or represent to the public or conduct or permit
to be sold any goods, wares or merchandise in the city under the
representation, advertisement of holding out by any means, directly or by
implication, as forced sales at reduced prices or as insurance, bankruptcy,
mortgage foreclosure, insolvency, removal, loss or expiration of lease or
closing-out sales or as assignees', receivers' or trustees' sales or as sales
of goods distrained or as sales of goods damaged by fire, smoke or water,
without first procuring a license therefor from the Licensing Officer of the
city.
§ 223-13. Exemptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any sale which is to be held
under a judicial order or judgment or a writ issuing out of any court or to
enforce any lawful lien or power of sale, whether by judicial process or not
or by a licensed auctioneer.
§ 223-14. Prohibited sales.
The advertising, holding out or representing to the public of any sale as
being of the character of the sales referred to in § 223-12 of this article
which are not in fact sales of such character is hereby prohibited.
§ 223-15. License application.
§ 223-16. License issuance; fees, transferability; time interval
between sales.
A. Written application shall be made for each sale of the kind or character
referred to in § 223-12 of this article which shall describe the kind or
character of the proposed sale to be advertised, held out or represented
to the public or conducted by the applicant and the name or names of
the person or persons conducting such sale.
B. The application shall contain or have annexed thereto a full and
complete inventory or list of the goods, wares and merchandise to be
sold at such sale, together with the wholesale price thereof and the
price or prices at which it is proposed to sell said goods, wares and
merchandise.
C. The application shall be duly verified by the oath of the applicant as
provided by law.
§ 223-12 SALES, SPECIAL § 223-16
223:405
§ 223-17. License revocation.
§ 223-18. Licensee's duties; Licensing Officer's investigative
powers.
A. Upon the approval of the application by the Licensing Officer, he shall
issue a license to the applicant authorizing the holding of the sale of the
kind and character applied for upon the payment of the following
license fees:
Duration of Sale Fee
Not exceeding 10 days $100
Not exceeding 20 days $200
Not exceeding 30 days $300
B. The license shall not be transferable.
C. Any person who has held a sale regulated by this article shall not be
granted a license within one year from the date of issuance of a
previous license.
A. Any license granted hereunder may be revoked by the Licensing Officer
for any of the following causes:
(1) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made or contained
in the written application for license or in connection with the sale
of said goods, wares and merchandise.
(2) Any violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(3) Conviction of the licensee of any misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude.
(4) Conducting the sale of goods, wares and merchandise in a manner
contrary to law and this article.
B. Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
specifying the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing,
personally or by mail with postage prepaid to the licensee at his last
known post office address at least five days prior to the date fixed for
hearing. The decision of the Licensing Officer shall be final and binding.
A. No licensee shall sell, offer or expose for sale at any such sale of goods,
wares and merchandise any substitutions, additions or replenishment
of goods, wares and merchandise in substitution, addition or
replenishment of the said goods, wares and merchandise listed and
stated upon the inventory and in the application.
B. The license shall keep full and accurate records of the sale of said
goods, wares and merchandise, including articles sold and prices at
which sold, dates of sale and other pertinent information.
§ 223-16 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 223-18
223:406
§ 223-19. Violations and penalties.137
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
C. The Licensing Officer may, in his discretion, check the articles upon sale
with the goods, wares and merchandise as listed in the inventory,
including quantity and prices, and the licensee shall render every
possible assistance and aid to him therein.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 223-18 SALES, SPECIAL § 223-19
223:407
Chapter 227
SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction contractors — See Ch. 121.
Street openings — See Ch. 255, Art. II.
Installation of water mains — See Ch. 285,
Art. I.
§ 227-1. Permit required for sand and gravel removal.
No person shall remove or excavate sand or gravel from any lands within
the city limits without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Council.
§ 227-2. Permit application; contents.
§ 227-3. Permit fee; filing of application; return of fee.
§ 227-4. Violations and penalties.138
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
A. Application for such permit shall be in writing and signed and sworn to
by the person making application therefor.
B. Each application shall set forth:
(1) Location and size of the land from which it is proposed to remove
the sand or gravel or make the excavation.
(2) Name or names of the owner or owners of the land.
(3) Purpose for which the removal or excavation is to be made.
(4) Estimated number of cubic feet of sand or gravel to be removed.
(5) What means or method of removal is to be employed so that the
removal and excavation shall not constitute a public nuisance.
A. Each application for a permit shall be:
(1) Accompanied by payment of the permit fee of $25.
(2) Filed with the City Clerk.
B. If the Council shall refuse to issue the permit, the permit fee shall be
returned to the applicant.
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 223-19 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 227-4
227:408
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 231
SECONDHAND GOODS, PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Secondhand building materials — See Ch.
105, Art. I.
Junk dealers and collectors — See Ch. 151.
Mercantile licensing — See Ch. 155, Art. I.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 195.
Special sales — See Ch. 223.
§ 231-1. Purpose.
§ 231-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed herein. Words used in
the present tense shall include the future, words in the plural number shall
include the singular number and words in the singular number shall include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Acceptable forms of identification
include: a current valid New Jersey driver's license or identification card
issued by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, a current valid photo
driver's license issued by another U.S. state, other verifiable United States
government issued photo identification with address, or valid United States
passport and evidence of current address. All of the above listed
identification procedures require the dealer to capture/record evidence of
the person's current address.
ARTICLE — Any article of merchandise, including any portion of such
article, whether a distinct part thereof or not, including every part thereof
whether separable or not, and also including material for manufacture, and
as so defined in N.J.S.A. 51:6-1, which may be amended from time to time. If
the definitions in this article and state statute are or become different, this
A. The City Council hereby finds that there is a need to regulate and
control the buying and selling of gold, silver, and precious or
semiprecious gems in order to prevent the easy disposal of items which
have been unlawfully obtained as the result of crime, while protecting
and recognizing the legitimate businesses which are engaged in the
buying and selling of gold, silver and precious or semiprecious gems.
B. This chapter, whenever possible, shall be read together with § 155-1 et
seq.
§ 227-4 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 231-2
227:409
chapter shall use the more expansive definition to ensure the goals of this
chapter are fostered.
DATABASE — A computerized, Internet-capable database with hardware
and software compliant with standards set by the Chief of Police.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, corporation, or other entity, whether
permanent or itinerant, who on one or more occasions (through any means)
buys or sells, receives for pawn or otherwise exchanges or trades any
property as described in Appendix I of this chapter,139 and includes anyone
advertising the purchase, sale or receipt for pawn of any of the
aforementioned items.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the City of Pleasantville or his
designee/representative.
GIFT CARD — A restricted monetary equivalent or scrip that is issued by
retailers or banks to be used as an alternative to a nonmonetary gift.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business conducted intermittently within the
City of Pleasantville or at varying locations.
PAWN — A bailment of personal property as security for any debt or
engagement redeemable upon certain terms and with the implied power of
sale or default.
PERSON — Any individual natural person, partnership, joint venture,
business, society, associate, club, trustee, trust, corporation, or
unincorporated group, or an officer, agent, employee, servant, factor or any
form of personal representative of any thereof, in any capacity, acting for
self or on behalf of another.
PRECIOUS METALS — Comprised of gold, silver, sterling, platinum and/or
their alloys as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq. and/
or N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq.; gems, gemstones, coins and all forms of jewelry
herein contained.
PUBLIC — Individuals and other retail sellers, not to include businesses
engaged primarily in wholesale transactions.
PURCHASE — The exchange of money or other consideration for the
pledge, sale, conveyance or trade of any property described in Appendix I
of this chapter.140
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted by a dealer
in which property described in Appendix I of this chapter141 is purchased,
pawned or exchanged from or with the public, as that term is defined in this
section.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Any article previously sold, acquired, exchanged,
conveyed, traded or otherwise formerly owned, including but not limited
to scrap gold, old gold, silver, jewelry, home electronics/audio and visual
139. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
140. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
141. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 231-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 231-2
227:410
equipment, musical instruments, telephones and telephonic equipment,
scales, computers, computer hardware and software, typewriters, word
processors, scanners, sporting goods of all kinds, antiques, platinum, all
other precious metals, tools of all kinds, televisions, DVRs, GPS,
camcorders, car stereos, gift cards, furniture, clothing, other valuable
articles, or as listed in Appendix I.142
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer who has not been in any retail business
continuously for at least six months at that address in the municipality
where the dealer is required to register. The term "transient buyer" will
also include a dealer who intends to close out or discontinue all retail
business in the City of Pleasantville within six months; or as so defined in
N.J.S.A. 51:6A-5 and N.J.A.C. 13:47C-1.1. Vendors doing business during a
community event sponsored/sanctioned by the City of Pleasantville shall not
be considered a transient buyer.
§ 231-3. License required.
No person shall engage in a regulated activity, as defined above, without
having first obtained a license therefor from the City Clerk, after the
application for said license has been approved by the City Council, which
license shall bear a number issued by the City Clerk and shall be
prominently displayed within the licensed premises. A separate dealer's
license shall be required for each location, place, or premises used for the
conduct of such business and shall also be licensed as described herein.
§ 231-4. License fee.
At the time of filing the application for a license, a license fee shall be
paid for the initial license for the premises where the activity is to be
conducted as set forth in Chapter 155, Licensing. Thereafter, the annual
renewal fee for the license shall be as set forth in Chapter 155. The license
fee is established to cover the cost of the Police Department's internal
investigation and administrative processing of each application.
§ 231-5. Application for a business license; investigation;
suspension and revocation.
§ 231-6. License renewal; nontransferability.
A. Any application for a business license shall be in accordance with
§ 155-1 et seq.
B. Any investigation performed for any applicant shall be in accordance
with § 155-1 et seq.
C. Any revocation or suspension of a license shall be in accordance with
§ 155-1 et. seq.
142. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 231-2 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 231-6
227:411
§ 231-7. Dealer's responsibilities, requirements, and recordkeeping.
Every dealer within the City of Pleasantville shall, upon purchasing,
receiving for pawn, or receiving for consignment, any property, as described
in Appendix I,143 from the public, as this term is defined in § 231-2, shall be
required to:
A. A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be
transferable and shall terminate on December 31 of the year in which
said license is issued, unless it is properly renewed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
B. On or about November 1 of each year, the Chief of Police shall make
available a renewal application for each licensed dealer under this
chapter. Upon submission of the renewal application, the license will be
renewed unless the dealer has violated provisions of this chapter. In
such case, the Chief of Police will notify the dealer, who may request a
hearing as described in § 231-5.
A. Record using a unique transaction number the name, address and
telephone number of the seller or sellers; the time and date of the
transaction; the net weight in terms of pounds troy, pennyweight (troy)
or kilograms/grams of the precious metals; fineness in terms of karats
for gold; and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., and
any property containing a serial number.
B. Document, through use of an electronic database software system as
designated by the Chief of Police, the information listed in § 231-7C(1)
through (6). These records shall be subject to the inspection of any
sworn law enforcement officer acting in the performance of their
duties. The dealer shall be responsible for purchasing and maintaining
the electronic database software chosen.
C. Through the use of applicably required computer equipment, and using
the electronic format approved by the Chief of Police, enter all
transactions into the electronic database by close of business on the
date that the transaction occurred, including the following information:
[Amended 3-16-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
(1) The name, address, date of birth, telephone number, and
governmental identification number of the seller.
(2) A full description of property sold or pawned by the seller, including
but not limited to, marks, numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials,
monograms and serial numbers, face value and identifying
numbers of gift cards.
(3) The price paid for the property.
143. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 231-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 231-7
227:412
(4) The entry must include the name of the licensee/employee who
made the transaction so as to readily identify that individual.
(5) A color photograph or color image of the seller's presented
acceptable identification scanned into the transaction record.
(6) A color photograph or color image of all property sold scanned into
the transaction record. When photographing or imaging, all
property must be positioned in a manner that makes it readily and
easily identifiable.
D. Any article purchased or powered by the dealer cannot be sold or
disposed of and shall be made available for inspection by any sworn law
enforcement officer in the performance of their duties for a period of 10
days from the date the information required above is received by the
Chief of Police in the prescribed electronic format. The property shall
remain on premises in the same condition as when purchased and shall
not be changed, modified, melted or disposed of by the dealer until the
ten-day period has expired. If the property is such that it would create a
hardship on the dealer by holding the property for such period, the
dealer may present the property to the Chief of Police or his designee in
order that it may be photographed and, if deemed necessary by the
Chief of Police, an investigation be implemented. The Chief of Police has
the authority to grant the dealer a waiver of the requirement under this
section. [Amended 3-16-2014 by Ord. No. 4-2015]
E. In the event of a database failure or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police. In the event that paper
forms are used, the dealer is responsible to enter all required
transaction information described in § 231-7C (1) through (6) into the
database as soon as possible upon the dealer's equipment being
repaired or replaced, or the database coming back into service. Failure
by the dealer to properly maintain computer equipment in a reasonable
fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace faulty computer equipment,
may result in the dealer being cited for a violation of this chapter and
may result in the revocation of the dealer's license under § 231-5D of
this chapter.
F. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Pleasantville Police Department or any other sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duties to
examine any database, book, ledger, or any other record on the
premises relating to the purchase of property from the public.
Pleasantville law enforcement officers are empowered to take
possession of any property known by a law enforcement officer or
official to be missing or to have been stolen, or where the officer or
official has probable cause to believe the article is missing or stolen.
Mutual receipts will be provided to the dealer and the police for any
property seized by the Pleasantville Police Department.
§ 231-7 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 231-7
227:413
§ 231-8. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to purchases made by dealers from wholesalers
or other legitimate suppliers, but shall only apply to those purchases made
from the public which includes other retail sellers as defined in § 231-2.
The dealer shall keep records of all wholesale purchases for a period
of six months from the date of such purchase, which records shall be
opened to investigation by the Pleasantville Police Department or any sworn
law enforcement officer in the performance of their duties. This chapter
specifically does not apply to yard sales and garages sales by residents
conducting such sales from their home residence a maximum of six times
per year.
§ 231-9. Purchases from minors prohibited.
No dealer within the City of Pleasantville shall purchase any property as
defined in Appendix I144 from any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 231-10. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter or § 155-1 et seq. shall be subject to penalties
in accordance with § 155-1 et seq.
Chapter 235
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer lines in private campgrounds — See Ch.
115.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Sewage disposal in mobile home parks — See
Ch. 166.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 251.
Water — See Ch. 285.
G. It shall be the duty of every dealer to maintain in working condition the
software and hardware required to properly utilize the electronic
database software system designated and approved by the Chief of
Police for documenting transactions consistent with this Section.
Payment of all required fees for any such hardware, software, licensing,
maintenance and repair are the sole responsibility of the dealer.
144. Editor's Note: Appendix I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 231-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 231-10
227:414
Part 1
[Adopted 6-7-1982 By Ord.S Newo.e 1r 1S-e1r9v8ic2e Ass Part 1 Of Ch. 181 Of The
1982 Code]
ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections; Usage; Enforcement
[Amended 6-21-1982 by Ord. No. 15-1982; 10-4-1982 by Ord. No.
24-1982; 5-6-1985 by Ord. No. 6-1985]
§ 235-1. Definitions.
A. Definitions. Unless the contents specifically indicate otherwise, the
meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure for five days at 20º C., expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l).
BUILDING — Any structure contained within exterior walls and from
which sewage originates.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of the
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it
to the building sewer beginning five feet outside the inner face of the
building wall and shall mean and include a house sewer or a private
sewer.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or to an existing extension from a public sewer when
available.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — The measure of the organic
matter present in the sewage as determined by the dichromatic reflux
method and expressed in milligrams per liter.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The amount of chlorine expressed in
milligrams per liter or parts per million by weight, which will complete
the normal reactions with all chemicals and materials in the sewage
leaving an excess of 0.1 milligram per liter (1.1 parts per million
by weight), after 30 minutes' contact time at room temperature of
approximately 70º F.
CITY — The City of Pleasantville, in the County of Atlantic, State of New
Jersey.
COMBINED SEWAGE — A mixture of rainfall runoff and sewage.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any system of
condensation, air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration or other but which
shall be free from odor and oil. It shall contain no polluting substances
which would produce BOD or suspended solids in excess of 10 parts per
million by weight.
§ 235-1 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-1
227:415
DIRECTOR OF REVENUE AND FINANCE — The Director of the
Department of Finance of the city.
ENGINEER — The City Engineer of the City of Pleasantville or his
authorized representative.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat or grease in a physical state which will
separate by gravity from wastewater through treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable
oil if it is properly pretreated in such a manner that the discharged
wastewater does not interfere with the wastewater facilities.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GREASE or FATS — Any material which is extractable from an acidified
sample of a waste by hexane or other designated solvent.
HEAVY METALS — The electronegative metals with a density greater
than five grams per cubic centimeter, including but not limited to
lead, chromium, mercury, nickel and zinc, plus the nonmetallic element
arsenic.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trades or businesses, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
MAJOR INDUSTRY — An industrial user of municipal wastewater
facilities that has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per work day;
has in its waste toxic substances injurious to the treatment process
or sewer system; is found by the USEPA, NJDEP or municipality to
have a significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on municipal wastewater facilities or upon the
quality of effluent from these wastewater facilities; or has a detrimental
effect upon human health or welfare.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
NJDEP — The State of New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection or successor agency.
NONSTATIONARY SOURCE — Any mobile vehicle, piece of equipment
or appurtenance thereof that is utilized in the discharge of waste or
wastewater to any sewer or natural outlet. The term includes but is not
limited to tank trucks and dump trucks, as well as associated equipment
and appurtenances. Fixed, permanent or semipermanent equipment is
excluded from the category of nonstationary source and is regulated
elsewhere in this article.
NORMAL SEWAGE — Sewage shall be regarded as normal for the city
if analyses show, by weight, a daily average of not more than 180 parts
per million of suspended solids, not more than 210 parts per million of
BOD and not more than 25 parts per million of chlorine demand each.
One part per million equals 8.34 pounds per million gallons.
§ 235-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-1
227:416
NYPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
OTHER WASTES — Garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings,
bark, sand, lime, cinders, ashes, offal, oil, tar, dye stuffs, acids,
chemicals and all other discarded matter which is not sewage or
industrial waste.
PART — As used in relation to the term "sewer system," includes all
lateral sewers or all combined sewers or all branch sewers or all
interceptor sewers or all trunk sewers and any sewage treatment and
disposal works, each part with necessary appurtenances, including
sewage pumping stations.
PERSON, ENTERPRISE, ESTABLISHMENT or OWNER — Any
individual, firm, company, partnership, association, society, corporation
(public or private) or group, including heirs, executors, administrators
or assigns, using the sewage works or sewerage system.
PETROLEUM HYDROCARBONS — That portion of the total extractable
grease or fats which is not retained on an activated alumina absorption
column after elutriating with hexane.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING CODE — The Plumbing Code of the city, as amended.
PLUMBING SUBCODE OFFICIAL — The Plumbing Subcode Official of
the city.
PRETREATMENT — Treatment given to waste from other than
residential users, prior to its direct or indirect discharge to municipal
wastewater facilities to remove illegal and/or undesirable waste
constituents or to reduce the strength of waste prior to discharge to
owned wastewater facilities.
PRIVATE SEWER — A building sewer and connection or other not
controlled by the City of Pleasantville or other public authority or
municipality.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The garbage that has been
shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under
the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no
particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and which is controlled by the City of Pleasantville.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Sewage discharging from the sanitary
conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels),
office buildings, factories or institutions, free from storm- and surface
waters and industrial wastes.
SEWAGE — The water-carried human or animal wastes from
residences, buildings, industrial establishments or other places,
together with such groundwater infiltration and surface water as may
§ 235-1 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-1
227:417
be present. The admixture with "sewage," as above defined, of
industrial waste or other wastes as hereinafter defined also shall be
considered sewage within the meaning of this article.
SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITIES — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage and to which storm-,
surface and ground water are not intentionally admitted.
SEWER SYSTEM, SEWAGE WORKS or SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All
sewer pipes and other appurtenances which are used or useful, in
whole or part, in connection with the collection, treatment or disposal
of sewage, industrial waste and other wastes and which are either
owned or operated or maintained or used by the City of Pleasantville,
individually or jointly with other municipalities, including sewage
pumping stations and sewage treatment and disposal works.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, excluding rainfall, runoff sewage or
industrial waste, which in concentration of any given constituent or
in quantity of flow exceed, for any period of duration longer than
15 minutes, more than five times the average twenty-four-hour
concentration or flows during normal operation.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A pipe or conduit which carries
storm- and surface water and drainage but which excludes sewage
and industrial wastes. It may, however, carry cooling water or other
unpolluted waters.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Director of the Water
Pollution Control Department of the city.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Those solids that either float on the surface
of or in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtration.
UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTE — Any water or waste containing
none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali;
phenols or other substances imparting taste or odor in receiving
waters; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state or
solution; and noxious or odorous gases. It shall contain not more than
10,000 parts per million by weight of dissolved solids, of which not
more than 2,500 parts per million shall be a chloride, with permissible
volumes subject to review by the engineer, and not more than 10 parts
per million each of suspended solids and BOD. The color shall not
exceed 50 parts per million.
USEPA — The United States Environmental Protection Agency or
successor agency.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
B. Usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
§ 235-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-2
227:418
§ 235-2. Use of public sewer required; general restrictions.
§ 235-3. Building sewers and connections.
A. It shall be unlawful to place, deposit or permit the deposit in an
unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city or in
any area under the jurisdiction of said city any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or
in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any sanitary sewage,
industrial wastes or other polluted waters, except where suitable
treatment has been provided in accordance with the subsequent
provisions of this article and the Public Health Law.
C. The discharge of industrial cooling water to the city's sewer system is
not permitted, except by specific written approval by the engineer.
D. It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault,
septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal
of sewage when the building on such property is situated within 200
feet of the public sewer. Should the building be beyond 200 feet and the
water table will permit, the installation of an acceptable septic tank
system may be permitted upon approval by the office of the Atlantic
County Board of Health.
E. The owner of any house, building or property which is used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other similar purpose within the
city and which abuts on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there
is now located or may in the future be located a public sewer is hereby
required, at his expense, to install suitable toilets and facilities therein
and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, in
accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the
date of official notice from the Plumbing Subcode Official to do so,
provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet of the building. In no
event shall the city be required to furnish a public sewer to a point
within 200 feet of any building.
F. No portion of this article shall be construed to interfere with or modify
the requirements of design, inspection and approval which are imposed
by the appropriate health officials and the State and County Health
Departments.
A. No person shall uncover, make any connection with or open into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first
obtaining a written sewer permit in accordance with the regulations as
established by the City, including the plumbing code of the City, as
amended. No work authorized by any such written sewer permit shall
be performed by any person other than a licensed contractor or
contracting firm who has been licensed by the State of New Jersey and/
or the City of Pleasantville. Such work requiring a licensed contractor
§ 235-2 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-3
227:419
shall include, but not be limited to, the opening of any street or
roadway, all excavations required for the construction or repair of
sanitary sewer facilities, the opening of, the altering of, or the
connection to the sanitary sewer system of the City of Pleasantville.
[Amended 12-19-2005 by Ord. No. 39-2005]
B. The owner shall make application to the Plumbing Subcode Official on a
form furnished by the City. The application shall be supplemented by
plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent by the
Plumbing Subcode Official. A permit and inspection fee of $20 shall be
paid at the time the application is filed. Signing of the application shall
signify assent to the rules, regulations and schedule of sewer service
rates and charges of the city. All applications for permission to
discharge into the public sewers, other than normal sewage from
toilets, baths, showers, wash bowls and sinks, shall be in writing, signed
and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in New Jersey, and shall
contain complete information as follows for review by the City
Engineer:
(1) Existing equalizing or pretreatment facilities.
(2) Total daily flow in gallons.
(3) Period of time during which flow in Subsection B(2) is discharged,
namely, hours of the day and days per week.
(4) Peak rate of flow.
(5) Character and concentration with respect to:
(a) Suspended solids, total and volatile.
(b) Dissolved solids, total and volatile.
(c) Five-day BOD (biochemical oxygen demand).
(d) Temperature.
(e) pH (hydrogen, ion concentration).
(f) Oil and grease.
(g) Sulfides.
(h) Alkalinity, total and caustic.
(i) Maximum size of solids.
(j) Data with respect to any chemical constituent.
(6) Any additional information and data requested by the City Engineer
as to every connection existing and as to any connection to be made
with the public sewers thereto for the discharge of waste other
than normal domestic sewage from toilets, baths, showers, wash
bowls and sinks.
§ 235-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-3
227:420
C. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the property being
served. In all buildings in which the building sewer is too low to permit
gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
building sewer shall be lifted by approved pump facilities. The owner
shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may directly be
occasioned by installation of the building sewer.
D. A separate independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another or an
interior lot, and no sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear
building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway. Under such
conditions, the building sewer from the front building may be extended
to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
Each side of the duplex house having a solid vertical partition making it
capable of divided ownership shall require a separate building sewer.
E. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination by the Plumbing Subcode Official,
to meet all requirements of this article.
F. The building sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the
applicable portions of the city's Plumbing Code, as amended.
G. All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights, so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sideways, sidewalks and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city or other appropriate governmental agencies. All
necessary permits to the opening of streets shall be obtained from the
City Engineer in advance of the issuance of any sewer permit.
H. Building sewers shall be serviced and repaired by the owner of the
property being served. Evidence of willful damage to building sewers
shall be a violation of this article.
I. The holder of the sewer permit shall notify the Plumbing Subcode
Official when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer. All work from the curb to within five feet of the
building shall be inspected by the Plumbing Subcode Official. All work
must be left uncovered and convenient for examination until after the
necessary inspection. Inspection shall be made as soon as practicable
after notification, but no dirt or other materials removed in connection
with the works shall be replaced until written consent has been
received from the Plumbing Subcode Official. The Plumbing Subcode
Official may apply any appropriate test of pipes, fittings and equipment,
and the plumber or contractor, at his own cost, shall furnish all
necessary tools, labor and help and shall remove or repair any defective
work when so ordered by the Plumbing Subcode Official.
J. The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all bills rendered by
the city for sewer service and when due as fixed by law. All unpaid
§ 235-3 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-3
227:421
§ 235-4. Use of public sewers.
charges and fees incurred shall be a lien against the property with
lawful interest until paid.
K. Whenever a cesspool or septic tank and facility is abandoned or its use
discontinued or prohibited on account of the connection of the premises
with a sewer or for any other reason, all accumulations of
excrementitious matter in or about the cesspool or septic tank shall be
removed and the excavation filled with suitable approved material.
L. When an application made to tie into the sanitary sewer collection
system requires connection to an existing service lateral or main, it
shall be the responsibility of the applicant to determine the location,
depth and condition of the service lateral prior to connecting. Any
information provided to the applicant by the city with regard to
location, depth and condition of the service lateral shall be approximate
only representing the best available information known to the city at
the time of the application. Said information shall be only employed as a
guideline to the applicant. The city shall not be responsible for the
verification of true existing conditions. [Added 12-15-1986 by Ord.
No. 38-1986]
M. When an application made to tie into the City's sanitary sewer
collection system requires the construction of a new service lateral or
main, all new construction shall be the responsibility of applicant. Such
construction shall have a six-inch lateral to run from curb to main and
also must be personally inspected by a Water Pollution Control
Supervisor or Water Pollution Control Officer in accordance with
Chapter 235. [Added 12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 38-1986; amended
9-6-2017 by Ord. No. 14-2017]
N. Prior to any connections, construction or installation of sanitary sewer
systems, proper application shall be made to the Water Pollution
Control Department for review and determination. [Added
12-15-1986 by Ord. No. 38-1986]
O. The city shall have the explicit right to waive any of the conditions
noted in Subsections L, M and N above, when the same is determined to
be in the best interest of the city. [Added 12-15-1986 by Ord. No.
38-1986]
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
foundation or basement sump drainage, cooling water or other
unpolluted waters to any sanitary sewer.
B. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such storm sewers or combined sewers specifically designated or to a
natural outlet approved by the engineer. Industrial cooling water or
§ 235-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-4
227:422
unpolluted process water may be discharged, upon approval by the
engineer, to a public or private storm sewer or a natural outlet.
C. Engineer's approval required for industrial waste.
(1) So far as is practicable, industrial wastes may be discharged into
the city's sewer system with or without pretreatment, provided that
the consent of the engineer is first obtained and the rules,
regulations and standards hereinafter prescribed are complied
with in the judgment of the engineer.
(2) Written approval by the engineer is required for all new discharges
of industrial wastes added to the city's sewer system after the
effective date of this article. These shall include all wastes in which
the quantity, temperature or chemical characteristics are altered in
operation procedures and equipment changes.
D. No industry shall discharge any flow directly into a sanitary, combined
or storm sewer. All such discharge shall be through a manhole or other
approved flow sampling structure, to be located between the sidewalk
and curb or other location agreed upon in writing between such
industry and the engineer and to be built by the owner. Each manhole
or approved sampling structure shall be kept safe and accessible at all
times. When required by the city, the NJDEP and/or the USEPA, an
industry shall install and maintain additional facilities at its own
expense, including, for example, meters, sealed automatic monitoring
systems or other appurtenances, to facilitate observation, sampling and
measurement of wastes. Construction, installation and maintenance of
such additional facilities shall be the responsibility of the industry,
which shall keep these facilities safe and accessible to the city at all
times. Design and construction of such additional facilities shall be
subject to the requirements of the governmental authority requiring
them.
E. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to any public
sewer any of the following described substances, materials, waters or
wastes:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150º F. (65º
C.), except by written approval by the engineer. In such case, the
engineer may require installation, by the industry, of an approved
temperature recorder in the receiving sewer.
(2) Any water or wastes which contain grease or oil or other
substances that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at
temperatures under 150º F.
(3) Any water or wastes containing mineral oil and grease exceeding
on analysis an average of 100 parts per million (834 pounds per
million gallons) or any floating oil, without written approval of the
engineer.
§ 235-4 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-4
227:423
(4) Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(5) Any water or wastes that contain more than two parts per million
by weight of the following gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide or
oxides of nitrogen.
(6) Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rubber, rags, feathers, tar, fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime
residues, beer or distillery slops, chemical residues, paint residues,
cannery waste, bulk solids or any solid or viscous substance
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
(7) Any water or wastes that contain phenols in such quantity that the
aggregate of contributions throughout the area of service creates
treatment difficulties or produces a plant effluent which may be
unsatisfactory.
(8) Any water or wastes, or acids or alkaline in reaction and having
corrosive properties, capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works. Free
acids and alkalis of such wastes must be neutralized, at all times,
within a permissible range of pH between 5.0 and 9.0.
(9) Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
toxic amounts as defined by USEPA regulations or in sufficient
quantity to damage the sewage works, injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters or the wet
weather overflows of the effluent of the sewage treatment plant or
result in a violation of effluent limitations or other conditions
contained in any NPDES permit.
(10) Heavy metals.
(a) Heavy metals in excess of the following concentrations:
[1] Iron, as Fe: five parts per million.
[2] Chromium, as Cr: one part per million.
[3] Nickel, as Ni: one part per million.
[4] Copper, as Cu: one part per million.
[5] Cadmium, as Cd: 0.1 part per million.
[6] Zinc, as Zn: 2.5 parts per million.
(b) At no time shall the hourly concentration exceed three times
the average concentration and with contributions from
individual establishments subject to control in volume and
concentration by the engineer.
§ 235-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-4
227:424
(11) Cyanide (CN) or any of its compounds amenable to chlorination in
excess of 0.08 parts per million by weight as CN in the wastes from
any outlet into the public sewers with a peak day concentration not
exceeding 0.2 parts per million. Total cyanide (CN) shall not exceed
0.5 milligrams per liter at any time.
(12) Any water or wastes containing the discharge of strong acid iron
pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether
neutralized or not.
(13) Any waters containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity the unusual provision, attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
(14) Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, which either singly or
by interaction with any waste is capable of creating a public
nuisance, hazard or menace to life or property or of preventing
entry into sewers for their maintenance and repair.
(15) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
that may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations, without special limits.
(16) Any waters or wastes that for a duration of 15 minutes have a
concentration greater than five times that of normal sewage as
measured by suspended solids and BOD.
(17) Any concentrated dye wastes, spent tanning solutions or other
wastes which are highly colored or wastes which are of unusual
volume, concentration of solids or composition as, for example,
total suspended solids of inert nature (such as fuller's earth), and/
or total dissolved solids (such as sodium chloride, calcium chloride
or sodium sulfate) or unusual in BOD.
(18) Any waters or waste which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases or
develop color of undesirable intensity or form suspended solids in
objectionable concentration or create any other condition
deleterious to structures and treatment processes.
(19) Any wastes discharged at a flow rate that is excessive over a
relatively short period of time, which cause or may cause an upset
of the treatment process and a substantial loss of treatment
efficiency or which may exceed the hydraulic capacity of the
sanitary sewer system.
(20) Any garbage other than properly shredded garbage.
F. Any discharge into the public sewer of wastes whose concentration of
suspended solids or BOD or grease causes, at the municipal sewage
works, a monthly increase in the average daily analysis of any of these
§ 235-4 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-4
227:425
constituents in excess of 2% of the annual daily average for the previous
year is prohibited unless specifically approved by the city.
G. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Plumbing Subcode Official, Construction Official, Superintendent
of Public Works and/or designee, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any
inflammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that
such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of the type and capacity as
approved by the Plumbing Subcode Official, Construction Official,
Superintendent of Public Works and/or designee and shall be so located
as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction and, as approved
by the Plumbing Subcode Official, Construction Official,
Superintendent of Public Works and/or designee, watertight and
equipped with removable covers which, when mounted in place, shall
be gastight and watertight. [Amended 10-16-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2006]
H. All grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner,
at his expense, in continuous, efficient operation at all times.
I. It is the responsibility of the establishment owner, lessee or assign to
carry out all proceedings necessary to have any and all grease
interceptors opened and ready for inspection and to see that the
equipment is put back in proper operation after the inspection. All
inspections will be conducted by the Plumbing Subcode Official,
Construction Official, Superintendent of Public Works and/or designee,
annually. [Amended 10-16-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2006]
J. Forms for periodic inspections will be furnished by the owner, lessee or
assign and posted as close as possible to the interceptor to which it
applies. The form shall also be protected from soiling. In those
instances where the interceptor is chemically treated, the method and
chemicals of such treatment shall be approved by the Plumbing
Subcode Official, Construction Official, Superintendent of Public Works
and/or designee. Any proposed chemical changes shall be furnished to
the Plumbing Subcode Official, Construction Official, Superintendent of
Public Works or designee for approval. [Amended 10-16-2006 by
Ord. No. 38-2006]
K. Fees; schedule for payment.
(1) The fee for inspection, as required in the schedule listed, will be the
same as the plumbing fee in force at the time of the requested or
required inspection. The minimum fee will include the first three
interceptors at one location prepared and ready for inspection.
Other interceptors that are prepared and ready for inspection at
§ 235-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-4
227:426
the same time and are in excess of the first three units will be
inspected at an additional fee to be 1/2 the minimum fee each. The
schedule for payment of the fee for inspection is as follows:
(a) For up to 60 pounds of grease capacity, the maximum
inspection interval shall be 4 months.
(b) For 60 pounds and over of grease capacity, the maximum
inspection interval shall be 2 months.
(2) The above schedule may be altered by the Plumbing Subcode
Official, Construction Official, Superintendent of Public Works and/
or designee if deemed necessary. The owner, lessee or assignee
shall be notified, in writing, of any schedule change. [Amended
10-16-2006 by Ord. No. 38-2006]
L. All existing food service establishments without grease interceptors
shall install grease interceptors and follow the inspection schedule as
set forth. The existing food service establishments shall have one year
from the effective date of this article to install a grease interceptor.
M. A similar schedule will be required for all other types of interceptors or
separators. The Plumbing Subcode Official, Construction Official,
Superintendent of Public Works and/or designee shall be responsible
for the scheduling of interceptors of all types. [Amended 10-16-2006
by Ord. No. 38-2006]
N. The Plumbing Subcode Official, Construction Official, Superintendent
of Public Works and/or designee shall require all interceptors to be
efficient in operation and may, at the expense of the owner, lessee or
assign, require all independent laboratory tests to ascertain the
concentration of grease being emitted from the effluent line of the unit.
All collected grease shall be kept in steel drums and stored in
refrigerated coolers. Disagreeable odors shall require deodorants to
combat said offensive odors. [Amended 10-16-2006 by Ord. No.
38-2006]
O. Pretreatment.
(1) The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes
having the following characteristics shall be prohibited.
(a) A BOD of more than 240 parts per million.
(b) A suspended solid content greater than 300 parts per million.
(c) A quantity of substances having the characteristics described
in § 235-4, except as defined in Subsection O(1)(a) and (b)
above.
(d) An average flow greater than 10,000 gallons per day shall be
prohibited unless reviewed and approved by the engineer.
§ 235-4 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-4
227:427
(2) Where necessary, in the opinion of the engineer, the owner shall
provide, at his expense, such pretreatment as may be necessary to:
(a) Reduce the BOD to 240 parts per million and the suspended
solids to 300 parts per million.
(b) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents.
(c) Control the quantities and rates of such discharge of waters
and wastes.
(3) Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information related to
the proposed pretreatment facilities shall be submitted for
approval of the engineer. No construction of such facilities shall be
commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing.
(4) When pretreatment standards are adopted by NJDEP or USEPA for
any given class of industries, then any industry within that class
shall conform to the NJDEP or USEPA timetable for adherence to
pretreatment requirements, as well as all other applicable
requirements promulgated by the NJDEP or USEPA in accordance
with the provisions of law. Additionally, such industries shall
comply with such more stringent standards necessitated by local
conditions as determined from time to time by the city.
P. Where pretreatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes,
they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner, at his expense, and shall be subject to the
periodic inspection by the engineer. They shall be the type and capacity
approved by the engineer and must produce an effluent conforming to
the provisions of this article. The owner shall maintain operating
records and shall submit to the engineer a monthly summary report of
the character of the influent and effluent, as may be prescribed by the
engineer to show satisfactory performance of the treatment facilities.
Q. Any approval of the engineer of a type, kind or capacity of an
installation shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility of
revamping, enlarging or otherwise modifying an installation if it is
found inadequate to accomplish the intended purpose.
R. All measures, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made herein shall be determined in
accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Sewage and shall be determined at a control manhole or other
approved sampling structure provided for herein, upon suitable
samples taken at said control manhole or other approved sampling
structure. In the event that no manhole or other approved sampling
structure has been required, the control manhole or other approved
sampling structure shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building is
connected.
§ 235-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-4
227:428
§ 235-5. Protection from damage.
No authorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance or equipment which is part of the public sewage works. Any
person violating these provisions shall be subject to immediate arrest under
charges of disorderly conduct.
§ 235-6. Inspections.
The engineer and other duly authorized officers of the city, the NJDEP and
USEPA, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted
immediately upon all private and public property for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance
with the provisions of this article during any reasonable hour of the day or
at any time during an emergency. The hours between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. shall be reasonable for this purpose.
S. No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial user whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or
character may be accepted by the city for treatment subject to extra
payment therefor by the industrial concern.
T. Without having first obtained the signed, written permission of the city,
no person shall directly or indirectly discharge or cause to be
discharged any quantity of waste or wastewater to any public sewer or
natural outlet from a nonstationary source, including, for example, but
not limited to the discharge of industrial waste from any tank truck.
Each and every individual operator and/or owner of a nonstationary
source that discharges in violation of this section shall be subject to the
penalties prescribed.
U. The right is reserved by the city to stop and prevent, at any time, the
discharge into the public sewers of any waste which may injure the
sewers or adversely affect sewage treatment or which is not in
conformity with the requirements and standards now or hereafter set
by the city, and the city may, at any time, without notice and without
recourse, sever the connection and cause removal of any sewer or drain
through which the waste may be discharged.
§ 235-4 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-6
227:429

ARTICLE II
Sewer Service Rates and Charges
§ 235-7. Schedule of rates for sewer service. [Amended 6-7-1993 by
Ord. No. 14-1993]
The annual rates to be paid for sewer services in the City of Pleasantville
from and after December 1, 1992, shall be and are hereby fixed,
determined, classified and shall be as follows:
A. A unit shall be classified as:
(1) Each residential single-family dwelling unit.
(2) Each residential single-family apartment dwelling unit.
(3) Each residential single-family condominium dwelling unit.
(4) Each residential single-family townhouse dwelling unit.
(5) Each mobile home, not including transient or campground.
(6) Each hotel rental room or motel rental room with a kitchen or
kitchenette facility.
(7) Each classroom of a public or private school.
(8) Each professional, institutional or public user, church, fraternal
organization or service organization.
(9) Each commercial establishment, including all other types of
nonresidential usage not mentioned elsewhere, shall be billed
$687.50 per year, payable on December 1 each year, and, in
addition thereto, an excess usage charge for water consumed or
used as aforesaid, as determined by the City, in accordance with
Subsection C(1). [Amended 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007;
11-2-2009 by Ord. No. 39-2009145]
(10) Each industry which is hereby defined and referred to as a
permitted use in the Industrial (IND) Districts as per Chapter 190,
Zoning and Land Use. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
B. Classification of hospital beds, hotel or motel rooms and like uses by
units. [Amended 11-2-2009 by Ord. No. 39-2009146]
(1) Each hospital or nursing home bed shall be classified as 1/2 unit.
145. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that rate changes be effective for sewer
charges from and after 1-1-2010.
146. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that rate changes be effective for sewer
charges from and after 1-1-2010.
§ 235-7 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-7
227:431
(2) Each hotel rental room, motel rental room, boardinghouse rental
room, cottage or tourist cabin rental room without a kitchen facility
shall be classified as 1/2 unit.
(3) Each hotel rental room, motel rental room, boardinghouse rental
room, cottage or tourist cabin rental room with a kitchen facility
shall be classified as 3/4 of a unit.
C. There are hereby fixed and determined, effective from and after
December 1995, the following rates for sewer service as above set
forth, that is, a base rate whereby an excess usage is charged. The base
rate charge shall be and is hereby fixed as follows: [Amended
11-6-1995 by Ord. No. 19-1995]
(1) For each unit connected to and/or serviced by the sewer system of
the City of Pleasantville as set forth in Subsection A(1) through (8)
and each whole unit as set forth in Subsection B(1) and (2) as
aforesaid, the sum of $500 per year, payable in installments on
December 1, March 1, June 1 and September 1 of each year, the
sum of which will be set forth on the sewer bills which will be
prepared. Each unit within the City of Pleasantville as set forth in
Subsection A(9) shall pay the amount as set forth in Subsection
A(9) and, in addition thereto, an excess usage charge of water
consumed or used as aforesaid, as determined by the city, in excess
of usage in the amount of 150,000 gallons per year or 12 months, of
$4 per 1,000 or fraction thereof, payable on December 1 of each
year, the amount as determined by the New Jersey Water Company
in cases where said company supplies water consumed and in other
cases where meters are installed by the customers as hereinafter
provided. If the amount due as set forth shall not be paid when due,
after 10 days interest shall accrue at the rate of 18% per annum
from the original due date, and the full amount becomes due and
payable. [Amended 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007; 11-2-2009
by Ord. No. 39-2009147]
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 235-7C(1) above, any person
who pays a residential sewer rate and qualifies for a tax deduction
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.41 shall receive an annual discount of
10% of the enacted annual sewer rate fee, which deduction of 10%
shall be applied in its entirety to the quarterly payment to be made
on September 1 of each year. [Added 12-7-2009 by Ord. No.
49-2009148]
(3) For each unit connected to and/or serviced by the sewer system of
the City of Pleasantville as set forth in Subsection A(10) as
aforesaid, the sum of $1,250 per year, payable on December 1 of
each year, and, in addition thereto, an excess usage charge for
147. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that rate changes be effective for sewer
charges from and after 1-1-2010.
148. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection J(2), (3) and (4) as
Subsection J(3), (4) and (5), respectively.
§ 235-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-7
227:432
water consumed or used as aforesaid, as determined by the city,
in excess of usage of the amount on 150,000 gallons per year or
12 months, of $4 per 1,000 gallons of fraction thereof, payable on
December 1 in each year, as determined by the New Jersey Water
Company in cases where said company supplies water consumed
and in other cases where meters are installed by the consumers
as hereinafter provided. If the amount due as set forth shall not
be paid when due, after 10 days interest shall accrue at the rate
of 18% per annum from the original due date, and the full amount
becomes due and payable. [Amended 4-2-2007 by Ord. No.
14-2007; 11-2-2009 by Ord. No. 39-2009149]
(4) Each municipality using the City of Pleasantville's public sewer
system to transport its sewage shall be charged for the actual flow
where the City of Pleasantville has installed measuring devices on
the public sewer line. The flow, as determined by the City of
Pleasantville, shall be charged to the respective municipality at $4
per 1,000 gallons or fraction thereof, payable on December 1 in
each year. [Amended 4-2-2007 by Ord. No. 14-2007]
(5) In clarification of the above qualifications, all mixed usage
containing more than one classification as set forth in Subsection A
shall be treated as separate units for each classification. The sewer
rate shall be charged for the total sum of the number of units in the
mixed usage as set forth in Subsection A. Exception shall be made
in cases where a classification within the mixed usage has no
separate plumbing fixtures that discharge sewage into the public
sewer system, then that part of the mixed usage shall be classified
as a half unit.
D. In properties as set forth in Subsection A(1), (3), (4), (5), (8) and (9) as
aforesaid, where there is a sewer line or public water supply
constructed for the purpose of carrying off the sewage or conveying
water in any part of the city, the city hereby reserves the right to
require all units to be connected with the sewer and public water
supply main, to pay for the installation of all meters required and to pay
the respective charges therefor, as aforesaid, or any other charges as
contained in any other city ordinance, which charge or charges shall be
a lien against said property with lawful interest until paid and as
otherwise in this article required. This responsibility will be carried out
by the Construction Official. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
E. In properties as set forth in Subsections A(2), (6) and (7) and B(1) and
(2) as aforesaid, where there is a sewer line or public water supply
constructed for the purpose of carrying off the sewage or conveying
water in any part of the city, the city hereby reserves the right to
require each separate building to be connected with the sewer and
149. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that rate changes be effective for sewer
charges from and after 1-1-2010.
§ 235-7 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-7
227:433
public water supply main, to pay for the installation of all meters
required and to pay the respective charges therefor, as aforesaid, or
any other charges as contained in any other city ordinance, which
charge or charges shall be a lien against said property with lawful
interest until paid and as otherwise in this article required. This
responsibility will be carried out by the Construction Official.
[Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
F. Meter requirements.
(1) All meters required or installed pursuant to this article shall be
furnished and installed by the owner of the service charge unit
involved, and such owner shall be required to maintain the same in
good operating condition and to make all necessary repairs and
replacements. Such meters shall be accessible to employees and
other authorized representatives of the city for reading, testing,
inspection or repair. If the owner, being required so to do, shall fail
to furnish or install a meter or meters or shall fail to maintain the
same, then, in any such case, after 10 days' written notice by the
Plumbing Subcode Official to perform such obligation, said
Inspector may enter onto such property to install such meter or
repair and maintain the same, as the case may be, and charge the
cost thereof to such owner. Bills for such installation or repair, if
made by the city, shall be due and payable immediately upon
completion of the work and shall be collected in the same manner
as bills for sewer service charges.
(2) In those cases where supply is in addition to or other than the
water system of New Jersey Water Company, the owner of each
such unit shall install and maintain a meter on such additional or
other source of water supply.
(3) Excluded from sewer charges shall be any water that may be
furnished through a separate meter, located on the owner's
property beyond the point of the water meter serving the property
and on a waterline used solely for lawn sprinkling, car washing, the
filling of swimming pools and other similar purposes, including a
commercial use, provided that the water so used is not discharged
in the public sewer system. The quantity of water so used and not
discharged into the public sewer system must be measured by a
separate meter installed by the owner as otherwise provided for all
other water meters. All requirements of Subsection F(1) shall
herein apply.
(4) Any customer having a swimming pool, who does not utilize a
separate meter as provided in Subsection F(3), may apply for a
permit to fill the swimming pool with water. Thereafter, upon
certification by the Superintendent of Public Works as to the size of
the pool, that it has been filled after the granting of such a permit
and the amount of water used to fill the pool, such amount of water
shall be deducted from the calculation of sewer charges on the next
§ 235-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-7
227:434
§ 235-8. Payment due date; rebates.
bill to be rendered by the city. All applications for such permits
shall be made to and upon forms supplied by the Superintendent
of Public Works and shall be processed upon payment of a fee of
$5 for each permit. To be eligible for such deduction, the customer
shall not fill the pool until after the same has been inspected by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
(5) Any industrial user may, subject to approval by the City Engineer,
install an adequate metering system so as to determine the amount
of water used that is not discharged in the public sewer system,
which shall then be excluded from sewer charges. In the
alternative, an industrial user may, subject to the approval of the
City Engineer, install an adequate metering system so as to
determine the amount of water that is discharged into the public
sewer system, and the same shall be included in the sewer charges,
but all other water utilized but not discharged into the public sewer
system, such industrial installations shall be subject to inspection
upon installation and biannually thereafter, by the city's Water
Pollution Superintendent, to confirm compliance with this chapter,
at a fee payable to the city as a part of the sewer charges of $20 for
each such inspection. Said charge shall be assessed and payable
after each inspection.
G. Method of appealing. The deadline for filing will be on or before
December 31. Anything after that date will not be considered. All sewer
rental fees and property tax must be current in order for the city to
accept an appeal request.
H. Agreements with neighboring municipalities. When and where
appropriate, the city may enter into agreements with neighboring
municipalities for the payment by said municipalities to the city of a fee
for the conveyance and treatment of sewage effluent generated by said
municipalities and conveyed through the sewer system of the city to the
treatment plant maintained by the Atlantic County Utilities Authority.
Certain agreements heretofore entered into between the city and the
City of Absecon and the Egg Harbor Township Municipal Utilities
Authority are hereby confirmed and ratified.
A. The sewer service charges prescribed by this article shall be for the
annual period beginning December 1 and ending the following
November 30 and shall be due and payable in advance on December 1.
Wherever the sewer service initially commences after December 1 of
any year, the annual sewer service rate shall be prorated on a monthly
basis to the following December 1, and said prorated charges shall be
due and payable in advance as of the date of the commencement of said
service. [Amended 12-1-1986 by Ord. No. 36-1986; 6-7-1993 by
Ord. No. 14-1993]
§ 235-7 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-8
227:435
§ 235-9. Liability of properties abutting city streets.
The charges for sewer service shall be paid for all properties abutting the
streets, avenues or alleyways in this city in which the public sewer shall be
laid and which shall be actually connected to said sewers.
§ 235-10. Delinquent charges; liens; termination notices;
reconnection.
B. No rebate shall be made for or on account of disconnection or nonuse
by the owner or lessee for a portion of the year.
A. If the charges for sewer service shall be and remain unpaid for the
period of 30 days after the same shall be due and payable as herein
provided:
(1) The charges shall bear interest from their due date until paid.
(2) The charges shall be and remain a lien upon the premises with
which such sewer is or should be connected the same as taxes upon
real estate, and the same charges of interest, costs and penalties
shall be imposed by the city for nonpayment of said charges for
sewer service as are imposed and fixed by law in the city for the
collection of taxes upon real estate.
(3) Council may direct that the sewer service furnished shall be cut off
and terminated; provided, however, that prior to cutting off said
sewer service, five days' notice shall be given to the tenant, owner
or person in charge of the premises to which such service is
furnished that unless said charges are paid within five days from
the date of the notice, the sewer service will be cut off and
terminated. The mailing of said notice addressed to the tenant,
owner or person in charge of the property shall be a sufficient
service thereof.
B. In the event that sewer service is cut off in any case, the applicant shall
prepay actual cost of reconnection.
§ 235-8 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-10
227:436
ARTICLE III
Sewage Transportation and Disposal
§ 235-11. Approved tank cars for transportation.
All sewage collected from cesspools or other sewage receptacles either
within or without the city limits may be transported through the streets of
the city in sewage tank cars only approved as provided by the provisions of
this article.
§ 235-12. Approval certificate required; inspection fee.
§ 235-13. Issuance of approval certificate; term of certificate.
§ 235-14. Sewage tank car operator's duties; inspection fee.
§ 235-15. Sewage tank car maintenance.
All sewage tank cars shall be kept clean and free from leakage and shall
not constitute a public nuisance or be hazardous to the health of any of the
inhabitants of the city.
A. The owner or operator of any sewage tank car shall, before transporting
any sewage, apply to the Atlantic County Board of Health for a
certificate of approval.
B. A fee of $5 shall be paid to the Atlantic County Board of Health for
inspection of the sewage tank car to be approved. After July 1 of any
year, the fee shall be $2.50.
A. After inspection and approval of the sewage tank car, the Atlantic
County Board of Health shall issue to the owner or operator thereof his
certificate of approval.
B. Said certificate shall be evidence of such approval from the date of its
issuance until December 31 of the year in which issued.
A. It is hereby made the duty of each operator of a sewage tank car to:
(1) Report promptly to the Plumbing Subcode Official all cesspools in
the city cleared by such operator.
(2) Have each of said cesspools inspected by the Plumbing Subcode
Official.
B. Each operator of a sewage tank car shall pay $1 to the Plumbing
Subcode Official for each inspection of a cesspool in the city cleaned by
such operator.
§ 235-11 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-16
227:437
§ 235-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-6-1985 by Ord. No.
6-1985150]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall fail to comply with or who violates
any provision of Articles I and III of this Part 1 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 day and/or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 235-16 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-16
227:438
Part 2
[Adopted 6-7-1982 By OSrde.w Nero .U 1s1e-r1 C98h2a rAgse sPart 2 Of Ch. 181 Of The
1982 Code]
ARTICLE IV
Sewer Connection Fees
§ 235-17. Residential connections. [Amended 11-5-1984 by Ord. No.
22-1984; 12-17-1984 by Ord. No. 25-1984; 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
The fee for residential connections shall be as follows: for each new
residential unit [as set forth in Article II, § 235-7A(1), (2), (3), (4) and (5)],
the connection to the city's main: $400 per unit, plus the additional cost of
construction from main to curb for wet connections only.
§ 235-18. Commercial, industrial and nonresidential connections.
[Amended 11-5-1984 by Ord. No. 22-1984]
The fee for commercial, industrial and other nonresidential connections
shall be as follows:
A. For each new commercial unit, industrial unit and other nonresidential
unit [as set forth in Article II, § 235-7A(6), (7), (8), (9) and (10) and B(1)
and (2)] for the connection to the city's main, the fee shall be computed
as follows:
(1) The minimum connection fee: $1,000 per unit, plus the additional
cost of construction from main to curb for wet connections only.
[Amended 2-17-2016 by Ord. No. 3-2016]
(2) In the event that the estimated water consumption exceeds
150,000 gallons per year per unit, then the connection fee shall be
determined by dividing the sum of 150,000 gallons per year into the
actual number of gallons consumed in a one-year period to
determine the number of equivalent units. The number of
equivalent units shall be calculated to the nearest 1/10.
(3) The estimated water consumption shall be as made by the applicant
and as approved by the City Engineer.
B. After occupation of the establishment by the applicant for at least one
full year, during which time an operable water meter has been installed
to accurately tabulate the water consumption, the aforesaid sewer
connection fee shall be recomputed based upon the actual consumption
for a one-year period and any overage returned to the applicant. Should
the actual water consumption exceed the estimated consumption upon
which the connection fee was computed, the applicant shall, within 30
days following a written demand by the city, pay such excess connection
fee to the city.
§ 235-17 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-19
227:439
§ 235-19. Payment of fees.
Sewerage connection fees are due and payable upon application for
connection to a functioning system. Developers constructing a dry sewerage
system may defer payment of the connection fee at their option, in which
case the homeowners shall be notified that they will be charged the
required connection fees when they are permitted to tie into the city's
functioning system.
§ 235-20. Right of access to premises; hours.
The city shall have access at all reasonable hours to premises connected to
the sewerage and water systems for the purpose of reading and installing
meters and inspecting and maintaining equipment. The hours between 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. shall be reasonable for this purpose.
§ 235-21. Schedule of rates and charges to be kept on file and open
to public inspection.
A copy of this article, containing the schedule or rents, rates, fees and
charges of the city for the services hereinabove described, shall at all times
be kept on file at the Clerk's office of the city and shall at all reasonable
times be open to public inspection.
§ 235-22. Compliance with Plumbing Code. [Added 5-6-1985 by Ord.
No. 6-1985]
Nothing herein shall be deemed to relieve any person of duty and
responsibility of complying with the Plumbing Code of the city, as amended.
§ 235-19 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-22
227:440
Part 3
Municipal Stormwater System
ARTICLE V
Illicit Connections
[Adopted 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 35-2005]
§ 235-23. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by The City of
Pleasantville, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit No. NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not
limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including but not limited to
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by The City of Pleasantville or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides, or
§ 235-23 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-23
227:441
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 235-24. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the City of Pleasantville any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 235-25. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the Construction/Code Department of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 235-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 235-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-26
227:442
ARTICLE VI
Improper Disposal of Waste
[Adopted 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 36-2005]
§ 235-27. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory,
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Pleasantville or other public
body and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 235-28. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Pleasantville
is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 235-29. Exceptions to prohibition.
A. Waterline flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
§ 235-27 SAND AND GRAVEL REMOVAL § 235-29
227:443
§ 235-30. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the Construction/Code Department of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 235-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
F. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following its use for its
intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(3) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 235-29 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 235-31
227:444
Chapter 236
(RESERVED)
Chapter 239
SHOPPING CARTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 159.
Pleasantville Shopping Center — See Ch. 197.
Street obstructions — See Ch. 255, Art. III.
§ 239-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SHOPPING CART — Four-wheeled shopping carts owned and furnished
by the owners or proprietors of stores and supermarkets and used by
customers and shoppers of said stores and supermarkets, with the
permission of the owners or proprietors of said stores and supermarkets,
to transport merchandise purchased by the customers and shoppers to
parking lots or other parking places provided by the owners or proprietors
of such stores or supermarkets for the convenience of their patrons or
customers.
§ 239-2. Removal from premises.
No person shall remove any shopping cart from the said stores or
supermarkets or parking lots or parking places at premises provided by the
owners or proprietors of said stores or supermarkets without the express
consent or permission of the owners or proprietors of said stores or
supermarkets.
§ 239-3. Abandonment on public and private property.
No person shall abandon or otherwise leave upon any public sidewalk,
street or other public or private property in this city any shopping cart
without the express written consent of the owner of said shopping cart.
§ 239-4. Carts to be returned immediately.
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, all shopping carts shall be
returned by the users thereof to the stores or supermarkets from which they
were taken, immediately upon the transportation of said merchandise for
which they were used by the patrons or customers without delay or damage
thereto.
§ 235-31 SHOPPING CARTS § 239-5
239:445
§ 239-5. Violations and penalties.151
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 243
SIGNS, TEMPORARY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 132.
Garage sales — See Ch. 223, Art. I.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
§ 243-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a system of regulation for the
posting of signs, temporary in nature, utilized throughout the City of
Pleasantville by requiring such signs, posters and the like to be removed
within a specific period of time following the event which is the subject
matter of such a sign or poster. Such regulation is intended to protect the
public interest by preventing the unwanted accumulation of unsightly signs
or posters no longer serving an informational purpose as a result of the
passing of a stated event and tending to degrade the aesthetic environment
and litter public and private property.
§ 243-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign, poster, advertisement, bill or placard
displayed for the purpose of displaying information, expressing opinion
or publicizing an event which is rendered moot or otherwise loses its
informational quality by the passing of an event which is the subject matter
of such sign, poster, advertisement, bill or placard. Said event shall include,
by description but not by limitation, general and special political elections.
§ 243-3. Mounting and posting regulations.
No temporary sign shall be affixed by tacking, pasting or otherwise
mounting upon utility poles, light standards, trees or the like unless in
accordance with the following regulations:
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 239-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 243-3
243:446
§ 243-4. Enforcement.
The Municipal Zoning Officer shall have the responsibility of regulating and
enforcing this chapter, including the issuance of complaints for violations
thereof to be adjudicated in the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 243-5. Violations and penalties.152
Upon violation of any portion of this chapter, the person responsible for
removal of such signs shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each violation will be
considered a separate offense.
Chapter 247
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 102.
Placement of construction waste — See Ch.
105, Art. II.
Littering — See Ch. 163.
Trash disposal in parks — See Ch. 187.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 207.
A. Each temporary sign must be clearly marked with the name of the
person or organization responsible for the removal of such sign.
B. It shall be unlawful to allow temporary signs to remain posted for a
period of 14 days after the event or election which is the subject matter
of such sign.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the person whose name appears on such
temporary sign to remove said sign within the aforestated period.
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 243-3 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 243-5
243:447

ARTICLE I
Recycling
§ 247-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ALUMINUM — All products made of aluminum, including aluminum cans,
foil, wrappers, containers for preparing dinners or other foods, screen
frames and lawn chairs.
DEBRIS — Stones, dirt, demolition material, broken concrete and other like
material, brush, branches, small trees and bushes.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable waste incident
to and resulting from the use, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food.
GLASS — All products made from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone,
the product being transparent or translucent and being used for packaging
or bottling of various matter and all other material commonly known as
"glass," excluding, however, blue and flat glass and glass commonly known
as "window glass."
METAL — All products made of metal, exclusive of aluminum, including
washers, dryers, refrigerators, stoves, hot water heaters, tire rims, springs,
bicycles, bimetal cans (tin cans) or scrap metal.
WASTEPAPER PRODUCTS — All uncontaminated newspaper, magazines,
books, paper, food cartons, cardboard boxes, wrapping paper, bags and
discarded letters and envelopes.
§ 247-2. Program established.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
paper products, glass, aluminum, metal, garbage, trash and debris with the
City of Pleasantville.
§ 247-3. Separation and placement; containers.
The occupant or owner of any building within the City of Pleasantville who
shall place for disposal, removal or collection the following named items
shall do so in strict conformity with the following regulations:
A. Wastepaper shall be bundled separately in paper bags or secured in
bundles not to exceed 50 pounds and shall not be contained in plastic
bags.
B. Glass shall be contained in a reusable metal or plastic occupant- or
owner-supplied container, separated into one container for glass with
lids, metal rings and plastic covers removed.
§ 247-1 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 247-3
243:449
§ 247-4. Yard waste.
C. Aluminum shall be contained in a reusable metal or plastic occupant- or
owner-supplied container.
D. Recycling will be collected by the Atlantic County Utilities Authority
every other Tuesday.
E. Yard waste shall be placed in biodegradable paper bags or rigid
reusable trash containers. Yard waste in plastic bags shall not be
permitted and shall not be collected in any part of the weekly collection.
For the purpose of this section, “biodegradable bags” shall be paper
bags which are designed and manufactured to decompose by natural
biological process. [Added 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 14-2005]
A. Yard waste includes leaves, grass, clean wood and brush or debris. Yard
waste does not include trash or other nonbiodegradable material.
[Amended 6-6-2005 by Ord. No. 14-2005]
B. Yard waste will be picked up by the Department of Public Works each
Thursday from the north side of Washington Avenue to Nevada Avenue
and each Friday from the south side of Washington Avenue to
Ridgewood Avenue. It must be placed at the curb by 7:00 a.m. on the
morning of collection in biodegradable bags. [Amended 6-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 14-2003; 12-1-2003 by Ord. No. 39-2003; 2-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 2-2011]
C. Brush/debris, branches and wood are not to exceed eight inches in
diameter, cut into four-foot lengths and secured with twine.
§ 247-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 247-4
243:450
ARTICLE II
Trash Collection
§ 247-5. Regulations.
All collections under this article shall be in accordance with the program
established as follows:
A. All trash collection shall be once a week and will include all
nonrecyclable household trash from residential and multifamily
dwellings.
B. All trash to be collected shall be placed at the curbline (in proper
receptacles) no earlier than 7:00 p.m. on the day before the day of
collection and no later than 7:00 a.m. on the date of collection. Any
trash not collected or placed at curbside after the time for collection
shall be immediately removed from the curbside. Any failure to remove
shall be considered a violation of this article. Empty trash receptacles
shall be removed from the curbside not later than noon on the day
following the collection. [Amended 4-4-2005 by Ord. No. 10-2005]
C. Collections on any particular day of collection shall be limited to the
maximum of four cans of trash per unit.
D. The City shall provide for the pickup of large nonmetal items, such as
furniture, rugs, mattresses, television sets and tires, on the day of
regular pickups. Each pickup is limited to no more than two items.
[Added 6-2-2003 by Ord. No. 14-2003]
E. Any contractor/owner performing work on any property owner must
remove any/all waste material left as a result of the work.
F. Any owner of a single-family dwelling or building which is unoccupied,
empty or sold will be responsible for the removal of all household trash
and any/all material left at said property. No trash, recycling, yard
waste, e-waste or any other material will be collected by the Atlantic
County Utilities Authority and/or Public Works Department. [Amended
2-18-2015 by Ord. No. 2-2015]
G. Any item(s) placed at the curb for disposal, removal or collection shall
be placed in such a manner as to not block the sidewalks or pedestrian
walkways.
H. Metal will be picked up by the Department of Public Works each
Tuesday from north side of Washington Avenue to Nevada Avenue and
each Wednesday from south side of Washington Avenue to Ridgewood
Avenue. It must be placed at the curb by 7:00 a.m. on the morning of
collection. [Added 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 15-2004]
I. Trash receptacles shall not be stored in plain sight when viewed from
the curbline. Such receptacles shall not be stored between the building
and the curbline, and further, when stored on the side of the building,
§ 247-5 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 247-5
243:451
§ 247-6. Removal from other than single- and multifamily
dwellings.
shall be placed behind a solid fence. Added 4-4-2005 by Ord. No.
10-2005]
A. The City shall not be responsible for the collection, removal and
disposal of garbage and trash from apartments, townhouses,
condominiums, high-rise buildings, hotels and motels.
B. Commercial pickup shall be only of light office trash; no big items or
debris and not to exceed two appropriate receptacles.
§ 247-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 247-6
243:452
ARTICLE III
Enforcement
§ 247-7. Violations and penalties.
A. If the City is forced to remove any material as defined in § 247-1 of this
chapter, a lien shall be placed on said property for the cost of the
removal.
B. Any person, firm or corporation that violates or neglects to comply with
any provisions of this chapter or any regulation promulgated pursuant
thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days and/or a period of community service not exceeding
90 days. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such.
§ 247-7 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 247-7
243:453
Chapter 251
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 139.
Sand and gravel removal — See Ch. 227.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 235.
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
§ 247-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 247-7
243:454
ARTICLE I
Regulation of Stormwater Runoff from Development
[Adopted 6-6-1988 by Ord. No. 14-1988]
§ 251-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Stormwater
Management” article.
§ 251-2. Statement of purpose.
It is hereby determined that the lakes and waterways within the City of
Pleasantville of Atlantic County are subject to flooding; that development
tends to accentuate such flooding by increasing stormwater runoff, due to
alteration of the hydrologic response of the watershed in changing from
the undeveloped to the developed condition; that such increased flooding
produced by development of real property contributes increased quantities
of waterborne pollutants and tends to increase channel erosion; that such
increased flooding, increased erosion and increased pollution constitutes
deterioration of the water resources of the City of Pleasantville, the county
and the state; and that such increase in flooding, increased erosion and
increased pollution can be controlled to some extent by the regulation of
stormwater runoff from such development. It is determined that it is in the
public interest to regulate the development of real property and to establish
standards to regulate the additional discharge of stormwater runoff from
such developments as provided in this article.
§ 251-3. Applicability.
The criteria within this article are applicable to all site and subdivision plans
that require approval by the Municipal Planning or Zoning Boards.153
§ 251-4. Goals and objectives.
In order to protect, maintain and enhance both the immediate and longterm
health and general welfare of its citizens, Pleasantville established the
following goals and objectives for stormwater control:
A. To ensure that stormwater runoff after development of a site will
approximate the same rate of flow and timing of stormwater runoff that
would have occurred under predevelopment conditions.
B. To maintain the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and
bridges, dams and other conveyance structures.
C. To minimize, to the greatest extent possible, the transport of pollutants
to receiving waters necessary for the preservation of the chemical,
physical and biological integrity of those waters.
153. Editor's Note: See Arts. XII, XIV and XV of Chapter 290, Zoning and Land Use.
§ 251-1 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-4
243:455
§ 251-5. Administrative procedure.
§ 251-6. Required submissions.
The following submissions shall be required for a proposed project under
review:
D. To minimize erosion and sedimentation from any development or
construction project.
A. Burden of proof. Whenever an applicant seeks a municipal approval of a
development to which this article is applicable from any board or
official of the municipality, that applicant shall be required to
demonstrate that his project meets the standards set forth in this
article.
B. Submission materials due. The applicant shall submit materials, as
required by § 251-6 hereof, to the municipal board or official from
which he seeks municipal approval prior to or at the same time he
submits his application for municipal approval.
C. Review of project. The applicant's project shall be reviewed by the
municipal board or official from which he seeks his municipal approval.
That municipal board or official shall consult with the Municipal
Engineer to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this article.
D. Time for decision. The municipal board or official shall promptly
determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this article.
The time for that determination should be the time permitted to review
and act on the applicant's application for a municipal approval.
E. Failure to comply. Failure of the applicant to demonstrate that the
project meets the standards set forth in this article is reason to deny the
applicant's underlying application for a municipal approval.
F. Variance. For good reason, the municipality maintains the right to grant
a waiver of the standards given in § 251-7 below.
A. Topographic base map. A topographic base map of the site extending
200 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development at a scale of
one inch equals 200 feet shall display two-foot contour intervals;
existing surface water drainage; marsh lands; outlines of woodland
cover; existing, natural and man-made features; roads; utilities; and
bearings and distances of property lines.
B. Vicinity map. Preparation of a map at the scale of one inch equals 400
feet will reflect the site of the proposed development, access to the site
and surface date reflected from United States Geological Survey Quads
and Soils Maps.
§ 251-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-6
243:456
§ 251-7. Design standards.
Each proposed project not exempted from the operation of this article shall
meet the following storm drainage standards:
C. Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of the
site shall include existing soil conditions, slope factors, wetlands,
vegetation and animal life. Particular attention should be given to
unique features of the site.
D. Water detention facilities map. The following information shall be
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map:
(1) The total area to be impervious or built-upon, the estimated land
area to be occupied by water-retention or -detention facilities and
the type of vegetation thereon, and details of the proposed plan to
control and dispose of surface water.
(2) Details of all water-retention or -detention plans, during and after
construction, including discharge provisions, discharge capacity
and spillway provisions, where applicable.
A. General standards. The project plans submitted shall demonstrate
careful consideration of the general and specific concerns, values and
standards of the Municipal Master Plan and applicable county, regional
and state storm drainage control programs and any County Mosquito
Commission control standards and shall be based on environmentally
sound site planning, engineering and architectural techniques.
B. Alternatives to detention basins.
(1) Basin requirements may also be satisfied the following ways:
Tanks, infiltration pits, dry wells or gravel layers underneath
paving may be used for the purpose, with appropriate
consideration for length of life and feasibility of continued
maintenance.
(2) Nonstructural management practices, such as cluster land use
development, open space acquisition, stream encroachment and
flood hazard controls should be coordinated with detention
requirements. Changes in land use can often reduce the scope and
cost of detention provisions required by means of appropriate
changes in runoff coefficients.
C. Specific standards.
(1) Detention basins.
(a) A detention facility must accommodate the volume of site
runoff generated from a two-year, five-year, ten-year and
twenty-five-year twenty-four-hour storm considered
individually (in each case, a Type III rainfall as defined in Soil
Conservation Service Publications, Technical Release No. 55).
§ 251-6 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-7
243:457
Runoff greater than that occurring from a twenty-five-year
twenty-four-hour storm will be passed over an emergency
spillway. Detention will be provided such that, after
development, neither the peak rate of flow from the site nor
the total flow during the hour of maximum release will exceed
the corresponding flows which would have been created by a
similar storm prior to development.
(b) The water quality design storm for dry detention basins shall
be defined as a one-year frequency Soil Conservation Service
Type III twenty-four-hour storm or a one-and-one-fourth-inch
two-hour rainfall. The outlet from the detention facility must
require that the runoff from a settleability design storm be
retained such that not more than 90% will be evacuated prior
to 36 hours for all nonresidential projects or 18 hours for all
residential projects. The retention time shall begin at the time
of peak storage. Retention will not be required in any case to
an extent which would reduce the outlet size to a diameter of
three inches or less.
(c) Multiple level outlets or other fully automatic outlets shall be
designed so that discharge rates from the developed condition
will not exceed the predevelopment runoff rate for a two- , five-
, ten- or twenty-five-year storm considered individually. Outlet
waters shall be discharged from the development at such
locations and velocities as not to cause additional erosion.
(d) Outlets from detention facilities shall be designed to function
without manual, electric or mechanical controls.
(e) In many instances, the provisions of separate detention
facilities for a number of single sites may be more expensive
and difficult to maintain than provisions of joint facilities for a
number of sites. In such cases, the municipality will be willing
to consider provisions of joint detention facilities which will
fulfill the requirements of this regulation. In such cases, a
properly planned staged program of detention facilities may be
approved by the municipality in which compliance with some
requirements may be postponed at early stages while
preliminary phases are being undertaken and construction
funds accumulated.
(f) If detention basins are provided through which water passes at
times other than following rainfall, the Municipal Engineer
should be consulted concerning design criteria. It will be
necessary for detention requirements to be met, despite the
necessity of passing certain low flows. This applies to all online
detention basins.
§ 251-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-7
243:458
(g) Soil borings must be made at least five feet below the lowest
invert of the basin bottom. Two soil borings will be required
per facility.
(h) Where the project consists of two phases, (a) new construction
which required provisions of storm drainage under the terms
of this article and (b) repair or rehabilitation of structures and
surfaces which does not result in increasing the extent of
impervious areas or in rendering existing surfaces less
pervious, the detention requirements may be computed on the
basis of Phase (a) exclusively.
(i) Soil within the recharge system shall be protected with filter
fabric during construction; then, when site construction is
complete, the filter fabric will be removed and basin soils
stabilized.
(j) The location of a detention facility shall be in an area with
seasonal high water a minimum of 1.5 feet below the lowest
invert elevation of the facility.
(k) A low flow channel shall be incorporated into the detention
basin to prevent broad area ponding.
(2) Stabilized access 20 feet wide is to be provided to the detention
facility capable of supporting maintenance vehicles.
(3) Retention-infiltration basin.
(a) A retention basin system must accommodate stormwater
runoff so that the minimum rate of percolation of the soil is 15
minutes per inch, which allows infiltration of 36 inches of
runoff over a three-day period from the basin.
(b) One soil boring shall be required for each 1,000 square feet of
all retention stormwater facilities. All borings must extend 10
feet below the lowest invert elevation of the proposed
stormwater facility.
(c) The location of a retention facility shall be in an area with
seasonal high water a minimum of two feet below the lowest
invert elevation of the facility. Furthermore, the bottom of any
proposed basin shall be at least five feet above any impervious
soil formations found in the soil logs; otherwise, the impervious
layer shall be penetrated at required intervals.
(d) Sediment traps must be located such that all inflowing
stormwater be treated before entering any subsurface
recharge system.
(e) Soil within the recharge system shall be protected with filter
fabric during construction; then, when site construction is
§ 251-7 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-7
243:459
complete, the filter fabric shall be removed and basin soils
stabilized.
(f) A low flow channel shall be incorporated into the retention
basin to prevent broad area ponding.
(g) Stabilized access 20 feet wide is to be provided to the retention
facility capable of supporting maintenance vehicles.
(h) The retention of site runoff as required by this article will
result in the accumulation of sediment, including particulate,
silt and debris. Provision must be made for periodic removal of
accumulated solid materials, such that the basin continues to
operate as designed.
(i) Infiltration practices, such as dry wells, infiltration basins,
infiltration trenches, buffer strips, etc., may be used to satisfy
this requirement, provided that they produce zero runoff from
the water quality design storm and allow for complete
infiltration within 36 hours.
(4) Detention/retention facilities in flood hazard areas.
(a) Whenever practicable, developments and their stormwater
facility basins should be beyond the extent of Zone A5 flood
hazard boundary. When this is not possible and facility basins
are located partially or wholly within Zone A5 (as defined by
New Jersey Division of Water Resources, Bureau of Flood Plain
Management), some storm conditions will make the facility
ineffective at providing retention of site runoff. This will
happen if the stream is already overflowing its banks and the
basin, causing the basin to be filled prior to the time it is
needed for containment of runoff. In such cases, the standards
established in these regulations will be modified in order to
give only partial credit to detention capacities located within
the A5 Zone. The credit will vary in ratio intended to reflect the
probability that storage will be available at the time a storm
occurs at the site.
(b) Stormwater runoff storage parameters shall be based upon the
location and elevation of said facility. If a facility is located on
the edge or within the base flood elevation (A5 Zone), the
following criteria shall be used to determine effective storage:
[1] When the bottom of the stormwater facility is less than two
feet below the base flood elevation, a storage volume of
2 1/2 times the calculated site runoff storage volume must
be accommodated by the basin.
[2] When the bottom of the stormwater facility is between two
feet and four feet below base flood elevation, a storage
§ 251-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-7
243:460
§ 251-8. Calculation methods and supplementary standards.
volume of 10 times the calculated site runoff storage
volume must be provided by the basin.
[3] When the bottom of said facility is four feet or more below
of the base flood elevation, a storage volume of 10 times
the calculated site runoff storage volume must be provided
by the basin.
(c) As an alternative approach to the above criteria, if the
developer can demonstrate that the detention provided would
be effective during runoff from the twenty-five-year twentyfour-
hour Type III storm, peaking simultaneously at the site
and on the flood hazard area, his plan will be accepted as
complying with provisions in the above set criteria.
(5) Landscaping. All detention and retention-infiltration basins shall be
landscaped in the following manner:
(a) Detention basins. All grassed areas shall be sodded into place.
(b) Retention-infiltration basins. Grassed area requirements for
retention-infiltration basins are identical to those of detention
basins in all respects.
(6) Basin design. Design of both detention and retention-infiltration
basin will be the same except for outlet design for detention basins.
(a) Side slopes of all basins shall not exceed three to one.
(b) All basins must maximize the distance between inflow and
outflow.
(c) At inflow point to basins, energy dissipaters should be
incorporated to reduce the velocity of inflowing waters.
(d) Design of facility should be based upon peak rates of runoff for
the entire drainage area upstream from the parcel in question
and design release rates computed on the basis of preexisting
conditions for the entire watershed.
A. Detention facilities. For the purpose of determining the total quantity of
runoff prior to and following development, the applicant shall utilize the
Soil Conservation Service's Technical Release No. 55 (TR-55). This
methodology shall serve as the basis for determining total storage
capacity required subject to the guidelines identified in previous
sections of this report and will also serve as the basis for determining
release rates from the two- , five- , ten- and twenty-five-year storms.
B. Calculations shall be computed on the basis of all areas upstream of the
parcel(s) in question. Peak rates of runoff shall be computed for the
§ 251-7 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-8
243:461
entire area and design release rates computed on the basis of
preexisting conditions for the entire watershed.
C. Maximum curve number values suitable for use in computing runoff
values for on-site undeveloped conditions are as follows:
Hydrologic
Soil Group
Curve Number
Value
A 25
B 55
C 70
D 77
D. Rainfall values for each of the storms used in designing stormwater
facilities include (Type III rainfall distribution):
Storm Event
Total Rainfall (P)
(inches)
2-year 3.5
5-year 4.5
10-year 5.6
25-year 6.0
E. The applicant must identify:
(1) The peak rate of runoff, making adjustments as required for
percent of impervious cover, alterations of hydraulic length and
percentage of watershed as wetland as described in TR-55 and
supplemented by notes provided by the Soil Conservation Service.
Either the tabular method described in TR-55 or the charts
contained in Appendix D of TR-55 shall be used.
(2) Total quantity of runoff utilizing the tabular hydrographic data
contained in TR-55. Total quantities of runoff shall be estimated
prior to and after development by calculating total area under the
hydrograph utilizing hydographic coefficients contained in TR-55.
(3) The relative timing of the peak rate of discharge following onset of
a storm, which shall be identified within the stormwater
calculations.
F. Methods and standards.
(1) For storm sewer design, the rational method may be utilized for
calculating runoff quantities subject to the following criteria:
Design requirements for storm sewers shall be the ten-year storm.
Runoff generated by storms of greater intensity (up to and
§ 251-8 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-8
243:462
including the twenty-five-year storm) shall be directed towards
detention basins or alternative stormwater facilities on the site.
(2) Rainfall intensity (I) shall be computed as a function of time of
concentration by generally accepted procedures found in Seeyles
algebraic equations, Soil Conservation Service Engineering Field
Manual, etc.
(3) Area (A) shall include all off-site acreage draining onto or through
the site.
(4) The coefficient of runoff (C) shall not be less than the values stated
below unless well documented and approved by the Municipal
Engineer:
Surface Minimum C
Structures and pavements 0.90
Cultivated dense or clay soils 0.30
Cultivated sand or loam soils 0.25
Meadows and rural areas 0.20
Heavily wooded areas 0.15
(5) Overall drainage runoff factors will not, in general, be less than the
following:
Proposed Development Minimum C
Site plans (to the limits of
improvements)
0.70
1/4-acre residential 0.50
1/2-acre residential 0.40
1-acre residential 0.30
(6) The above tables are intended as minimum design standards. They
are not mandated design criteria.
(7) Hydraulics will be computed using Manning's equation or generally
accepted nomographs for pipe flow. Pipe may be reinforced
concrete, corrugated metal or other material approved by the
Municipal Engineer.
(8) Minimum friction factors (n) are listed below:
Pipe n
Corrugated aluminum and annular
helical
15 to 27 inches 0.022 to 0.016
30 to 42 inches 0.023 to 0.019
42 inches and greater 0.024 to 0.022
§ 251-8 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-8
243:463
Pipe n
Concrete cast iron 0.013
With paved invert Subtract 0.003
(9) Minimum pipe diameter shall be 15 inches. Maximum distances
between manholes or inlets shall be 500 feet.
(10) Pipe rim elevations shall be matched in all manholes and inlets. In
general, a cover of one diameter shall be maintained over the
drainage pipe. If this is not possible, trench conditions must be
designed and detailed to ensure at least 85% relative compaction.
(11) Inlets shall be specified with cast curb inlets attached. Inlets shall
be depressed one to two inches to increase capacities on steep
grades (6% or more).
(12) Design velocities shall be at least two feet per second and no more
than 10 feet per second.
G. Designed structures. All drainage structures, including manholes,
inlets, headwalls and sections and box culverts, shall conform to the
current details of the New Jersey Department of Transportation. Unless
approved otherwise by the Planning Board Engineer, all curb inlets
shall be standard Type B with curb piece heights equal to the exposed
curb face of the adjacent curb, plus two inches. All lawn inlets shall be
standard Type E. When the pipe size is such as to require a larger
structure, standard Type B1 or B2, E1 and E2 shall be used. If still
larger sizes are required, they shall be specifically detailed using
standard frames and grates.
H. Dished gutters on local streets shall be permitted only at T intersections
involving local streets. Dished gutters shall not be permitted on arterial
or collector streets.
I. Storm drainpipes running longitudinally along streets shall not be
located under curbing.
J. Storm drainpipes shall be reinforced concrete, corrugated aluminum
pipe, pipe arch or helical corrugated pipe and shall be of the size
specified and laid to the exact lines and grades approved by the
Planning Board Engineer. All pipe shall support AASHTO HS-20 loading
per the pipe manufacturer.
K. For both major and minor development, blocks and lots shall be graded
to secure proper drainage away from all buildings, to prevent the
collection of stormwater in pools and to avoid concentration of
stormwater from each lot to adjacent lots.
§ 251-8 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-9
243:464
§ 251-9. Maintenance and repair.
Operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility includes
periodic removal and disposal of accumulated material and debris.
§ 251-10. As-built certification.
Upon final approval of a stormwater management facility:
A. Responsibility for operation and maintenance of the facility lies upon
the owner or owners of the property, unless assumed by a governmental
agency or where portions of the land are sold and legally binding
arrangements shall be made to the successor or new owner in title.
B. A schedule of maintenance shall be required on an annual basis and
shall be submitted to the Municipal Engineer and Construction Official.
In cases where maintenance or repair is neglected, the municipality has
the authority to perform the work and to backcharge the owner.
C. Prior to obtaining preliminary approval, the applicant shall describe in
detail the mechanisms for maintenance, including but not limited to:
(1) Types and quantities of equipment necessary for maintenance.
(2) The methodology for maintaining all stormwater facilities on-site.
(3) The body responsible for the maintenance activity. Where property
is subdivided and sold separately, a homeowners' association or
similar permanent entity should be established as the responsible
entity, absent an agreement by government agency to assume
responsibility.
(4) The lifetime of the stormwater facility.
(5) Itemized costs associated with all maintenance items and
foreseeable costs associated with repair of a system which fails.
D. Prior to receiving final approval, the applicant shall enter into a formal
agreement with the municipality specifying both maintenance bonds,
maintenance responsibilities and maintenance activities. This
agreement shall be in a form satisfactory to the Municipal Attorney and
may include, but not necessarily, guaranties, deed restrictions,
covenants and bonds.
E. In the event that the detention facility becomes a danger to public
safety or health or if it is in need of maintenance, the municipality shall
notify in writing the responsible party. From the notice, the responsible
person shall have 14 days to effect such maintenance and repair of the
facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal Engineer or his
designee. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such
maintenance and repair, the municipality may immediately proceed to
do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible party.
§ 251-9 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-10
243:465
§ 251-11. Single-family and duplex lots.
§ 251-12. Fees.
If no fee is due to the municipality as a result of the applicant's underlying
application for a municipal approval and if the application does not require
the Planning Board or Zoning Board approval process, there shall be due
to the municipality at the time of submission of materials in support of this
application a fee as follows:
§ 251-13. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999]
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
A. A reproducible Mylar as-built construction plan must be submitted to
the Municipal Engineer for documentation of final design.
B. As-built material test results have to be supplied to the Municipal
Engineer from a certified laboratory within two weeks after facility
installation and prior to performance bond release.
C. When excavated and completed, the design engineer shall certify in
writing to the municipality that the stormwater facility will operate as
intended in the design phase, taking into consideration all soil and
water conditions encountered during construction.
A. Stormwater increase.
(1) For all construction upon single-family and duplex lots, there shall
be no increase in stormwater runoff or alteration or runoff flow
downstream causing flooding, erosion, sedimentation or other
similar harmful effect.
(2) This regulation shall apply to all building permit applications.
B. A building permit shall be required for any site work that requires the
movement of more than 20 cubic yards of earth or the construction of
more than 200 square feet of new impervious surface, as well as new
construction for which a building permit is required.
A. One hundred eighty dollars for each 10,000 square feet to be graded or
developed as part of the project, with a minimum of $150 per project.
B. This fee is an approximation of the estimated cost to the municipality to
have its professional staff and consultants review the proposed project.
§ 251-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-13
243:466
ARTICLE II
Stormwater Control for Major Development
[Adopted 7-5-2006 by Ord. No. 25-2006]
§ 251-14. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 251-15.
C. Applicability.
(1) This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
(2) This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the City of Pleasantville.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
§ 251-14 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-14
243:467
§ 251-15. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2, unless modified
specifically for the City of Pleasantville:
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A 58:16A-55.5,
if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 251-14 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-15
243:468
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
means: any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving water body
or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land, or more than 10,000 square feet of
new impervious coverage. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is the
placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil or
bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Pleasantville.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the City of Pleasantville, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
§ 251-15 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-15
243:469
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
§ 251-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-15
243:470
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 251-16. General standards.
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and performance standards for stormwater management
measures.
(1) Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 251-17. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
(2) The standards in this article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or water quality management plan adopted in
§ 251-15 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-16
243:471
§ 251-17. Stormwater management requirements for major
development.
accordance with Department rules. The stormwater management
requirements within this article, as they relate to major
development supercede other design requirements stipulated in
the City Code, including but not limited to the following sections:
(a) City Chapter 290, Zoning and Land Use.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 251-23.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department's Landscape Project or Natural
Heritage Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through
15.150, particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G.
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis that,
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
§ 251-16 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-17
243:472
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at Subsection E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
§ 251-17 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-17
243:473
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of
spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks,
lawns, fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
§ 251-17 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-17
243:474
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate county clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 251-20, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org.
§ 251-17 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-17
243:475
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 251-18, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied; areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department-approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
§ 251-17 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-17
243:476
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 251-18, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
§ 251-17 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-17
243:477
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to
be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsections F(1)(c)[1],
F(1)(c)[2] and F(1)(c)[3] above shall only be applied if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff could increase
flood damages below the point of discharge.
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at § 251-15 shall be submitted to
the appropriate soil conservation district for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable soil conservation district guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
§ 251-17 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-17
243:478
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 251-20, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources
of technical guidance are listed in § 251-20. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
§ 251-17 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-17
243:479
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (A x B)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice
TSS Percent Removal
Rate
Bioretention systems 90
Constructed stormwater wetland 90
Extended detention basin 40-60
Infiltration structure 80
Manufactured treatment device See § 251-19C
Sand filter 80
Vegetative filter strip 60-80
Wet pond 50-90
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
§ 251-17 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-17
243:480
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 251-20.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top-of-bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subparagraph shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil
§ 251-17 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-17
243:481
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
standard for off-site stability in the Standards for Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under the Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.,
then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and soil conservation district
staff to identify necessary stabilization measures; and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
§ 251-17 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-17
243:482
§ 251-18. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover have
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the land
use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
§ 251-17 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-18
243:483
§ 251-19. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55, Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
§ 251-18 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-19
243:484
§ 251-20. Sources for technical guidance.
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 251-21D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 251-21.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 251-17 of this article.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 251-17 of this article, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsections A(1) and A(2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
§ 251-19 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-20
243:485
§ 251-21. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each soil
conservation district may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The soil conservation districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each soil conservation
district may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
§ 251-20 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-21
243:486
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per
square foot.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface. See
Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards. A variance or exemption
from the safety standards for stormwater management basins may be
granted only upon a written finding by the appropriate reviewing
agency (municipality, county or Department) that the variance or
exemption will not constitute a threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
§ 251-21 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-21
243:487
§ 251-22. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
(3) The applicant shall submit 15 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this article.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this article.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map, as
appropriate, may indicate the following: existing surface water
§ 251-21 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-22
243:488
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 251-16
through 251-19 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective of
controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
§ 251-22 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-22
243:489
§ 251-23. Maintenance and repair.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 251-17 of this article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 251-23.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsections C(1) through C(6) of this article
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability. Projects subject to review as in § 251-14C of this article
shall comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
§ 251-22 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-23
243:490
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of non-vegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsections B(6) and B(7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsections B(3) and B(4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
§ 251-23 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-23
243:491
§ 251-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties as indicated in § 251-13 of the Municipal
Code.
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 251-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-24
243:492
ARTICLE III
Private Storm Drain Inlet Retrofitting
[Adopted 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 14-2011]
§ 251-25. Purpose.
This article requires the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which are
in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or resurfacing
or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the discharge of
solids and floatable (such as plastic bottles, cans food wrappers and other
litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the City
of Pleasantville so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 251-26. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Pleasantville or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and
transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 251-27. Prohibited conduct.
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
§ 251-25 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-27
243:493
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 251-28. Design standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in § 251-27 above shall comply with the
following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection C below.
A. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials;
B. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in § 251-28 below prior
to the completion of the project.
A. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inches across the smallest dimension.
(3) Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
B. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than 7.0
square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches across the smallest
dimension.
C. This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
§ 251-27 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-28
243:494
§ 251-29. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Public Works, Code
Enforcement and Construction Official of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 251-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days for each storm drain inlet that is
not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
§ 251-31. Severability:
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
(2) Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches and 1/2 inches wide (this
option does not apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New-Jersey-Register-listed historic property.
§ 251-28 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-31
243:495

ARTICLE IV
Refuse Containers and Dumpsters
[Adopted 8-1-2011 by Ord. No. 14-2011]
§ 251-32. Purpose.
This article requires dumpsters and other refuse containers that are
outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all times and prohibits
the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of liquids, semiliquids
or solids from the containers to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the City of Pleasantville and/or the waters of the state
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties
for the failure to comply.
§ 251-33. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Pleasantville or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and
transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 251-34. Prohibited conduct.
§ 251-32 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-34
243:497
§ 251-35. Exceptions to prohibition.
Exceptions are as follows:
§ 251-36. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Public Works and
Code Enforcement of the City of Pleasantville.
§ 251-37. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
be punishable as such.
§ 251-38. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
A. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
B. Any person who own, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the City of Pleasantville.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 251-34 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 251-38
243:498
Chapter 255
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building materials on sidewalks — See Ch.
105.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Litter on sidewalks — See Ch. 159.
Loitering — See Ch. 163.
Charitable solicitations in roadways — Ch.
195, Art. IV.
Sale of public lands — See Ch. 219.
Abandoned shopping carts — See Ch. 239.
Vehicles and traffic — Ch. 278.
§ 251-38 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 251-38
243:499

ARTICLE I
Construction and Repair of Sidewalks
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 188 of the
1982 Code]
§ 255-1. Sidewalk construction by abutting owners.
The sidewalks of all highways now or hereafter dedicated to public use,
situate within the corporate limits of the city, shall be graded, curbed, paved
and repaired and made to conform to the requirements of this article by
the owners of the respective lots of land fronting or bounding upon such
highways.
§ 255-1.1. Permit required. [Added 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 7-2001]
§ 255-2. Construction of curbing.
The curbing shall be natural or artificial stone or cement. If of stone, each
straight section shall be not less than four feet in length, 16 inches in depth
and four inches in width. The front face shall be straight and true, without
warp or twist. The ends shall be pitched off square and true in order that
the stones may be set with close joints.
§ 255-3. Construction of sidewalks.
A. It shall be unlawful to dig, excavate, open or in any manner interfere
with or disturb within the right-of-way of any municipal street within
the City of Pleasantville for any purpose whatsoever without first
securing a permit in accordance with Chapter 255, Article II.
B. Upon receipt of a street opening permit, a construction permit must be
obtained from the Construction Official.
A. Sidewalks shall be constructed by excavating six inches below the
finished grade. Five inches of concrete shall then be laid, of the
following mixture: one part portland cement, three parts of clean sharp
sand and five parts of broken stone (trap, limestone or other sound
stone free from dirt and dust), which stone shall not be greater than will
pass through a one-inch ring.
B. The cement and sand shall be thoroughly mixed and dry until the
mixture shows a uniform color. The broken stone, having first been wet,
shall then be added to the mass and turned over with the addition of the
necessary quantity of water until the broken stone is thoroughly
incorporated.
C. The wearing or top surface shall be one inch in thickness, applied
before the concrete is set and shall be composed of one part portland
cement, one part of crushed stone or trap rock and one part of clean
sharp pit sand. The surface shall be worked perfectly smooth and true
§ 255-1 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 255-3
243:501
§ 255-4. Composition of unpaved sidewalks.
The unpaved portion of the sidewalk shall be of good gravel or broken stone
screenings, or a combination thereof, or well-kept turf.
§ 255-5. Pitch of sidewalks and driveways.
The pitch or rise of the finished surface of sidewalks from the curb to the
property line shall be at the rate of 3/8 inch per foot, the outer edge to be
flush with the top of curb. The finished surface of private driveways crossing
any sidewalk shall have an inclination or rise from the inner line of the
street gutter of 7 1/8 inches in five feet, with the shape of a double reverse
curve. It shall then rise to the property line at the rate of 3/8 inch per foot.
§ 255-6. Width of sidewalk paving.
The sidewalks of all highways shall be paved for a width of at least five feet,
and at least 1/2 of the minimum allowable width of the paving shall be laid
upon each side of the middle line of the sidewalk; provided, however, that
the sidewalks of Main Street between the southwest side of Pleasant Avenue
and the northeast side of West Jersey Avenue shall be paved for their full
widths.
§ 255-7. Spaces reserved for shade trees.
The paving of sidewalks for spaces adjoining the curbline, which spaces
shall not exceed three feet in width or diameter, shall not be required. Such
space shall be reserved for no other purpose than that of planting shade
trees.
§ 255-8. Notice of noncompliance; time limit for compliance.
If any sidewalk is not graded, curbed, paved or repaired according to
the provisions of this article, the City Engineer shall cause notice of such
contemplated improvement to be given to the owner of any lands thereby
affected. Such notice shall state that the owner of property abutting upon
such sidewalk is required to grade, curb, pave or repair such sidewalk to
conform to the provisions of this article within 30 days from the date of
service of or advertising of said notice.
§ 255-9. Procedure upon refusal of owner to repair.
In case of the neglect or refusal of any such owner, after giving of such
notice as is provided by this article, to grade, curb, pave and repair the
sidewalk of the public highway in front of or adjoining his lot or lots of
land, such sidewalk shall be graded, curbed, paved and repaired by the city,
under the direction and supervision of the Streets and Roads Committee
and the City Engineer, so as to conform to the requirements of this article.
by using a straight edge upon strips about two inches wide by four
inches deep.
§ 255-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 255-10
243:502
§ 255-10. Performance of work by city; securing of bids.
If the owner of any lot shall refuse or fail to comply with the notice required
by § 255-8 of this article within the time prescribed, Council shall cause
such improvement to be made. The City Engineer shall, upon the direction
of the Council, prepare specifications for the work to be done and materials
to be furnished for such improvement, and Council shall by advertisement
secure bids for effecting such improvement; provided, however, that such
bids shall be received by the Council in open session and any and all such
bids may be rejected. The contract, when awarded, shall be awarded by the
Council to the lowest responsible bidder.
§ 255-11. Financing cost of repair.
The cost of such construction and repair of sidewalks shall be paid for out
of moneys to be obtained by issuing temporary notes of the city to finance
local improvements for the purpose of such construction and repair.
§ 255-12. City Engineer's certification of cost.
The City Engineer shall certify to the Council the cost of so constructing
and repairing the sidewalk in front of each lot or parcel of land, designating
such lot or parcel by number as the same appears upon the City Map,154
with the name of the owner as nearly as the same may be ascertained.
§ 255-13. Assessment of costs; recordkeeping.
A. The cost of such grading, curbing, paving and repairing shall be
assessed by resolution of the Council upon the lot or lots of land in front
of which such sidewalks have been so constructed, improved and
repaired, which resolution shall state the name of the owner of each lot
as nearly as may be ascertained, the number of the lots as shown upon
the City Map and the amount assessed thereon. Such assessments
shall, from the date of the passage of such resolutions, become due and
payable and shall be and remain a first lien upon the lots upon which
they are laid until paid and shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per
annum from and after the expiration of 30 days from the date of such
certification.
B. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk forthwith to deliver a certified copy
of the aforesaid resolution to the Collector of Taxes, who shall at once
enter the same in a book to be provided for that purpose to be labeled
"Sidewalk Assessments."155
C. It shall also be the duty of the Tax Collector to whom such assessments
have been returned forthwith to cause a notice of the assessment and
the amount thereof to be given to each person assessed, either
154. Editor's Note: A copy of the City Map is on file in the office of the City Clerk.
155. Editor's Note: A copy of the book labeled "Sidewalk Assessments" is on file in the office of
the City Tax Collector.
§ 255-10 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 255-13
243:503
§ 255-14. Redemption of notes.
The amount of each assessment, when collected, shall be appropriated for
the payment of the temporary loans provided for in § 255-11 of this article
and shall be kept separate from the other funds of the city and shall be
devoted exclusively to the redemption of such temporary notes.
personally or by mail, postage prepaid, directed to the person assessed,
at his last known post office address.
§ 255-13 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 255-14
243:504
ARTICLE II
Street Openings
[Adopted 4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 7-2001156]
§ 255-15. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY OPENING — An urgent and immediate opening and repair
operation required to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general
public from the immediate hazards posed by a broken or leaking main,
an eroded and undermined structure, damaged utilities or other similar
instance involving a sudden and unforeseen hazard on a public street.
PERFORMANCE SURETY — A corporate bond, performance bond, certified
check or other similar security acceptable to the City Solicitor which is
furnished by the applicant as a guaranty of good faith to perform and
complete the work, as described on the application and permit forms, to full
compliance with the construction standards contained herein and to assure
that any subsequent necessary repairs are accomplished as directed by the
City Engineer.
§ 255-16. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to dig, excavate, open or in any manner interfere with
or disturb within the right-of-way of any municipal street within the City
of Pleasantville for any purpose whatsoever without first securing a permit
therefore as hereinafter provided.
§ 255-17. Application; fee.
A. Application for permission to make any street opening between the
curblines, driveways or in any sidewalk area shall be made to the City
Engineer. Such application shall be made on the required application
form and shall be signed by the applicant and shall specify:
(1) The applicant's name, address and phone number (local and out of
town).
(2) The name, address and phone number of the person or firm who
will be performing the work.
(3) The length and width of such excavation.
(4) The purpose for which the excavation is to be made.
(5) The estimated time required to complete the work and restore the
surface.
156. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. II, Street Openings, adopted
6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. II of Ch. 188 of the 1982 Code, as amended.
§ 255-15 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 255-17
243:505
§ 255-18. Newly paved streets.
No permit shall be issued for any street opening which would disturb the
pavement of any road having been constructed, reconstructed or overlaid
until a period of five years after the completion of said construction,
reconstruction or overlay, except in the event of an emergency or hardship
as described below. The five-year period as articulated herein shall be
calculated from December 31 of the year in which said road was
constructed, reconstructed or overlaid and run five years thereafter.
(6) Such other information as may be prescribed by the City Engineer.
B. A fee of $200 shall be paid to the City Clerk, c/o the City Engineer, prior
to the issuance of the permit for all excavations of less than or equal to
six square yards. If said area to be opened, disturbed or undermined
exceeds six square yards, the additional yardage shall be classified as
"excess yardage," and an additional fee shall be due and payable by the
applicant for all yardage in excess of six square yards at a rate of $10
per square yard.
C. The area to be opened, disturbed or undermined by the applicant shall
be measured and determined by the office of the City Engineer.
A. Emergency opening. In the event that an entity shall be required to
open a street and/or roadway as a result of an emergency, said
emergency opening shall be reviewed by the City Engineer, and if said
City Engineer shall determine that no such emergency existed, then the
entity so opening the street and/or roadway shall have a fine imposed
upon such entity in the amount of $1,000 for the first nonemergency
opening, a five-thousand-dollar fine for a second nonemergency
opening and a ten-thousand-dollar fine for a third nonemergency
opening.
B. Hardship condition. In the event in which a property owner has a
hardship condition which requires a street opening permit to be issued
contrary to Subsection A above, the City of Pleasantville may grant
relief if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) A letter addressed to the city, c/o City Clerk, is received detailing
the hardship and necessity of opening the street in lieu of waiting
the prescribed period of time.
(2) Upon receipt of the letter, a public meeting date will be set for the
city to take formal action.
(3) The property owner making the request shall serve a notice to all
property owners within 200 feet, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal hand delivery, a minimum of 10 days
prior to the public meeting.
(4) The property owner shall file a copy of the notice served to
adjoining property owners with an affidavit of proof of delivery of
§ 255-17 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 255-18
243:506
§ 255-19. Issuance of permit.
The Engineer, upon receipt and examination of the application and the
fee referred to herein above, shall issue a permit under his hand for the
excavation. He shall specify on the permit that it is good for a thirty-day
period from the date of issuance. He shall further specify on the permit that
such work shall be completed and restored within 48 hours after work is
commenced or within a duration of time which in his opinion is reasonable
and fair. The applicant shall notify the City Engineer 24 hours before the
commencement of any work so that appropriate inspection can be made
where required.
§ 255-20. Restoration of excavated area. [Amended 11-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 20-2017]
The applicant to whom such permit is issued shall, within the time limited
in such permit, replace the earth and pavement in the excavation in such
manner as proscribed herein and the same shall be left in as good condition
as it was before the excavation was commenced. Except as otherwise herein
stated, all street work performed shall be in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2007, and as amended.
notice with the City Clerk at least three days prior to the public
meeting. The notice must:
(a) Identify the property by street address and block and lot.
(b) State the reason for the hardship.
(c) State the type and size of the utility opening.
(d) Advise the adjoining property owners that, if they have any
objections, they must advise the City Clerk, in writing, as to
their objections to the proposed street opening at least three
days in advance of the public meeting.
(e) State date and time of public meeting.
(f) Be approved by the City Clerk prior to mailing.
(5) The city shall consider the request at a public meeting and review
all objections received in writing. Approval or denial of the request
shall be through formal adoption of a resolution.
(6) A request which included the extension of a utility main shall not be
considered and will be automatically denied.
(7) A request based solely on economic savings shall not be considered
and will be automatically denied.157
157. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding roadway restoration, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 20-2017.
§ 255-18 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 255-20
243:507
Reference to articles or sections hereinafter refer to said state highway
specifications.
A. Trenches shall be backfilled in layers not to exceed six inches and a
vibratory tamper must be used. Ninety-five-percent compaction shall be
required. Puddling of backfill is strictly prohibited. Should there be a
deficiency, additional backfill material shall be supplied by the
permittee. Whenever the City Engineer shall deem the material
unsatisfactory for backfill, the permittee shall provide acceptable
material for the backfill.
B. Roadways with a concrete base shall be restored using a combination of
concrete and asphalt. The amount of concrete and asphalt to be used at
each such excavation shall be as directed by the City Engineer. (See
detail at end of chapter.)
C. Bituminous concrete street restoration specifications.
(1) Gravel. Gravel shall be installed six inches thick. The gravel shall
consist of compact soil aggregate Type I-5. The use of a recycled
asphalt product (RAP) or recycled concrete product may be
substituted for the soil aggregate as long as it meets the New
Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) requirements for I-5
materials. The City Engineer may, at his discretion, submit samples
of the soil aggregate for a gradation analysis, with the costs of said
analysis borne by the applicant.
(2) Temporary roadway restoration.
(a) Less than 100 square feet.
[1] For openings in asphalt roadways that are less than 100
square feet, the temporary restoration will consist of the
installation of six inches of soil aggregate, Type I-5, to a
level of six inches below the level of adjacent paved
surfaces. A four-inch lift of stabilized base course, Mix I-2,
followed by a two-inch lift of a bituminous concrete cold
patch shall be installed to grade.
[2] These temporary surfaces shall be in place for a period of
not less than 45 days to allow sufficient settlement to
occur. Should settlement continue to occur, the City
Engineer shall determine when the work is acceptable for
final restoration. The permittee shall be responsible for all
maintenance deemed necessary by the City Engineer until
such time as the final restoration is completed.
(b) Greater than 100 square feet.
[1] For openings in asphalt roadways that are greater than
100 square feet, the temporary restoration will consist of
the installation of six inches of soil aggregate, Type I-5, to
§ 255-20 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 255-20
243:508
a level six inches below the level of the adjacent paved
surfaces. A six-inch lift of stabilized base course, Mix I-2,
shall then be installed to grade.
[2] These temporary surfaces shall be left in place for a period
of not less than 45 days to allow sufficient settlement to
occur. Should settlement continue to occur, the City
Engineer shall determine when the work is acceptable for
final restoration. The permittee shall be responsible for all
maintenance deemed necessary by the City Engineer until
such time as the final restoration is completed.
(3) Final roadway restoration.
(a) Newly paved streets.
[1] In the event that an emergency or hardship requires the
opening of a roadway that has been resurfaced by the City
during the previous five years pursuant to § 255-18, a fullwidth
restoration will be required. The restoration will
consist of six-inch dense graded aggregate base course,
and a six-inch bituminous stabilized base course, Mix I-2,
brought to existing grade, within the excavated area. A full
width, curb to curb, milling two inches in depth to extend
20 feet beyond the limit of excavations will be performed
after proper settlement in the trench area. The allowable
time for the settlement shall be 45 days unless otherwise
directed by the City Engineer. The final surface course
shall be a two-inch bituminous concrete surface course,
Mix I-5. (See detail at end of chapter.)
[2] Trench restoration may be permitted under special
circumstances and at the option of the City of Pleasantville
and City Engineer for openings having a minimum impact
on the longevity and serviceability of the street in
question. (See detail at end of chapter.)
(b) Streets paved between five and eight years prior to proposed
opening.
[1] Any street opening on a street that has been constructed,
reconstructed, or overlaid between five years and eight
years after the completion of said construction,
reconstruction, or overlay will require a half-width paving
from the center line to the curb on the side affected by the
opening. The trench shall be repaved with six inches of
gravel or similar subbase, four-inch stabilized base (HMA
19M64) to the surface. The half width of the street shall
then be milled 1 1/2 inches deep from the center line to the
curbline a distance of 20 feet on either side of the opening
edges. A one-and-one-half-inch surface course (HMA
9.5M64) shall be machine-placed and rolled as per New
§ 255-20 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 255-20
243:509
Jersey Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Roads and Bridges, 2007, and as
amended.
[2] If the opening crosses over the center line of the street,
the above street repair shall be full-width restoration.
(c) Streets paved over eight years prior to proposed opening.
[1] Where 20% or more of the existing surface width and/or a
distance parallel or longitudinal to the roadway center line
of 25 feet or more has been disturbed, the permittee shall
mill the entire pavement surface from edge to edge or curb
to curb and the full length of the trench plus five feet each
side at a minimum depth of two inches. All milling and
disposal of millings shall be done in accordance with
Division 400 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications. The
permittee shall clean and sweep the milled surface and
apply tack coat in preparation for immediate paving. The
area will then be paved with two inches of HMA 9.5M64
surface course in accordance with Division 400 of the
NJDOT Standard Specifications. The City will require that
the terminal ends of the paving be keyed and cut vertical
to provide a smooth transition to the existing asphalt
surface. Feathering will not be allowed.
[2] Where less than 20% of the existing surface and a distance
parallel or longitudinal to the roadway center line of less
than 25 feet has been disturbed, the permittee shall
sawcut the existing surface course two inches deep at a
location 12 inches beyond the trench surface, and remove
the existing pavement to the same depth. Pavement
removal shall be done by milling or another method as
approved by the City Engineer. The permittee shall clean
and sweep the milled surface and apply tack coat in
preparation for immediate paving. The area will then be
paved with two inches of HMA 9.5M64 surface course in
accordance with Division 400 of the NJDOT Standard
Specifications. The Township will require that the terminal
ends of the paving be keyed and cut vertical to provide a
smooth transition to the existing asphalt surface.
Feathering will not be allowed.
(d) Calculating age of street.
[1] The five-year period as articulated herein shall be
calculated from December 31 of the year in which said
road was constructed, reconstructed or overlaid and run
five years thereafter. The end date of this five-year period
is the beginning date of the five-year to eight-year period
articulated herein.
§ 255-20 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 255-20
243:510
§ 255-21. Performance and maintenance surety.
Before any permit is issued for any work in a public street, certain
performance and maintenance sureties are to be posted with the City Clerk.
[2] The eight-year period as articulated herein shall be
calculated from December 31 of the year in which said
road was constructed, reconstructed or overlaid and run
eight years thereafter. The end date of this eight-year
period is the end date of the five-year to eight-year period
articulated herein.
(e) No surface water shall be entrapped or ponded on the
resurfaced areas. If any ponding occurs, the permittee will be
responsible for performing whatever remedial action is
required by the City Engineer.
(4) If more than one excavation would be required within a fifty-foot
length, a single trench must be used rather than the individual
excavations. Final restoration will require the entire pavement
surface from edge to edge or curb to curb and the full length of the
trench plus five feet each side at a minimum depth of two inches.
All edges shall be coated with an asphaltic tack coat prior to a twoinch
lift of bituminous concrete surface course, Mix I-5, being
placed to a level even with the existing road grade.
(5) In all cases where concrete has to be removed prior to any
excavation, saw cut methods of removal shall be used. The
restoration of the concrete shall be according to the following
specifications:
(a) It shall be Class B with a design strength of 4,000 pounds per
square inch (psi).
(b) It shall have a minimum thickness of not less than four inches
for sidewalk, six inches for driveway aprons and eight inches
for gutter.
(c) It shall have a minimum width of not less than five feet for
sidewalks.
(d) It shall have control joints not more than five feet for sidewalk,
10 feet for curb and gutter and expansion joints and not more
than 20 feet for sidewalk, curb and gutter.
D. By the acceptance of such a permit, the applicant shall be deemed to
have agreed to comply with the terms hereof, and upon his failure to do
so to pay on demand any cost or expense that the City may incur by
reason of any shrinkage or settlement in the excavated area resulting
from such excavation if such shrinkage or settlement shall occur within
three months from the time the surface thereof is restored.
§ 255-20 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 255-21
243:511
§ 255-22. Insurance.
A. Performance surety.
(1) The performance surety shall be in the form of either a corporate
guaranty bond or a surety guaranty bond issued by a company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, in a form
satisfactory to the City Clerk and in the penal sum of 100% of the
full amount of the total estimated construction costs. A certified
check drawn in favor of the City of Pleasantville for the same
amount (100% of the total estimated construction costs) may be
substituted for the performance surety. The estimated costs of the
proposed work shall be based upon current market values, and said
amount shall be prepared by the applicant and approved by the
City Engineer.
(2) In lieu of the above-mentioned performance surety, public utility
companies or authorities may post an annual performance surety
for $10,000 or for an increased amount determined by the City
Engineer. The form of surety shall be approved by the City Solicitor.
B. Maintenance surety.
(1) In addition to the posting of a performance surety, and as a
condition to the release of same, the City of Pleasantville may, at its
discretion, require the applicant to post a maintenance surety in
the form of either a surety or guaranty bond issued by a company
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey, in a form
satisfactory to the City Solicitor and in the penal sum of 15% of the
performance surety. A certified check, drawn in favor of the City of
Pleasantville, for the same percentage (15% of the performance
surety) may be substituted for the maintenance surety.
(2) Public utility companies or authorities posting and continually
maintaining a performance surety in accordance with this section
will not be required to post a separate maintenance surety.
C. The applicant shall be responsible for all maintenance and repairs
required at the site for a period of one year following completion of
construction.
A. All applicants and their agents and employees are required to be
covered by a policy or policies of liability insurance. Said insurance
shall provide coverage for public liability of at least $100,000 per
person per occurrence, $300,000 per occurrence for bodily injury
liability and at least $50,000 per occurrence for property damage.
B. A certificate of insurance that confirms the aforementioned coverage
shall be submitted to the City Engineer whenever a performance surety
is posted.
§ 255-21 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 255-23
243:512
§ 255-23. Clearance for fire equipment.
The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to fire stations and fire hydrants. Materials or
obstructions shall not be placed within 15 feet of fireplugs. Passageways
leading to fire escapes or fire-fighting equipment shall be kept free of
debris, construction materials or other obstructions.
§ 255-24. Protection of traffic.
Protection of traffic must be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
§ 255-25. Responsibility and liability of the city.
§ 255-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction thereof before the Judge of the City Court, be subject
to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or to imprisonment in the city or county jail
for a period not exceeding to 90 days, or both. Penalties for violating the
emergency road opening provisions are contained above in § 255-18, Newly
paved streets, of this article.
§ 255-27. Exemptions.
Street openings and excavations performed by the City of Pleasantville or
agents of the City of Pleasantville are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 255-28. (Reserved).
§ 255-29. (Reserved).
A. The city shall not be responsible for any injury or damage to persons or
property resulting from the negligence of the applicant or his servants,
agents or employees in making, grading or filling any excavation
permitted under the terms of this article.
B. This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the city or any
official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any
person injured in the performance of any excavation work for which an
excavation permit is issued hereunder; nor shall the city or any official
or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or
responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the
issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
§ 255-23 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 255-29
243:513

ARTICLE III
Obstructions158
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. IV of Ch. 188 of the
1982 Code]
§ 255-30. Obstructing traffic on Main Street.
No person shall conduct any market or offer for sale any merchandise from
a stand, wagon, pushcart or any motor or other vehicle when the same is
placed on either side of Main Street so as to be an obstruction of traffic.
§ 255-31. Obstructing traffic on Washington Avenue.
No person shall conduct any market or offer for sale any merchandise from
a stand, wagon, pushcart or any motor or other vehicle when the same is
placed on either side of Washington Avenue so as to be an obstruction of
traffic.
§ 255-32. Obstructing pedestrian traffic.
No person shall place, deposit, display, exhibit or offer for sale his goods,
wares or merchandise upon the streets, highways or sidewalks of the city so
as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of persons over and along
the full width of said streets, highways and sidewalks.
§ 255-33. Dumping on streets and sidewalks.
No person shall throw, dump or deposit any earth, building materials,
dirt, ashes, papers, advertising matter, boxes, rubbish or other articles
upon any street, highway or sidewalk in the city;159 provided, however,
that this section shall not apply to the placing of building materials160 on
the driveways of streets or highways when authorized by permit from the
Building Subcode Official, in which event the person obtaining such permit
shall place a red lantern or lamp on said building materials or other articles
and keep the lantern or lamp constantly burning from 30 minutes after
sunset until 30 minutes before sunrise.
§ 255-34. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-17-1999 by Ord. No.
6-1999; 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 19-2004]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, plus all costs associated with the
illegal dumping.
158. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 195, Peddling and Soliciting.
159. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 159, Littering.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 105, Building Materials.
§ 255-30 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 255-34
243:515

ARTICLE IV
Repairs of Motor Vehicles on Streets
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. V of Ch. 188 of the
1982 Code]
§ 255-35. Repairs on public highways prohibited; exceptions.
No automobile mechanic, keeper or owner or lessee of a garage or any other
person shall repair, service or overhaul any automobile, truck or motor
vehicle of any description upon any of the public highways, streets or alleys
of the city, except as provided in § 255-36 of this article.
§ 255-36. Emergency repairs.
Where an automobile, truck or motor vehicle has failed in operation upon
a public highway, street or alley, emergency repairs necessary to place
said vehicle in operation may be made upon said highway, provided that
said emergency repairs shall be completed in less than 60 minutes and a
permit therefor shall be obtained from the Chief of Police, or the Captain or
Sergeant in charge of the Police Department, who is hereby given authority
to grant or refuse said permit in his discretion.
§ 255-37. Violations and penalties.161
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 255-35 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 255-37
243:517

ARTICLE V
Vacation of City Streets and Alleys
[Adopted 12-2-1991 by Ord. No. 23-1991]
§ 255-38. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to fix fees and establish procedures for the
orderly administration of city process when private individuals solicit the
city to vacate certain street or alleys. The further purpose of this article is
to ensure that the city is compensated for its time and costs when private
individuals petition the city to vacate certain streets or alleys.
§ 255-39. Procedure; fee.162
Any individual who seeks to have the City of Pleasantville vacate any
municipally owned street or alley not needed for public use shall first obtain
from the Pleasantville City Tax Assessor's office a request for street/alley
vacation form. The individual shall then complete this form and return it to
the Tax Assessor's Office, together with a fee in the amount of $200.
§ 255-40. Additional fees.
The Pleasantville City Council reserves the right to request an additional
fee of up to $2,000. Such additional fees shall be calculated at the rate
of $0.50 per square foot of area being vacated to a maximum of $2,000.
Any such additional fee shall be payable before the second reading of said
vacation ordinance. The disposition of the additional fee shall be governed
exclusively by the provisions of § 255-41.
§ 255-41. Disposition of fees.
When the vacation request is acted upon, disposition of the request form
fee(s) shall be as follows:
A. In the event that the City Council decides that the street or alley shall
not be vacated, the request form fee(s) shall be returned to the
individual who made the request by the Tax Assessor.
B. In the event that the City Council decides to fulfill the request and grant
the vacation, said vacation request form fee(s) shall be forfeited to the
city to cover the costs incurred by the city in preparing the necessary
paperwork and in taking the necessary steps for the introduction and
publication of the vacation ordinance and shall not be considered a
selling price for the property vacated.163
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 255-38 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 255-41
243:519
Chapter 261
TAXATION
§ 255-41 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 255-41
243:520
ARTICLE I
Five-Year Exemption and Abatement
[Adopted 11-15-1993 by Ord. No. 28-1993164]
§ 261-1. Residential tax exemptions. [Amended 11-2-2009 by Ord.
No. 38-2009]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1, residential tax exemptions shall be granted
throughout the municipality for the first $25,000 in the Tax Assessor's full
and true value of home improvements for each dwelling unit primarily
and directly affected by the improvement in any dwelling more than 20
years old, as not increasing the value of the property for a period of
five years, notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the
improvements are made is increased thereby. During the exemption period,
the assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment
thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements, unless there is
damage to the dwelling through action of the elements sufficient to warrant
a reduction.
§ 261-2. Commercial and industrial tax exemptions.
The City Council of the City of Pleasantville may enter into agreements with
developers for tax exemption and abatement on commercial and industrial
improvements and/or construction projects and condominium construction
projects pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 providing for the
exemption from real property taxation of improvements and the abatement
of real property taxation on projects for a period of five years, subject to
the following procedures which shall govern agreements for tax exemptions
and tax abatements entered into by the Council and developer:
A. Improvements.
(1) All improvements as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. shall be
exempt from local property taxes if approved by the Tax Assessor
after proper application has been made. Application shall be in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and shall be on forms
prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the
Department of the Treasury and subject to the standards
promulgated by the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs.
(2) With reference to improvements, in determining the value of real
property, the City of Pleasantville shall regard up to the Assessor's
full and true value of the improvements as not increasing the value
of the property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the
value of the property to which the improvements are made is
164. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 36-2003, adopted 11-17-2003, provided for the readoption
and reaffirmation of the tax abatement program contained in this article. Said program
shall continue to be available to those property owners and projects that are eligible
according to the requirements specified in this article and state law.
§ 261-1 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 261-2
243:521
increased thereby. During the exemption period, the assessment on
the property shall not be less than the assessment thereon existing
immediately prior to the improvements, unless there is damage to
the structure through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction.
(3) Applicants shall be encouraged to apply for tax exemptions on
improvements prior to the commencement of construction of the
improvements; however, the application must be filed with the
Pleasantville Tax Assessor within 30 days, including Saturdays and
Sundays, following the completion of the improvement, conversion,
alteration or construction in order to be eligible for tax exemption
thereon.
(4) Every properly completed application for exemption which is filed
within 30 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the
completion of the improvement shall be approved and allowed by
the Assessor to the degree that the application is consistent with
the provisions of this article and/or the tax agreement, provided
that the improvement for which the application is made qualifies as
an improvement pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. and the tax
agreement, if any.
B. Construction projects.
(1) Applicants for tax abatement on construction projects shall make
application to the City Council of the City of Pleasantville and shall
provide the Council with an application setting forth:
(a) A general description of the construction project for which
abatement is sought.
(b) A legal description of all real estate necessary for the
construction project.
(c) Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by
the governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of
the construction project.
(d) A description of the number, classes and type of employees to
be employed at the construction project site within two years
of the completion of the construction project.
(e) A statement of the reasons for seeking tax abatement on the
construction project and a description of the benefits to be
realized by the applicant if tax abatement is granted.
(f) Estimates of the cost of completing such construction project.
(g) A statement showing:
[1] The real property taxes currently being assessed at the
construction project site.
§ 261-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 261-2
243:522
[2] Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by
the applicant on the construction project during the period
of the agreement.
[3] Estimated tax payments that would be made by the
applicant on the construction project during the first full
year following the termination of the tax agreement.
(h) A description of any lease agreements between the applicant
and proposed users of the construction project and a history
and description of the user's businesses.
(i) If the construction project is a multiple dwelling, a description
of the number and types of dwelling units to be provided, a
description of the common elements or general common
elements and a statement of the proposed initial rentals or
sales prices of the dwelling units according to the type and of
any rental lease or resale restrictions to apply to the dwellings
units respecting low- or moderate-income housing.
(j) Such other pertinent information as the governing body may
require.
(2) Upon adoption of an ordinance authorizing a tax agreement for a
particular construction project, the governing body may enter into
a written agreement with the applicant for the abatement of local
real property taxes, provided that the projects construction costs
exceed the sum of $300,000 and the applicant meets the statutory
criteria and the requirements specified herein. The agreement
shall provide for the applicant to pay to the municipality in lieu of
full property tax payments an amount annually to be computed in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10C, providing for tax phase-in
pursuant to said Subsection C for a period of five years.
(3) If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax agreement,
the property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property, or
fails to meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would
have otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due
and payable from the property owner as if no abatement had been
granted. The City Council shall notify the property owner and Tax
Collector forthwith, and the Tax Collector shall, within 15 days
thereof, notify the owner of the property of the amount of taxes
due. However, with respect to the disposal of the property, where it
is determined that the new owner of the property will continue to
use the property pursuant to the conditions which qualify the
property, no tax shall be due, the abatement shall continue and the
agreement shall remain in effect.
(4) No abatement shall be granted, or tax agreement entered into,
pursuant to this article with respect to any property for which
property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid, or for which
penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 261-2 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 261-2
243:523

ARTICLE II
Tax Collection Fees
[Adopted 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 4-2002]
§ 261-3. Enumeration of fees.
The following fees shall be collected by the Tax Collector:
A. Certificate of redemption: $30 each.
B. Duplicate tax bills: $5 each property.
C. Duplicate tax sale certificates: $100 each. [Added 10-20-2008 by
Ord. No. 28-2008]
D. Tax search fee: $10 each. [Added 10-20-2008 by Ord. No. 28-2008]
E. Return check service fee: $20 per check. [Added 10-20-2008 by Ord.
No. 28-2008]
F. A convenience fee for electronic credit card use of 3.25% of the total
charged per transaction via website. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
3-2011]
§ 261-3 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 261-3
243:525

ARTICLE III
Hotel and Motel Occupancy Tax
[Adopted 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 7-2004]
§ 261-4. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to implement the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48f-1 et seq. which authorizes the governing body of a municipality
to adopt an ordinance imposing a tax at an uniform percentage rate not
to exceed 1% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1,
2003, but before July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for
every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel or
motel subject to taxation pursuant to Subsection (d) of Section 3 of N.J.S.A.
54:32b-3 which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant
to statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon
the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 261-5. Definitions.
Unless the context in which they occur requires otherwise, the following
terms when used in this article, shall mean:
CUSTOMER — Includes every occupant of a room or rooms in a hotel.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Division of Taxation of the State
Department of the Treasury or any officer, employee or agency of the
Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury duly authorized
by the Director (directly, or indirectly by one or more redelegations of
authority) to perform the functions mentioned or described in this article.
HOTEL — A building or portion of it which is regularly used and kept open
as such for the lodging of guests. The term "hotel" includes an apartment
hotel, a motel, boardinghouse or club, whether or not meals are served.
OCCUPANCY — The use or possession or the right to the use or possession
of any room in a hotel.
OCCUPANT — A person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has
the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession,
permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement or otherwise.
PERMANENT RESIDENT — Any occupant of any room or rooms in a hotel
for at least 90 consecutive days shall be considered a permanent resident
with regard to the period of such occupancy.
PERSON — Includes an individual, partnership, society, association, jointstock
company, corporation, public corporation or public authority, estate,
receiver, trustee, assignee, referee and any other person acting in a
fiduciary or representative capacity, whether appointed by a court or
otherwise, and any combination of the foregoing.
PERSONS REQUIRED TO COLLECT TAX or PERSONS REQUIRED TO
COLLECT ANY TAX IMPOSED BY THIS ARTICLE — Includes tangible
personal property or services; every operator of a hotel and every lessor.
§ 261-4 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 261-5
243:527
Said terms shall also include any officer or employee of a corporation or
of a dissolved corporation who, as such officer or employee, is under a
duty to act for such corporation in complying with any requirement of this
article and any member of a partnership; provided, however, the vendor of
tangible personal property to all contractors, subcontractors or repairmen,
consisting of materials and supplies for use by them in erecting structures
for others or building on or otherwise improving, altering or repairing real
property of others, shall not be deemed a person required to collect tax, and
the tax imposed by any section of this article shall be paid directly by such
contractors, subcontractors or repairmen.
PURCHASER — A person who purchases property or who receives services.
RECEIPT — The amount of the sales price of any property and the charge
for any service taxable under this article, valued in money, whether received
in money or otherwise, including any amount for which credit is allowed by
the vendor to the purchaser, without any deduction for expenses or early
payment discounts, but excluding any credit for property for the same kind
that is not tangible personal property purchased for lease accepted in part
payment and intended for resale, excluding the cost of transportation where
such cost is separately stated in the written contract, if any, and on the
bill rendered to the purchaser, and excluding the amount of the sales price
for which food stamps have been properly tendered in full or part payment
pursuant to the federal Food Stamp Act of 1977, Pub.L.95-113.
ROOM — Any room or rooms of any kind in any part or portion of a hotel
which is available for or let out for any purpose other than a place of
assembly.
USE — The exercise of any right or power over tangible personal property
by the purchaser thereof and includes, but is not limited to, the receiving,
storage or any keeping or retention for any length of time, withdrawal
from storage, any distribution, any installation, any affixation to real or
personal property or any consumption of such property. Use also includes
the exercise of any right or power over intrastate or interstate
telecommunications, mobile telecommunications services and prepaid
telephone calling arrangements. Use also includes the exercise of any right
or power over utility service.
§ 261-6. Establishment of tax.
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
City of Pleasantville which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of
3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel room in the City of
Pleasantville on or after July 1, 2004, on charges of rent for every occupancy
of a hotel as that term is defined in this article.
§ 261-7. Tax is additional.
The tax shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 261-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 261-8
243:528
§ 261-8. Exemptions.
The tax imposed by this article shall not be imposed on those organizations
specified in the New Jersey Sales and Use section, N.J.S.A. 54:32b-9.
§ 261-9. Payment of the tax and violations for unfair practices.
§ 261-10. Responsibility for collection.
The tax imposed by this article shall be collected on behalf of the City by
the person collecting the rent from the customer. Each person required to
collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable for the tax imposed,
collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any such person shall have
the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a customer as if the
tax were part of the rent and payable at the same time; provided that the
Chief Financial Officer of the City shall be joined as a party in any action or
proceeding brought to collect the tax.
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser.
B. A hotel/motel or any other entity subject to this tax shall not assume or
absorb any tax imposed by this article.
C. A hotel/motel or any other entity subject to this tax shall not in any
manner advertise or hold out to any person or to the public in general,
in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the tax will be assumed or
absorbed by the hotel/motel or any other entity subject to this tax, that
the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the customer or
that the tax will be refunded to the customer.
D. Each assumption or absorption by a hotel/motel or any other entity
subject to this tax of the tax shall be deemed a separate offense, and
each representation or advertisement by a hotel/motel or any other
entity subject to this tax for each day that the representation or
advertisement continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 261-8 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 261-10
243:529

ARTICLE IV
Exemption for Single-Family Residential Structures
[Adopted 5-19-2014 by Ord. No. 12-2014]
§ 261-11. Tax exemption and abatement.
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:12-1 et seq. providing for tax exemptions
and abatements for single-family residential projects is hereby adopted
for the Block 189 Rehabilitation Area and the residential dwellings to
be constructed thereon by the redeveloper, and all relevant provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. including but not limited to application procedures,
tax abatement agreements and payment in lieu of taxes shall be available
for construction of new single-family dwellings on the Block 189
Rehabilitation Area.
§ 261-12. Application.
Applicants for such tax abatement for new residential dwellings in the Block
189 Rehabilitation Area shall make application to the City Council of the
City of Pleasantville on application forms provided by the City Council and
such applicants shall provide all information required in such application.
§ 261-13. Terms and conditions.
Upon approval, the applicant for tax abatement shall enter into an
agreement with the City, which agreement shall provide the terms and
conditions of the tax abatement.
§ 261-14. Accordance with statutes.
Such tax abatement agreements shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:21-10 and such abatement shall be on a tax phase-in basis in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:21- 10(c).
§ 261-15. Applicability.
The provisions of this article apply to new single-family residential
development on the Block 189 Rehabilitation Area only.
§ 261-16. Severability.
Should any section, clause, sentence, phrase or provision of this article be
declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such decision shall not affect the remaining provisions of this article.
§ 261-17. Inconsistent provisions.
All other ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are, and to the extent of such inconsistency, hereby
repealed.
§ 261-11 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 261-18
243:531
§ 261-18. When effective.
This article shall be effective immediately upon its being adopted by the City
Council of the City of Pleasantville and published as required by law.
§ 261-18 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 261-18
243:532
Chapter 265
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 155.
Motorbuses — See Ch. 167.
Taxi stands — See Ch. 278, § 278-43.
§ 265-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Pleasantville, Atlantic County, New Jersey.
DRIVER — Any person who drives a taxicab within this city.
ENTITY — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies.[Added 5-21-2001 by Ord. No.
11-2001; amended 11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 45-2006]
OWNER — Any individual, partnership or corporation licensed by the City
for ownership rights.
RENTER — Any person who has filed a leasing disclosure statement and
filed the necessary papers to lease a taxicab.
SENIOR CITIZENS — Any person 62 years of age or older.
STREET — Includes any street, avenue, park, local, county, state or federal
highway or other public roadway located within the city, whether or not the
same is an improved road.
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motor car capable of carrying up to six
passengers, including the driver, duly licensed by the City and engaged in
the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out, announced
or advertised to operate or run or which is operated and run over any of
the streets within the City and which accepts passengers for transportation
from points and places within the City to points and places within or
without the same city; provided, however, that nothing herein contained
shall include autobuses, streetcars, limousines, jitneys or such public
conveyances as are by law exclusively subject to state and/or federal
regulation.
§ 265-2. Administrative authority; rules and regulations; appeals.
A. The licensing, inspection and control of taxicabs and the owners and
operators thereof, the examination of applicants for licenses to operate
such taxicabs and the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
shall be vested in the Mayor and Public Safety Committee of the City
Council.
§ 261-18 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 265-2
243:533
§ 265-3. Vehicle conformity required.
No taxicab license shall be granted authorizing the operation of any vehicle
as a taxi unless said vehicle conforms with all the provisions of this chapter.
§ 265-3.1. Taxicab stands. [Added 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 4-2001]
There shall be no taxicab stands on the streets of the City of Pleasantville
unless otherwise established by the Public Safety Committee of City
Council. The following taxi location is hereby designated: the north side of
East West Jersey Avenue from a point 225 feet east of the easterly line of
Main Street to a point 100 feet east therefrom.
§ 265-4. Number of licenses.
B. The Mayor and Public Safety Committee may promulgate reasonable
rules and regulations affecting the operation, use of and inspection of
taxicabs, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. Said rules
and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall only be
effective upon approval by the City Council.
C. The Public Safety Committee of City Council shall hear all appeals
taken from any action or decision of the City Clerk and/or Police Chief.
A. City Council determined that the number of taxicabs necessary for the
convenience of the residents of the City shall not exceed 30 in number.
Taxicab licenses shall not be issued and outstanding for more than 30
taxicabs unless City Council, by resolution, from time to time shall find
and determine that the public convenience and necessity require a
greater or lesser number than 30 and fixed said maximum number.
B. At such time that the City Council determines the number of licenses
should be increased or the City has acquired any licenses through
revocation or repossession, the additional licenses shall be offered
through a lottery procedure.
C. In order to qualify for the lottery, the applicant must certify, in writing,
that he/she is financially capable of paying an amount equal to the fair
market value of the license at the time of the lottery. The fair market
value shall be established by the Public Safety Committee of the City
Council. The average of the three most recent sales and input from the
owners will be considered by the Committee. The City Clerk my require
whatever additional information is necessary to establish that the
applicant is financially capable. The applicant must be 21 years of age.
D. The applicant shall only be entitled to obtain one license in the lottery,
regardless of the number of licenses involved in said lottery.
E. Each applicant who shall participate in the lottery shall pay a deposit of
$1,000, to be in the form of a certified check. After said lottery, the one
who is to receive the license must pay the balance of the fair market
value within 60 days. If the payment is not made within said period, the
§ 265-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 265-4
243:534
§ 265-5. Licenses.
There are hereby established three classes of taxicab licenses to be known
as "taxicab owner's license," "taxicab driver's license" and "taxicab renter's
license."
§ 265-6. Applications.
City shall retain the license and the deposit of $1,000 shall be forfeited
to the city.
F. Taxicabs licenses, ownership, renters or operators, shall be limited to
no more than eight per entity. [Amended 4-2-2001 by Ord. No.
4-2001; 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 11-2001; 10-16-2006 by Ord. No.
39-2006]
G. The City shall deliver to the taxicab owner a certificate of ownership for
the taxicab license.
A. Taxicab owner's license. A taxicab owner's license shall entitle a taxicab
therein described to pick up passengers within the City and to
otherwise be lawfully operated anywhere within this City by a driver
duly licensed hereunder and by the New Jersey Division of Motor
Vehicles until either of said licenses expire or are surrendered,
suspended or revoked and shall not be transferable. Taxicab owner's
licenses shall be limited to no more than two per owner.
B. Taxicab driver's license. A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the
person named therein to operate within this City any taxicab duly
licensed hereunder and by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles
until either of said licenses expire or is surrendered, suspended or
revoked and shall not be transferable. There shall be no limit to the
number of taxicab driver's licenses issued.
C. Taxicab renter's license. A taxicab renter's license shall entitle the
person named therein to rent and/or lease and operate one taxicab
within this city. The taxicab shall be duly licensed by the owner with the
City and by the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles until either of
said licenses expire or is surrendered, suspended or revoked. The
taxicab renter's license shall not be transferable.
D. No one is permitted to operate a taxicab in the City of Pleasantville
unless they have been issued a license by the City Clerk. This includes
the picking up of any passengers within the City limits. [Added
4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 4-2001]
E. No one is permitted to operate a taxicab in the City of Pleasantville
unless they are operating as a representative of a company that has
been approved by the City of Pleasantville. [Added 6-2-2008 by Ord.
No. 12-2008]
§ 265-4 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 265-6
243:535
A. All applications for a taxicab owner, taxicab driver, taxicab renter's
license and renewal license shall contain: [Amended 6-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 12-2008]
(1) The full name and address of the owner.
(2) The serial number, color, year, make and model of the taxicab.
(3) The state registration number, number of doors on said vehicle and
number of persons the vehicle can carry as passengers.
(4) The name of the insurance company, policy number and name and
address of the insurance agent.
(5) Valid NJ registration, NJ license plates and a regular NJ driver's
license that is not in a provisional status.
B. All applications shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall, prior to the
issuance of said license, receive proof thereof or, if organized and
existing under the laws of another state, be officially able to do business
in the State of New Jersey and must supply the name and address of the
New Jersey registered agent for said corporation.
C. Each applicant for a taxicab owner's license, driver's license or renter's
license shall:
(1) In addition to any law of the State of New Jersey, establish to the
satisfaction of the Public Safety Committee of the City Council or
its designee that such applicant is currently licensed by the
Division of Motor Vehicles of New Jersey and maintains a valid
license by the standards set forth:
(a) The latest offense was of such a nature that it revealed an
unreasonable disregard by the licensee for the safety and
welfare of himself or others.
(b) The number and seriousness of the offenses contained in the
prior driving record of the licensee reveal a pattern or patterns
of unreasonable disregard by the licensee for the safety and
welfare of himself or others.
(c) The nature and extent of the driving record of the licensee
establish a substantial risk that the licensee will commit
another offense.
(2) Be at least 21 years of age.
(3) Be a legal resident of the State of New Jersey.
(4) Submit a certificate from a licensed physician of the State of New
Jersey at the applicant's expense certifying that the applicant has
been examined within the preceding 30 days and that the applicant
has no infirmity of body or mind or visual impairment or deficiency
which might render the applicant unfit for the safe operation of a
§ 265-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 265-6
243:536
§ 265-7. Investigation of applicant. [Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
12-2008]
taxicab; said physician's certificate shall be presented at the time
of the initial application and at the time of alternate renewals
thereafter.
(5) Submit a certified driver's license abstract from New Jersey
Division of Motor Vehicles showing the driving record and traffic
violation check for the preceding three years. Applicants must not
carry in excess of nine points on their driver abstract and have
sufficient knowledge of the city's traffic regulations.
(6) Furnish with the application two recent photographs of the
applicant being not less than 1 1/4 inches in height by one inch in
length. One photograph is to be filed with each application and one
is to be attached to an identification card which is to be displayed in
the interior of the taxicab driven by the applicant.
(7) Exhibit a working knowledge of the English language by locating
places on a map of New Jersey or Atlantic County, when asked, and/
or explaining, in detail, how to reach certain destinations within
Atlantic County to the licensing official's satisfaction.
D. All applications shall be filed with the City Clerk who shall submit said
applications upon the completion of the investigation to the Public
Safety Committee of the City Council.
E. Employees of the Pleasantville Police Department and members of their
family shall not own, operate, lease or have any interest in taxicab
licenses in the City of Pleasantville. [Added 4-2-2001 by Ord. No.
4-2001]
A. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license, taxicab owner's license or
taxicab renter's license shall be required to submit to an investigation,
processing a criminal background check for both state and local for any
criminal record. No application for a taxicab driver's license or taxicab
owner's license shall be approved until such time as the applicant has
executed a form of consent and release so as to permit the Pleasantville
Police Department to conduct such investigation as may be required in
order to determine that the applicant substantially complies with the
meaning, intent and purpose of this chapter.
B. The following guidelines for criminal background investigation could
disqualify an applicant pending the approval by the Public Safety
Committee:
(1) Conviction of a first or second degree crime.
(2) Conviction of a third or fourth degree crime within the five years
prior to licensing application date.
§ 265-6 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 265-7
243:537
§ 265-8. Leasing of taxicabs.
(3) Conviction of an offense, Title 2C, Chapter 14 (sex offenses).
(4) Conviction of an offense, Title 2C, Chapter 35 (controlled
dangerous substance), within the five years prior to licensing
application date.
(5) Conviction of two or more disorderly persons offenses within one
year prior to licensing application date.
C. The following guideline for motor vehicle traffic/driving record could
disqualify an applicant pending the approval by the Public Safety
Committee:
(1) Two convictions of any violation of Title 39, Chapter 4, within one
year prior to licensing application date.
(2) Two reportable accidents within one year prior to licensing
application date that can be determined to be the fault of the
applicant.
(3) An average 1.5 convictions of Title 39, Chapter 4, for the last three
years, one of which occurred within one year prior to licensing
date.
(4) A combination of one reportable accident and one conviction of
Title 39, Chapter 4, that stems from separate incidents within one
year prior to licensing application date.
(5) A conviction of operating an uninsured vehicle within one year
prior to licensing application date.
(6) A conviction of Title 39, Chapter 4-50 (DWI), within 10 years prior
to licensing application date.
(7) Any other convictions or combinations thereof contained in these
guidelines (both criminal and motor vehicle) which, in the
investigator's opinion, would affect the public health and safety and
welfare.
A. A taxicab owner may lease or rent a taxicab to another party. Prior to
the renter taking possession of the taxicab, a leasing disclosure
statement signed by both parties must be filed, in person, by the taxicab
owner with the City Clerk, indicating:
(1) The date of execution of the lease.
(2) The names and addresses of the owner and renter and their
respective social security or federal identification numbers.
(3) The owner's Pleasantville taxi license number and the New Jersey
license plate number of the taxicab to be rented.
§ 265-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 265-8
243:538
§ 265-9. Insurance.
(4) The term of the lease which shall not exceed one year in duration.
(5) The name and address of the renter's insurance carrier, the policy
number and expiration date thereof, together with a copy of the
cover sheet of said policy which specifically covers Pleasantville
City as an additional first party insured and which shall otherwise
contain a hold-harmless agreement from the carrier on behalf of
the renter for the benefit of the City of Pleasantville.
B. Regardless of the term of the lease, the owner is responsible for
complying with all national, state, county and municipal laws, rules and
regulations governing taxicab owners.
C. If a lease or its renewal is terminated for any reason, the taxicab owner
shall notify the City Clerk in writing within 48 hours of such
termination.
D. A taxicab owner shall not authorize or permit a renter of the taxicab to
sublease the taxicab to another party. Renters are specifically
prohibited from subleasing the taxicab leased from an owner, and
taxicab renters are required to be an operator of the taxicab which they
lease or rent.
E. With respect to a leased cab there shall be no more than three drivers of
said cab, which may either be the owner and two renters or three
renters, in which case the owner shall not be permitted to be a driver of
that cab.
F. A renter may be a renter to no more than two owners and shall not,
therefore, at any time for any reason operate any other taxicab other
than the one(s) he/she leases. [Amended 4-19-1999 by Ord. No.
16-1999]
A. Each applicant for a taxicab owner's license or taxicab renter's license
shall be accompanied by a policy of insurance, with the premium
prepaid thereon, written by an insurance company duly licensed to
transact business under the insurance laws of the State of New Jersey,
which shall be submitted to the City Clerk and to the City Solicitor for
approval as to form and sufficiency. A certificate of insurance must be
submitted to the City Clerk prior to a license being approved.
B. Such policy shall be conditioned for payment of a sum required to
satisfy all claims for damage by reason of bodily injury to or the death of
all persons or property damage as follows: Up to six-passenger vehicle,
not less than $100,000 combined single limit. [Amended 7-19-2004
by Ord. No. 17-2004]
C. Such policy shall provide coverage for every driver of each vehicle
listed in the policy and the acceptance of said policy by the City of
Pleasantville, and the issuance of the license by the City shall constitute
§ 265-8 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 265-9
243:539
§ 265-10. Power of attorney.
No taxicab owner's, renter's or driver's license shall be issued until the
applicant therefor shall have delivered to the City Clerk, concurrently with
the filing of the application and insurance policy referred to herein, a power
of attorney executed by said applicant wherein and whereby the applicant
shall appoint the City Clerk for the City as his or her, its true and lawful
attorney for the purpose of acknowledging service of any process out of
court of competent jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of
the indemnity granted under the insurance policy filed.
§ 265-11. Term of license; fees.
§ 265-12. Revocation of license.
The Public Safety Committee of City Council or its designee may, in its
discretion, refuse to issue or renew or may, after notice and hearing, revoke
or suspend any license issued under the provisions of this chapter if the
applicant has been convicted of any crime, disorderly persons offense or
petty disorderly persons offense in this state or in any other state or
territory or has been convicted of a violation under Title 39, Motor Vehicles
and Traffic Regulations, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey or who
violates any provision of this chapter or has any judgment unsatisfied of
record arising out of an automobile accident or who has made false answers
in the application for such license, or any renewal thereof, or who has
failed or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe and adequate taxi services
or who has not complied fully with all requirements of this chapter for
such class of licensure, or if the licensee or applicant has in any degree
an agreement by and between the applicant and the City that the
applicant holds and saves harmless the City from any and all claims
from damages arising out of personal injury and/or property damage
made by third parties as the result of the issuance of said license and
the operation of said license and the operation of a taxicab. In the event
that such policy is canceled for any reason, a notice of such action must
be delivered to the City of Pleasantville.
A. A taxicab license shall be issued for a term of one year commencing
April 1 and expiring March 31 of the following year.
B. The annual license fee for each taxicab owner's license is $150.
C. The annual license fee for each taxicab driver's license is $100.
D. There shall be a $15 transfer fee for the issuance of a taxicab owner's
license for a vehicle replacing that originally issued. This fee shall be
for the administrative cost involved in processing the vehicle.
E. There shall be a fee of $10 for the replacement of any license or ID.
F. There shall be a fee of $5 for the replacement of each door decal
(emblem).
§ 265-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 265-12
243:540
contributed to any injury to person or damage to property arising out of
negligent operation of a motor vehicle or as to any taxicab owner's license
if the motor vehicle licensed or to be licensed by reason of unsafe or
unsanitary conditions is dangerous to the safety or health of the occupants
and others, or if the policy of insurance required herein has once lapsed or
such coverage is not maintained at all times or a taxicab at any time carries
more passengers than the same is authorized to carry by the terms of this
chapter.
§ 265-13. Rates/fares.
§ 265-14. Rules and regulations for owners.
A. A rate schedule shall be established for the operation of licensed
taxicabs, promulgated by the Mayor and Public Safety Committee of the
City Council. The rate schedule shall at all times be on file with the City
Clerk. A copy of said rate schedule shall also be distributed by the City
Clerk to each taxicab licensee. The rate schedule and all changes shall
become effective upon approval by resolution of the City Council.
B. No taxicab shall be operated in the City unless and until there is
predominantly displayed in the interior thereof, within full view and
access of any passengers therein and on the exterior of the vehicle, a
complete list of rates.
C. No taxicab shall at any time carry more than five passengers unless
otherwise designated on the taxicab owner's license.
D. Every driver of such taxicab shall have the right to demand payment of
legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid;
but no driver of such vehicle shall otherwise refuse or neglect to convey
any orderly person or persons upon request anywhere in the City unless
previously engaged or unable to do so. No driver of any such taxicab
shall carry any other person than the first passenger employing him,
without the consent of the first passenger.
E. Senior citizens who are residents of the City of Pleasantville shall
receive a discount from any posted taxi fare, and said reduced rate shall
be prominently posted on the interior of the taxicab.
A. No sale or transfer of a taxicab license shall be transacted without
approval from the Public Safety Committee. The seller and buyer of the
taxicab license shall supply the City Clerk with all required information
regarding the transfer.
B. A vehicle listed on the license may be substituted or replaced by
another vehicle only after the vehicle sought to be substituted shall
have been inspected and approval given by the Chief of Police and such
vehicle complies with the provisions of this chapter.
C. An owner shall replace a taxicab when ordered by the City Clerk and/or
the Chief of Police where it appears that the vehicle no longer meets the
§ 265-12 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 265-14
243:541
reasonable standards for safe operation. Upon failure to comply with
such order, the license may be suspended by the Public Safety
Committee, upon written notice of the action proposed and an
opportunity to be heard by the Public Safety Committee. The license
shall not be returned until said order is executed by the licensee.
Notwithstanding the above, any taxicab that is 13 years old as of
January 1 of the licensing year shall have until December 31 of the same
calendar year before the taxicab (vehicle) is to be replaced. [Amended
4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 4-2001; 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 11-2001;
7-5-2006 by Ord. No. 21-2006; 1-20-2010 by Ord. No. 1-2010;
12-1-2014 by Ord. No. 27-2014]
D. Licenses granted under the preceding section of this chapter may be
revoked or suspended at any time by the City Clerk, as hereinafter
provided, subsequent to a hearing by the Mayor and Public Safety
Committee if the vehicle shall not be in a safe condition for the
transportation of passengers and kept in conformity to the terms of this
chapter.
E. The owner of a taxicab license shall maintain a record of all repairs to
the vehicle at all times, and all repairs, however minor, shall be
recorded.
F. The owner of any taxicab, the use of which has been discontinued, shall
surrender his/her emblem and license to the City Clerk.
G. A taxicab license cannot lie dormant more than six months. If said
license remains dormant, it shall revert to the city. If, however, an
extension is needed, a written request shall be made to the Mayor and
Public Safety Committee, detailing reasons for such request. This
petition must be received by the City Clerk prior to the expiration of the
six months. A decision shall be rendered by the Public Safety
Committee, after written notice and a hearing before said Committee.
The burden will be on the owner of the license to show a reason of
undue hardship.
H. The owner of any taxicab shall record all requests for service as
received and retain a record of each such call for no less than one year.
Records shall contain no less than the following:
(1) Date and time received.
(2) Location at which passengers(s) is to be picked up; driver to whom
the call was assigned.
(3) Destination of passengers.
I. An owner shall report any motor vehicle accident involving his/her
taxicab to the City Clerk within 24 hours, regardless of the jurisdiction
in which the accident occurred.
§ 265-14 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 265-14
243:542
§ 265-15. Rules and regulations for drivers and mentors.
J. An owner shall not require, authorize or permit a driver to operate a
taxicab for more than 12 hours in any continuous twenty-four-hour
period.
K. An owner shall make sure that all drivers have a copy of the rules and
regulations governing drivers. An owner shall not issue orders to a
driver which are in conflict with these rules and regulations. Owners
shall exact from drivers full compliance with the rules and regulations
issued by the city. An owner shall promptly notify the City Clerk of any
violation of rules by a driver and any fact, condition or occurrence of
said violation.
A. Upon approval by the Chief of Police, the taxicab driver's license will be
issued. This license shall be displayed on the visor, passenger side,
continuously visible to all passengers.
B. There shall be issued to each licensed driver an identification card
which shall be constantly and conspicuously displayed on the outside of
the driver's coat or shirt when he/she is on duty. No vehicle shall be
operated, except by a duly licensed person who is wearing such
identification card conspicuously displayed.
C. No owner or operator of any taxicab shall induce any person to use said
taxi by knowingly misinforming or misleading any such person, either
as to the time or place of the arrival or departure of any interstate
vehicle or as to the location of any hotel or public place, nor shall any
owner or operator induce any person to use any route other than the
route to which the passenger instructed said driver to use.
D. No taxicab owner or operator, or employee of either, shall divert or
attempt to divert any passenger from patronizing any place of business
of his/her choice to any place of business.
E. No taxicab owner or operator, or employee of either, shall offer or give
money or other thing of value to any employee of any place of business
in consideration for the soliciting or obtaining of taxicab passengers for
the aforesaid taxicab owner, operator or agent or employee of either.
F. All taxicab drivers shall, at all times while operating their taxicabs,
wear clothing that is clean and neat.
G. The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render
to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a
mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt, on
which shall be the name of the owner, license number or motor number,
amount of meter reading or charges and the date of the transaction.
H. No alcoholic beverages shall be carried in the passengers' or driver's
section of the taxicab except by the passenger. The passenger shall not
§ 265-14 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 265-15
243:543
§ 265-16. Construction of taxicab and required equipment.
carry an open or unsealed can or bottle containing an alcoholic
beverage upon entry into the taxicab or while riding in the taxicab.165
I. Every operator of a taxicab, immediately after the discharge of a
passenger, must search such taxicab for any property lost or left
therein, and any such property found, unless sooner claimed or
delivered to the owner, must be reported in writing by the operator or
owner of the taxicab to the City Clerk with the particulars and
description of the property within the 12 hours after the finding thereof.
J. A driver shall not indicate by word, motion or gesture that he/she is
restricting his/her direction of travel or destination. The taxicab driver
shall not ask a passenger for a destination until the passenger is seated.
K. Official notice will be taken of any misconduct, deceit, fraud, subterfuge
or actions of the driver which are against the best interest of the public,
even though not specifically mentioned in the rules. Any violation of
these rules may result in suspension or revocation of license.
L. A driver shall record every trip as follows: date and time call was
received, location where passengers were picked up and the
destination of passengers.
A. All taxicabs shall have four doors, two leading into the passengers'
compartment and two leading into the driver's compartment. The doors
shall be so constructed that they may be opened from the inside and the
outside. Each door shall be constructed with an approved safety lock.
B. Emblems furnished by the City are to appear on the exterior of both
front doors of the vehicle. These will be furnished by the City and
replacements will be supplied for a fee. Rate schedules are to appear on
the exterior of both rear doors of the vehicle, and the number of the
taxicab shall be affixed to the driver's side of the rear window. The
number shall consist of block letters at least five inches in height.
[Amended 4-2-2001 by Ord. No. 4-2001]
C. On the top of the taxicab, there shall be a sign at least 12 inches wide by
six inches high made of plastic on which there shall be the word "taxi"
or the name of the company. The sign is to be illuminated by a white
bulb.
D. Tinted windows are prohibited at all times.
E. The exterior of the taxicab shall be clean and free of obvious dents and
scrapes, and the paint is to be uniform in color.
F. The interior of the taxicab shall be clean and orderly.
165. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 84, Alcoholic Beverages.
§ 265-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 265-16
243:544
§ 265-17. Inspections prior to and after issuance of license.
G. All equipment, including safety seat belts, shall be functional and in
working order at all times.
H. No taxicab license shall be issued or renewed unless and until proof has
been given to the Licensing Officer that such taxicab has adequately
provided for the safety of children under the age of eight and weighing
less than 80 pounds who are passengers in a taxicab operated by the
applicant pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2 et seq. and the Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standards. Such proof shall consist of a written policy or
posted notice at the base of operation and in all taxicabs, conspicuous
to drivers, setting forth that, prior to the operation of the taxicab,
children 18 months of age or younger who are passengers in a taxicab
shall be placed in a child restraint seat. No children under the age of 13
will be permitted to ride in the front seat of the taxicab. All children
under the age of 18 must wear a seatbelt while riding inside of the
taxicab. Every taxicab licensed must keep and maintain a federally
approved car seat in the passenger compartment or trunk of the
licensed vehicle at all times, for use in accordance with the section.
[Amended 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 2-2002; 6-2-2008 by Ord. No.
12-2008]
I. Every cab must have a protective safety shield between the driver seat
and rear passenger seat. [Added 5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 11-2001]
J. The taxicab must display a current valid New Jersey Department of
Motor Vehicle Commission inspection certificate. [Added 6-2-2008 by
Ord. No. 12-2008]
A. Before a taxicab license is issued, the taxicab shall be inspected by a
member of the Police Department to ascertain whether such taxicab
complies with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Subsequent to annual renewal of the taxicab license during the month
of March and again during the month of September, taxicabs shall be
inspected by a member of the Police Department to ensure the
continued maintenance of the safe and sanitary operating conditions as
required by this chapter.
C. In addition, it shall be the duty and right of a member of the Police
Department to inspect the taxicab for the purpose of ascertaining
whether or not this chapter is being violated. During the month of
March, the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Inspection team will conduct a
taxicab inspection in conjunction with the Pleasantville Police
Department to ensure the continued maintenance and the safe
operating conditions of the taxicab as required by this chapter.
[Amended 6-2-2008 by Ord. No. 12-2008]
D. Revocation or suspension of license.
§ 265-16 SIGNS, TEMPORARY § 265-17
243:545
§ 265-18. Rules of operation.
§ 265-19. Violations and penalties.
(1) Rejection of any safety equipment, violation for safety reasons or
any vehicle found to be in an unsafe condition for taxicab purposes
under this chapter is subject to immediate suspension or
revocation of license.
(2) Rejection due to damage of the taxicab or any other noncompliance
of this section will be subject to a warning notice allowing 14 days
to rectify and comply. A reinspection will be made by a member of
the Police Department, and if the taxicab is still in violation, the
license will be subject to immediate suspension or revocation.
(3) If a taxicab is rejected by the New Jersey Motor vehicle inspection
team or the Pleasantville Police Department for any violations, it
will be subject to a warning notice and allowed 14 days to rectify
the violations and to have the taxicab reinspected at a central
inspection facility only. Private inspection facilities, will not be
accepted, no exceptions. A member of this police department will
make a reinspection. If the taxicab was inspected at a private
inspection facility and/or still failed state inspection after the 14
days, the license will be subject to immediate suspension or
revocation.
E. Licenses granted under the preceding section of this chapter may be
revoked or suspended at any time by the Mayor, if the vehicle shall not
be in safe condition with the terms of this chapter.
A. The operator will have his/her safety seat belt engaged at all times that
this vehicle is in operation. Also, any passengers in the front seat will
engage the seat belt.
B. Capacity shall be limited to three passengers in the rear seat, one
passenger for each jump or bucket seat and two passengers in the front
seat with the driver, making all licensed taxicabs limited to seat seven
or five passengers, depending on whether the particular licensed
taxicab contained jump or bucket seats. Should the owner's insurance
policy permit more passengers than this section permits, an exception
to this section is permitted to automatically allow whatever number of
passengers is indicated in said insurance policy.
C. No licensee, without justifiable grounds, shall refuse to take any
passenger or prospective passenger to any destination.
D. No charge shall be made for time consumed or distance traveled from
the point of dispatch to point of pickup.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a
§ 265-17 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 265-19
243:546
Chapter 266
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, WIRELESS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
§ 266-1. Purpose and intent.
period of community service not exceeding 90 days. [Amended
2-17-1999 by Ord. No. 6-1999]
B. In addition to the penalty provided in Subsection A of this section, the
Mayor and/or Public Safety Committee may suspend or revoke any
license issued under this chapter.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines for the siting of
wireless telecommunications towers and antennas and ancillary
facilities. The goals of this chapter are to: protect residential areas and
land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and antennas;
encourage the location of towers on municipally owned property where
appropriate or in other nonresidential areas; minimize the total number
of towers throughout the community; strongly encourage the joint use
of new and existing tower sites as a primary option rather than
construction of additional single-use towers; encourage the use of
existing buildings, telecommunications towers, light or utility poles, or
water towers as opposed to construction of new telecommunications
towers; encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is
minimal; ensure that all telecommunications facilities, including
towers, antennas and ancillary facilities, are located and designed to
minimize the visual impact on the immediate surroundings and
throughout the community by encouraging users of towers and
antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual
impact of the towers and antennas through careful design, siting,
landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; enhance
the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide
such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently;
consider the public health and safety of telecommunications towers;
and avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
B. In furtherance of these purposes, the City of Pleasantville shall give due
consideration to the City's Master Plan, Zoning Map, existing land uses
and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the location
of towers and antennas.
§ 265-19 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, § 266-2
266:547
§ 266-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following items shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, flagpoles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANCILLARY FACILITIES — The buildings, cabinets, vaults, closures and
equipment required for operation of telecommunications systems, including
but not limited to repeaters, equipment housing, and ventilation and other
mechanical equipment.
ANTENNA or TOWER — Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic,
radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving
of electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals. Parabolic dish antennas used for satellite
communications shall not be included within this definition.
APPROVING BOARD — The Pleasantville Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment, as applicable, which is statutorily authorized to hear land
use applications under the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.)
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices and/or long
distance providers or the public switched telephone network.
BUFFER AREA — The area surrounding a telecommunications tower and
ancillary facilities which lies between the tower and adjacent lot lines and/
or land uses.
CARRIER — A company that provides wireless services.
CITY or MUNICIPALITY — The City of Pleasantville.
COLLOCATION — When two or more receiving and/or transmitting facilities
are placed together in the same location or on the same antenna support
structure.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FALL ZONE — The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the
base of a wireless telecommunications tower. The "fall zone" is the area
within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris (such as ice) or
collapsing material.
FUNCTIONALLY EQUIVALENT SERVICES — Cellular radio, personal
communication service (PCS), enhanced specialized mobile radio,
specialized mobile radio and paging, commercial land mobile radio and
additional emerging technologies.
§ 266-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 266-2
266:548
GUYED TOWER — A tower which is supported or braced through the use of
cables (guy wires) which are permanently anchored.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower, the vertical distance measured from
the lowest finished grade at the base of the tower to the highest point on
the tower, even if said highest point is an antenna.
LATTICE TOWER — A type of mount that is self-supporting with multiple
legs and cross-bracing of structural steel.
MONOPOLE — The type of tower that is self-supporting with a single shaft
of wood, steel or concrete and a platform (or racks) for panel antennas
arrayed at the top.
MOUNT — The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted,
including the following four types of mounts:
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — A facility for the provision
of personal wireless services, as defined by the Telecommunications Act of
1996.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date of this chapter, including permitted towers or antennas that
have been approved but have not yet been constructed so long as such
approval is current and not expired.
RADIO FREQUENCY (RF) ENGINEER — An engineer specializing in
electrical or microwave engineering, especially the study of radio
frequencies.
RADIO FREQUENCY RADIATION (RFR) — For the purposes of this chapter,
shall mean the emissions from personal wireless service facilities or any
electromagnetic energy within the frequency range from 0.003 MHz to
300,000 MHz.
STEALTH DESIGN — A telecommunications facility that is designed or
located in such a way that the facility is not readily recognizable as
telecommunications equipment (see alternative tower structure).
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — A facility designed and used for the
purpose of transmitting, receiving, and relaying voice and data signals from
various wireless communication devices, including transmission towers,
antennas and ancillary facilities. For purposes of this section, amateur radio
transmission facilities and facilities used exclusively for the transmission of
television and radio broadcasts are not telecommunications facilities.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS or TRANSMISSION TOWER — The monopole or
lattice framework designed to support transmitting and receiving antennas.
A. Roof-mounted: mounted on the roof of a building.
B. Side-mounted: mounted on the side of a building.
C. Ground-mounted: antenna support (tower) mounted on the ground.
D. Structure-mounted: mounted on a structure other than a building.
§ 266-2 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, § 266-2
266:549
For purposes of this section, amateur radio transmission facilities and
facilities used exclusively for the transmission of television and radio signals
are not transmission towers.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — Any personal wireless services as
defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 which includes
FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services, including
cellular, personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio
(SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging, and similar
services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. It does
not include any amateur radio facility that is owned and operated by a
federally licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas, nor does it include noncellular telephone service.
§ 266-3. Applicability.
§ 266-4. General requirements.
A. New towers and antennas. All new telecommunications towers or
antennas in the City of Pleasantville shall be subject to these
regulations.
B. Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting telecommunications towers
and preexisting antennas shall not be required to meet the
requirements of this chapter, other than the requirements of §§ 266-10
and 266-11, absent any enlargement or structural modification or the
addition of any antennas.
C. District height limitations. The requirements set forth in this Chapter
shall govern the location of telecommunications towers that exceed,
and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, the height
limitations specified for each zoning district.
D. Public property. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased
or otherwise controlled by the City of Pleasantville shall be encouraged,
provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been
approved by resolution by the City's governing body. Said approved
publicly owned sites utilized for the purpose of constructing towers
and/or antennas shall be treated as engaging in a conditional use under
this Chapter.
E. Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This chapter
shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is
under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for
receive-only antennas.
F. Satellite dish antennas. This Chapter shall not govern any parabolic
dish antennas used for transmission or reception of radio signals
associated with satellites.
§ 266-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 266-4
266:550
A. Principal or accessory use. Telecommunications antennas and towers
may be considered either principal or accessory uses. Notwithstanding
any other land use regulation, a different existing structure on the same
lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot.
If a tower and its appurtenant structures constitute the sole use of the
lot, the tower shall be deemed to be the principal use.
B. Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zone regulations, including but not
limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other
such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even
though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within
such lot.
C. State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of
the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this Chapter shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within 90 days of the effective date of such standards
and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by
the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense.
D. Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state or local
building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are
published by the Electronic Industries Association and
Telecommunications Industry Association, as amended from time to
time. If, upon inspection, the City of Pleasantville concludes that a
tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a
danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the
owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower
into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal
of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
E. Not essential services. Telecommunications towers and antennas shall
be regulated and permitted pursuant to this Chapter and shall not be
regulated or permitted as essential services, public utilities, or private
utilities.
F. Collocation required. The City of Pleasantville mandates that carriers
collocate antennas on towers and other structures whenever possible.
See § 266-7 for collocation requirements.
§ 266-4 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, § 266-4
266:551
§ 266-5. Use regulations.
G. Conditional use. Telecommunications facilities on public land in the City
of Pleasantville shall be principal uses. Telecommunications facilities on
nonpublic lands in the City of Pleasantville shall be conditional uses in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
H. Site plan required. Site plan approval shall be required for all new
telecommunications facilities in the City of Pleasantville, including
modifications to or addition of new telecommunications facilities to
preexisting towers, buildings or other structures. For the purposes of
this Chapter, the City's Zoning Official may approve site plans for
telecommunications facilities on public lands, provided that said
permitted uses conform to the use regulations established in § 266-5,
and site design standards established in § 266-6 herein. All other site
plans for telecommunications facilities must be approved by an
approving body pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
A. Permitted use. Wireless telecommunications facilities are permitted as
permitted uses on all lands owned by the City of Pleasantville
regardless of zoning district.
B. Conditional use. Wireless telecommunications facilities are permitted
as conditional uses in the Regional Shopping Center (RSC) and
Industrial (IND) Zoning Districts and in the Economic Redevelopment
Area (EDA) Zoning Overlay District.
C. Conditional and permitted use standards. Wireless telecommunications
facilities may be permitted on the above-referenced lands, provided
that:
(1) The minimum lot size on which the telecommunications facility is to
be located is at least 30,000 square feet in area.
(2) Lattice towers and any type of guyed tower are prohibited.
(3) Telecommunications towers shall be limited to monopoles without
guys designed to ultimately accommodate at least three carriers
and shall meet the following height and usage criteria:
(a) For a single carrier, up to 120 feet in height;
(b) For two carriers, up to 140 feet in height; and
(c) For three or more carriers, up to 160 feet feet in height.
D. Factors considered in granting use permits.
(1) In addition to the above standards, the approving board or Zoning
Official, as appropriate, shall consider the following factors in
determining whether to issue a conditional use permit:
§ 266-4 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 266-5
266:552
§ 266-6. Site design standards.
The following site design standards shall apply to wireless
telecommunications facilities:
(a) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
(b) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(c) Surrounding topography;
(d) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(e) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness, including stealth designs which are
encouraged;
(f) Availability of suitable existing towers, alternative tower
structures, other structures or alternative technologies not
requiring the use of towers or structures;
(g) Availability of proposed tower to other potential carriers.
(2) This list is considered to be illustrative in nature and may not
include all factors to be considered.
A. New towers.
(1) Telecommunications towers may not be located closer than 300
feet to any residential zone. Antennas located on preexisting
buildings or structures are exempt from this requirement.
(2) Fall zone.
(a) A fall zone shall be established such that the tower is set back
50% of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line or
nonappurtenant building. This tower setback requirement may
be adjusted higher or lower by the approving board or Zoning
Official, as appropriate, based on the design of the antenna
mount(s) on the top of the tower and the particular geography
of the subject site in relation to the features of the adjoining
lands or rights-of-way consistent with the intent of the
definition of "fall zone" of this Chapter.
(b) The above notwithstanding, in no instance shall a fall zone be
less than 20 feet from the edge of the tower (measured at the
base) to the inside edge of the buffer area required for the site.
(c) The fall zone setback may supercede the zoning district
setback for a site for the tower and exposed ancillary facilities
only. Ancillary facilities enclosed in an ancillary building
pursuant to § 266-6A(5) of this Chapter must satisfy the
§ 266-5 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, § 266-6
266:553
minimum zoning district setback requirements for accessory
structures.
(3) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than eight feet in height. Said towers shall be equipped with
appropriate anti-climbing measures.
(4) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers:
(a) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences or planned
residences or any other area frequented by the public. The
standard buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least 10
feet wide outside the perimeter of the compound. However, at
a minimum, the facility should be shielded from public view by
evergreen trees at least eight feet high (3 1/2 inch caliper) at
planting and planted in staggered double rows 15 feet on
center.
(b) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced at the
sole discretion of the approving authority.
(c) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient
buffer.
(5) Ancillary buildings. Any proposed building enclosing related
electronic equipment shall not be more than 10 feet in height nor
more than 200 square feet in area, and only one such building shall
be permitted on the lot for each provider of wireless
telecommunications services located on the site. Such buildings
must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements for
accessory structures.
(6) Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a
neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(b) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors,
textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend them into
the natural setting and surrounding buildings.
§ 266-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 266-6
266:554
(7) Lighting. No lighting is permitted except as follows, which shall be
subject to review and approval by the approving board as part of
the site plan approval process:
(a) The building enclosing electronic equipment may have one
light at the entrance to the building, provided that the light is
attached to the building, is focused downward and is switched
so that the light is turned on only when workers are at the
building; and
(b) No lighting is permitted on a tower except lighting that
specifically is required by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), and any such required lighting shall be focused and
shielded to the greatest extent possible so as not to project
towards adjacent and nearby properties.
(8) Signs. No signs are permitted except those required by the Federal
Communications Commission, the Electronic Industries
Association (EIA) and/or the Telecommunication Industry
Association (TIA) or by law, such as warning and equipment
information signs.
B. Antennas mounted on existing structures or roof tops.
(1) Antennas on existing structures. Any antenna which is not attached
to a tower may be attached to any existing business, industrial,
office, utility or institutional structure owned by the City of
Pleasantville or in the zoning districts enumerated in § 266-5B of
this chapter.
(a) Side- and roof-mounted personal wireless service facilities
shall not project more than 10 feet above the height of an
existing building or structure nor project more than 10 feet
above the height limit of the zoning district within which the
facility is located. Personal wireless service facilities may
locate on a building or structure that is legally nonconforming
with respect to height, provided that the facilities do not
project above the existing building or structure height.
(b) The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations.
(c) The antenna complies with all applicable building codes.
(d) The equipment structure shall not contain more than 200
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are less
than 48 feet in height, the related unmanned equipment
structure shall be located on the ground and shall not be
located on the roof of the structure.
§ 266-6 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, § 266-6
266:555
§ 266-7. Collocation.
(e) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building,
the area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
(f) Equipment storage buildings, structures or cabinets shall
comply with all applicable building codes.
(2) Aesthetics. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a
tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to or closely
compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to make
the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as
possible.
C. Antennas on existing towers. An antenna may be attached to a
preexisting tower in a nonresidential zone and, to minimize adverse
visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of
towers, collocation of antennas by more than one carrier on existing
towers shall take precedence over the construction of new towers,
provided such collocation is accomplished in a manner consistent with
the following:
(1) A tower which is modified or reconstructed to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna shall be of the same tower type
as the existing tower, unless reconstruction as a monopole is
proposed.
(2) An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not
to exceed the maximum tower height established by this Chapter.
(3) On-site location. A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the
collocation of an additional antenna may be moved on site,
provided that the new location is within 10 feet of its existing
location and further provided that said new location is no closer to
any property line or nonappurtenant building than the existing
location.
(a) After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate collocation, only one
tower may remain on the site.
A. The City of Pleasantville requires that licensed carriers share personal
wireless service facilities and sites where feasible and appropriate,
thereby reducing the number of personal wireless service facilities that
are stand-alone facilities. All applicants for site plan approval for a
personal wireless service facility shall demonstrate a good faith effort
to collocate with other carriers. Such good faith effort includes:
(1) A survey of all existing structures that may be feasible sites for
collocating personal wireless service facilities;
§ 266-6 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 266-7
266:556
§ 266-8. Location priorities.
Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be located and approved in
accordance with the following prioritized locations:
§ 266-9. Site plan submission requirements.
In addition to the site plan submission requirements contained in the Zoning
and Land Use Code for the City (Chapter 290 of the City Code), the
following information shall be submitted in conjunction with site plan
approvals for all wireless telecommunications facilities:
(2) Notification by certified mail of intent to seek site plan approval to
all the other licensed carriers for commercial mobile radio services
operating in the county;
(3) Sharing information necessary to determine if collocation is
feasible under the design configuration most accommodating to
collocation; and
(4) A copy of a proposed lease or affidavit of compliance with this
section.
B. In the event that collocation is found to be not technically feasible, a
written statement of the reasons for the unfeasibility shall be submitted
to the City. The City may retain a technical expert in the field of RF
engineering to verify if collocation at the site is not feasible or is
feasible given the design configuration most accommodating to
collocation. The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense
of the applicant. The City may deny approval to an applicant that has
not demonstrated a good faith effort to provide for collocation.
C. If the applicant does intend to collocate or to permit collocation, plans
and elevations, which show the ultimate appearance and operation of
the personal wireless service facility at full build-out, shall be
submitted.
A. The first priority shall be an existing tower or an existing or proposed
water tower or standpipe owned by either a public or private utility
within or near the City of Pleasantville.
B. The second priority shall be new towers on lands owned by the City of
Pleasantville.
C. The third priority shall be an existing building in the Regional Shopping
Center (RSC), Industrial (IND) and Economic Redevelopment Area
(EDA) Zoning Districts.
D. The fourth priority shall be new towers on lands not owned by the City
of Pleasantville located within the Regional Shopping Center (RSC),
Industrial (IND) and Economic Redevelopment Area (EDA) Zoning
Districts.
§ 266-7 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, § 266-9
266:557
A. Comprehensive service plan. In order to provide proper evidence that
any proposed location of wireless telecommunications antennas (and
any supporting tower and/or ancillary building enclosing related
electronic equipment) has been planned to result in the fewest number
of towers within the City of Pleasantville at the time full service is
provided by the applicant throughout the municipality, the applicant
shall submit a comprehensive service plan. Said comprehensive service
plan shall indicate how the applicant proposes to provide full service
throughout the municipality and, to the greatest extent possible, said
service plan shall also indicate how the applicant's plan is coordinated
with the needs of all other providers of telecommunications services
within the City. The comprehensive service plan shall indicate the
following:
(1) Whether the applicant's subscribers can receive adequate service
from antennas located outside of the borders of the City of
Pleasantville.
(2) How the proposed location of the antennas relates to the location of
any existing towers within and/or near the City of Pleasantville.
(3) How the proposed location of the antennas relates to the
anticipated need for additional antennas and supporting towers
within and/or near the City of Pleasantville by both the applicant
and by other providers of telecommunications services within the
City.
(4) How the proposed location of the antennas relates to the objective
of collocating the antennas of different service carriers on the same
tower.
(5) How the proposed location of the antennas relates to the overall
objective of providing full telecommunications services within the
City of Pleasantville while, at the same, limiting the number of
towers to the fewest possible.
B. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of the
proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and
zoning (including when adjacent to other municipalities), and all
properties within the applicable fall zone, adjacent roadways, proposed
means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of
the proposed tower and any other structure, topography, parking and
other information deemed by the approving authority to be necessary to
assess compliance with this chapter.
C. Legal description of the entire tract and leased parcel (if applicable).
D. The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit and residentially zoned properties.
E. The separation distance from other towers and antennas.
§ 266-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 266-9
266:558
§ 266-10. Monitoring and maintenance.
F. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials, including, but
not limited to, species type, size, spacing and existing vegetation to be
removed or retained.
G. Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method of
camouflage.
H. A description of compliance with all applicable federal, state or local
laws.
I. A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of
the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for
future users.
J. Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other telecommunications
sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
K. A letter of commitment to lease excess space to other potential users at
prevailing market rates and conditions. The letter of commitment shall
be in form suitable for recording with the County Clerk prior to the
issuance of any permit and shall commit the tower owner(s), property
owner(s) and their successors in interest.
L. A visual impact study containing, at a minimum, a photographic
simulation showing the appearance of the proposed tower, antennas
and ancillary facilities from at least five points within a three-mile
radius. Such points shall be chosen by the carrier with review and
approval by the approving board or designee to ensure that various
potential views are represented.
M. An analysis of the RFR levels at the facility as a means of assessing
compliance with the FCC RF safety criteria. This analysis shall:
(1) Take into consideration all collocated radio transmitting antennas
and/or nearby antennas that could contribute to RFR levels at the
facility.
(2) Be performed by an RF engineer, health physicist or similar
knowledgeable individual.
(3) Follow current methods recommended by the FCC for performing
such analyses.
A. After the wireless telecommunications facility is operational, the
applicant shall submit, within 90 days of beginning operations, and at
annual intervals from the date of issuance of the building permit,
existing measurements of RFR from the wireless telecommunications
facility. Such measurements shall be signed and certified by an RF
engineer, stating that RFR measurements are accurate and meet FCC
§ 266-9 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, § 266-10
266:559
§ 266-11. Abandonment or discontinuation of use.
Chapter 267
TELEPHONES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning and land use — See Ch. 290.
guidelines as specified in the radio frequency standards section of this
chapter.
B. The applicant and coapplicant shall maintain the personal wireless
service facility in good condition. Such maintenance shall include, but
shall not be limited to, painting, structural integrity of the mount and
security barrier, and maintenance of the buffer areas and landscaping.
A. At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue
operation of a personal wireless service facility, such carrier shall notify
the Pleasantville Municipal Clerk by certified United States mail of the
proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such
notice shall be given no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or
discontinuation of operations. In the event that a licensed carrier fails
to give such notice, the wireless telecommunications facility shall be
considered abandoned upon discontinuation of operations.
B. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, at the option of the
municipality, the carrier shall physically remove the personal wireless
service facility within 90 days from the date of abandonment or
discontinuation of use. Physically remove shall include, but not limited
to:
(1) Removal of antennas, mount, equipment shelters and security
barriers for the subject property.
(2) Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance
with local, county and state solid waste disposal regulations.
(3) Restoring the location of the personal wireless service facility to its
natural condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall
remain in the after-condition.
C. If a carrier fails to remove a personal wireless service facility in
accordance with this section, the municipality shall have the authority
to enter the subject property and physically remove the facility. The
approving board will require the applicant to post a bond at the time of
approval to cover costs for the removal of the personal wireless service
facility in the event the municipality must remove the facility.
§ 266-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 267-1
267:560
§ 267-1. Rules and regulations.
In all zones of the City of Pleasantville other than residential zones, public
telephones are permitted, provided that they are located within the
property lines of the principal use and conform to the rules and regulations
hereinafter set forth:
§ 267-2. Permit application procedure.
No individual, business, firm, corporation, association, partnership or any
other organization, group or entity may place or maintain any outdoor
public telephone without having first obtained a permit from the City of
Pleasantville. Permits shall be applied for and issued subject to the
following:
A. No public telephone shall be located in any side yard or rear yard
setback area.
B. No public telephone, even those situate within the lot lines of the
principal use, shall be permitted when it unreasonably interferes with
or impedes the flow of pedestrians or vehicular traffic, including any
legally parked or stopped vehicle, or unreasonably interferes with the
ingress or egress from any residence or place of business, or interferes
with the use of traffic signs or signals, hydrants or mail boxes permitted
at or near said location.
C. No public telephone shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(2) Within five feet of any driveway.
(3) Within three feet of any public area improved with a lawn, flowers,
shrubs, trees or other landscaping.
(4) At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet.
D. All public telephones installed in the City of Pleasantville shall be
capable of providing outgoing calls only and specifically shall not be
capable of receiving incoming telephone calls.
A. Application for permit shall be made to the office of the City Clerk,
which application will contain the name and address of the owner of the
public telephone as well as the name, address and signature of the
owner of the property upon which the public telephone is to be located.
Such application will contain a plan or sketch of the telephone in
sufficient detail to describe the size, location, equipment and means of
installation and cabling. If the property is being leased and the tenant is
applying for the permit, the owner of the property and the tenant must
sign the application.166
§ 267-1 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 267-2
267:561
B. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a one-time fee of
$25, which fee is to cover the expense of review and investigation of the
permit application and is nonrefundable.
C. Upon determination that the public telephone for which a permit is
sought complies with the terms of this chapter, such permit will be
issued to the applicant. A copy of the permit number shall be affixed to
the public telephone in such a fashion so as to be secure from defacing
or damage by the elements.
D. The application process as herein described shall be applicable to
public telephones maintained on city property pursuant to an
agreement for payment of commission; however, no fee shall be
required for investigation and review of such application.
E. The owners of existing public telephones shall apply for the permit
required hereunder within 30 days from the date this chapter becomes
final. The City of Pleasantville reserves the right to reject any and all
locations submitted for approval based upon their nonconformity with
this chapter.
F. If a permit is not obtained for any existing telephone within 30 days
from the date this chapter becomes final, or if the application for a
permit for an existing telephone is rejected, the owner of the property
upon which the public telephone is located shall forthwith remove said
public telephone and all ancillary equipment. If the owner fails or
refuses to remove said public telephone within 10 days from
notification by the City Clerk, the City of Pleasantville may cause the
public telephone to be removed. Public telephones that have been
removed by the city shall be released to the lawful owner thereof upon
payment of a fee of $250 to the City of Pleasantville. If no person makes
a claim for return of a public telephone and/or ancillary equipment
removed by the city pursuant to this chapter within six months from the
date of removal, such public telephone and/or ancillary equipment may
be disposed of pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157.
G. No telephone for which a permit is granted pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall subsequently be removed or relocated without
prior notification to the office of the City Clerk. In the case of relocation,
a new application and fee will be required, and no such public
telephone may be maintained at the new location until a permit therefor
is granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
H. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I).167
(1) Proximity to existing public telephones, building entrances and
other public accommodations.
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
167. The determination to approve a telephone shall include but not limited to the following
considerations.
§ 267-2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 267-2
267:562
§ 267-3. Violations and penalties.168
Any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation violating any of
the provisions of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations adopted
hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 269
TOWING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licensing — See Ch. 155, Art. I.
Abandoned or junked vehicles — See Ch. 276.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 278.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 281.
(2) The potential for a public nuisance or undesirable activity.
168. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 267-2 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 267-3
267:563

ARTICLE I
General Regulations and Regulations for Vehicles Towed to Any
Place Other Than City Tow Lot
§ 269-1. Purpose.
The purpose for this chapter is to establish regulations pertaining to the
towing and storage of vehicles to the City Tow Lot at the request of the
City of Pleasantville Police Department or any other City Department that
has the legal authority to order a vehicle to be towed. This chapter is
established pursuant to N.J.S.A.40:48-2.9 and N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(u). This
chapter also establishes regulations for the towing of vehicles from private
parking lots and other private property at the request of the property
owners and which vehicles are then stored in storage facilities other than
the City Tow Lot.
§ 269-2. Enforcement.
This City employee authorized to enforce the regulations contained herein
shall be the Chief of the Pleasantville Police Department. The Chief is
authorized to delegate this authority to a subordinate officer(s) and is
also authorized to promulgate procedures and rules consistent with and
necessary to the effectuate the provisions of this chapter.
§ 269-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORIZED LICENSED TOWING OPERATOR -- — A licensed towing
operator that has been approved by the Police Department to provide
towing services on behalf of the City.
CITY — The City of Pleasantville.169
LICENSED TOWING OPERATOR — A towing operator that has complied
with all provisions of this article and whose name appears on the list
of licensed towing operators maintained by the Clerk of the City of
Pleasantville.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — An occurrence in which a private
passenger automobile comes in contact with any other object for which the
private passenger automobile must be towed or removed for placement in
a storage facility or to any other location. This shall include occurrences
of vandalism, fire, comprehensive claims and accidents caused by drunk
drivers.
OPERATOR — Any person who is in actual physical control of an automobile,
truck or motor vehicle.
169. Editor's Note: The former definition of "City tow lot," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2014.
§ 269-1 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 269-3
267:565
ROTARY LIST — The list containing the names, addresses, phone numbers,
and other pertinent information of the licensed towing operators who have
made application and been approved to tow the vehicles at the direction
of the City of Pleasantville Police Department and/or other authorized City
representative.[Amended 7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2014]
TOWING SERVICES and/or TOWING — The providing of transportation of
automobiles, trucks or motor vehicles that, as a result of accident, collision,
breakdown, abandonment or otherwise, are unable to be moved under their
own power.
TOW TRUCK — A motor vehicle specifically designed, constructed, used
or maintained for the safe transportation of automobiles, trucks or motor
vehicles.
TOWING OPERATOR — Any towing firm, individual or company who is
in the business of towing vehicles from public or private property in an
agreement or contract with the owner or operator of a private lot, facility or
property. This definition includes towers who tow vehicles at the request of
the vehicle’s owner, such as a service station, garage or other like tower.
VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle which can only be operated by a licensed
operator or which must be registered with a governmental agency that
promulgates regulations for such vehicles.
§ 269-4. Licensing.
§ 269-5. Tow truck markings and equipment.
§ 269-6. Mercantile license fees.
Mercantile license fees shall be as follows:
A. Each tower shall maintain a valid mercantile license, which shall be
prominently displayed at their storage lot or facility.
B. A copy of the mercantile license shall be kept in the tow vehicle at all
times and must be presented upon demand.
C. No mercantile license shall be issued until the following conditions have
been met: certificates of insurance showing public liability insurance in
the amount of $1,000,000 and property damage insurance in the
amount of $1,000,000.
A. All tow trucks shall have the name of the registered owner, address and
telephone number painted or permanently attached to both sides of the
vehicle.
B. All tow trucks shall be equipped with a rotary or flashing amber light,
approved-type fire extinguishers and road flares.
A. Licensed towing company/operator: $75. (This fee is subject to change
by resolution of City Council).
§ 269-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 269-7
267:566
§ 269-7. Storage facilities.
A. All private towers shall be required to maintain a storage lot or facility
for all vehicles towed, which shall be located within seven miles of the
boundaries of the City of Pleasantville.
B. Each tower shall maintain at the storage facility:
(1) A log or entry book for recording each vehicle being towed.
(2) A copy of each contract authorizing towing services.
(3) A copy of the towed vehicle report.
C. Each storage facility shall be staffed by a responsible person 24 hours
every day while vehicles are being stored or have a responsible person
on call.
D. Each tower shall be responsible for towing damages while providing
towing services.
E. After a vehicle has been stored at a towing storage facility for a period
of seven days, the tower may tow the vehicle to another facility in
Atlantic County, provided that the Pleasantville Police Department has
been notified as to the date and time of the removal and to what
location the vehicle is being moved.
F. It shall be the responsibility of the tower, after at least 48 hours from
the time that a vehicle has been impounded, to send a written request
to the Division of Motor Vehicles in the state where the vehicle is
registered for a certified copy of the registration for the motor vehicle
which has been towed.
G. Within 48 hours after this information has been received from the
Division of Motor Vehicles, it is the responsibility of the tower to notify
the vehicle owner of the circumstances surrounding the towing and the
charges and fees incurred. The fee for the inquiry to the Division of
Motor Vehicles may be added to the fees and charges already
outstanding for the initial towing and storage.
H. The licensed towing operator shall maintain his business operation at
the same location as the compound and maintain his business office at
the compound.
I. The licensed towing operator shall, on the first day of each month,
provide, in writing, to the Clerk and Police Chief of Pleasantville that
month’s list of all passenger automobiles, trucks and motor vehicles in
the possession of the licensed towing operator over the course of the
previous month. Said list shall state the make and model of the
passenger automobile, truck and motor vehicle, the year of the same,
the registration number of the motor vehicle, the vehicle identification
number and a detailed list of all charges and expenses relating to said
§ 269-7 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 269-7
267:567
§ 269-8. Warning signs for towing in private parking lots.
§ 269-9. Towed vehicle report; removal of vehicle.
passenger automobile, truck and motor vehicle, and the date the
vehicle was towed.
A. Warning signs shall be sized in accordance with the following: The size
of warning signs shall be a minimum two feet by three feet and six
square feet in area and a maximum three feet by five feet and 15 square
feet in area.
B. Warning signs shall be conspicuously located to be visible to any
entrance to any parking lot and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the tower or towing firm.
(2) The twenty-four-hour monitored telephone number.
(3) The address or location of the storage lot or facility.
(4) The words “unauthorized vehicles will be towed.”
(5) The towing fee which will be charged to the owner of the towed
vehicle.
C. A minimum of two signs as herein described shall be provided in each
private parking lot from which towing will be done.
A. Each vehicle to be towed must be inspected by the tower prior to
towing for existing damage and a towed vehicle report filled out before
the vehicle is removed from its place. The report shall describe the
existing damage to the vehicle and one copy shall be kept by the tower,
and the original shall be kept by the Pleasantville Police Department for
inspection by any interested party.
B. No vehicle shall be removed from its original place by any tower until it
has been established by the Police Department that said vehicle is not a
stolen vehicle or one which has been used in the commission of a crime.
(1) Should a vehicle be found to be stolen or wanted in connection with
the commission of any crime, The vehicle shall only be towed to the
City Tow Lot.
(2) Should the NCIC/SCIC computers be down, the Police Department
shall authorize the towing of the vehicle and again check with
NCIC/SCIC within 24 hours. If the vehicle is found to be stolen or
otherwise wanted, the tower shall surrender the vehicle to the
care, custody and control of the Pleasantville Police Department at
no charge.
C. No vehicle shall be hooked, lifted or moved by a tower without the
authorization of the Pleasantville Police Department.
§ 269-7 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 269-10
267:568
§ 269-10. Fees and charges for towing, storage and mileage.
Fees and charges for towing, storage and mileage for all vehicles are as
follows:
A. If the vehicle has not been lifted prior to the owner’s return to the
private parking lot, whether it is hooked up or not, it is to be released by
the tower at no charge.
B. If the vehicle has been lifted but not removed from the private lot prior
to the owner’s return to the lot, a fee of not more than 20% of the
authorized towing service fee, as indicated on the warning signs for the
lot, may be imposed for the release of said vehicle.
C. Any vehicle which has been towed from the private parking lot,
regardless of how far, before the owner’s arrival may be assessed the
full amount of the authorized towing fee.
D. Maximum fee. [Amended 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009; 5-5-2014
by Ord. No. 9-2014]
(1) The maximum fee which can be charged for the towing of any
vehicle from off of private property and the City rotary towing list
shall be as follows:
Service Maximum Fee
Towing of all vehicles under 6,000 pounds
with trailer GVW
$125
Towing of all vehicles weighing over 6,001
pounds up to 9,999 pounds GVW
$135
Towing of all vehicles weighing over 10,000
pounds up to 32,000 pounds GVW
$250
Towing of all vehicles weighing over 32,001
pounds and up
Shall be billed at
reasonable
prevailing rates
Winching of vehicles $100
Uprighting of vehicles $100
Excessive cleanup $35
Additional truck with driver (This fee shall
only apply if the vehicle requires more than
one tow operator to tow that specific
vehicle.)
$50
Service calls during regular business hours,
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
$25
Service calls after hours, Sundays and
Holidays
$40
§ 269-10 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 269-10
267:569
§ 269-11. Release of vehicle.
§ 269-12. Holding of vehicles; auctionable title.
Service Maximum Fee
Service calls for flat tire, remove tire and
replace with serviceable spare tire, add to
above rate
$15
Vehicle storage, inside or outside, per day $50
Flat bed or dollies $50
(2) Vehicles will be released during normal business hours only.
E. Payment of fees and charges provided in this immediate section may be
made in cash or by major credit card.
F. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated: [Added 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009]
STANDARD CLEANUP — Any cleanup that includes the use of oil dry,
cleanup of glass and/or car/vehicle parts that are in the accident/crash
area, including point of impact. Any cleanup that does not fall within
these parameters shall be considered an excessive cleanup.
WINCHING OF VEHICLE — This service fee does not apply if the
vehicle has to be pulled onto the flatbed during a normal tow. This will
apply if it is used to but not limited to pulling a vehicle out of a ditch,
etc.
A. No vehicle shall be released from storage without the tower first
obtaining proper identification from the person claiming the towed
vehicle.
B. A receipt for the towing service shall be provided, which shall show the
following:
(1) The towing service’s, name, address and telephone number.
(2) The signature of the agent releasing the vehicle.
(3) The signature of the person claiming the vehicle.
(4) All fees and charges.
C. If a vehicle is towed in violation of any section of this article, the vehicle
is to be released at no cost for towing or storage.
A. The towing operator shall submit a written list to the Chief of Police
indicating which vehicles have been held for 30 days or more, as
delineated by N.J.S.A. 39:10-1 et seq.
§ 269-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 269-12
267:570
B. The Chief of Police or his designate will physically examine the vehicle
documenting pertinent information, assigning the same a control
number and applying for auctionable title through the state.
§ 269-12 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 269-12
267:571

ARTICLE II
Services for City, City Tow Lot and Rotary List
§ 269-13. City Tow Lot. [Amended 7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2014]
The City of Pleasantville does not possess a City-owned tow lot. The licensed
towing operator shall store the vehicle at their motor vehicle facility and
compound. The City of Pleasantville Police Department shall keep a record
of all vehicles towed at its direction and the location of the vehicle towed.
§ 269-14. Service provided by towers for City Tow Lot.
Towing operators licensed pursuant to this article agree to provide the
following towing services to the City of Pleasantville in the following
manner:
A. The towing of passenger automobiles, trucks and motor vehicles from
accident scenes, including cleaning and removal of debris from the
scene of the accident, as well as any necessary waiting time.
B. The provision of winching services and dolly-wheel services at scenes of
accidents.
C. The provision of a flatbed truck for vehicles that cannot be towed in an
ordinary fashion.
D. The towing and impounding for police investigation purposes of any
passenger automobile, truck or motor vehicle at the direction of the
Chief of Police.
E. The towing of any automobiles, trucks or motor vehicles that are
recovered after being stolen.
F. The licensed towing operator shall make available for service to the
City of Pleasantville at least two trucks having two-way communication
equipment on a twenty-four-hour call.
G. The licensed towing operator shall provide tow trucks capable of
handling the transporting of heavy passenger automobiles and
equipped to provide appropriate towing service and road service.
H. Licensed towing operators shall equip their tow trucks to provide the
following.
(1) Mechanic’s tools to perform complete emergency work.
(2) Towing and safety equipment.
(3) Warning devices, such as lights, flares and flags, to warn other
motor vehicle operators of the presence of a disabled or parked
vehicle.
I. The tow trucks provided by the licensed towing operator shall comply at
all times with the statutes and regulations of the State of New Jersey
§ 269-13 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 269-14
267:573
§ 269-15. Rotary list.
§ 269-16. Responsibilities of operator.
and be subject to inspection by the Chief of Police of the City of
Pleasantville.
J. The storage of any abandoned, wrecked or disabled passenger
automobile, truck or any motor vehicle that might be towed by the
towing operator pursuant to this article. [Added 2-18-2009 by Ord.
No. 1-2009]
K. The licensed towing operator agrees that no rate or fees for towing
service, road service or any other service shall be charged in excess of
the maximum rates and fees set forth hereinafter in this article. [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009]
A. The Police Department shall establish an approved list of towing
operators that will be permitted to tow vehicles to the City Tow Lot. Tow
operators shall be chosen to conduct the towing operations specified in
this chapter on a rotating nondiscriminatory basis. No tow operator
may be listed more than one time on the list. No tow operator may
lease, rent or otherwise allow another tow operator to use its vehicles
or equipment in an effort to obtain additional spots on the rotary list.
B. Towing operators shall be authorized in the order that their
applications are approved.
C. Towing services must be provided on a twenty-four-hour, seven-day-aweek-
basis. A tow operator that is selected to respond to a call for
towing services must be at the service site within 10 minutes from the
time of notification by the Police Department. If the towing operator is
not there within this period of time, the Police Department may select
another towing operator from the list. Continued violation of this
provision may be grounds for removal from the rotary list.
D. If no towing operator on the rotary list is available or responds in a
timely manner to a call for service, the Police Department may then
select a towing operator not on the rotary list.
E. During adverse weather conditions or other emergency conditions, all
towing contractors on the rotary list shall give priority to requests for
towing services to the City of Pleasantville.
A. The licensed towing operator agrees that all personnel and equipment
used under the terms of this article shall be and remain employees and
property of the registered towing operator.
B. The licensed towing operator shall at all times maintain direct
supervision, management and control over its personnel and
equipment, and in no event shall such equipment and/or personnel be
§ 269-14 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 269-16
267:574
represented by said licensed towing operator as belonging to or
employed by the City of Pleasantville.
C. The licensed towing operator shall agree that it is operating under this
article and as an independent contractor and in no manner or sense as
an agent or employee of the City of Pleasantville.
D. The licensed towing operator shall at no time sublet or assign his
license, or any part thereof, or any tow for any purpose.
E. The licensed towing operator shall agree to indemnify, defend and hold
harmless and reimburse the City of Pleasantville from any and all
claims or law suits against the City arising out of the acts, negligence,
intentional negligence and/or responsibility of the licensed towing
operator.
F. Insurance.
(1) The licensed towing operator shall, prior to the beginning date of
this license, furnish the City Clerk of the City of Pleasantville with
certificates of insurance naming the City as an additional named
insured, describing the types and amounts of insurance, identifying
the coverage to this license by reference and providing for 30 days’
written notice to the City by registered mail prior to any
modification, cancellation, nonrenewal or other change in
coverage, and containing a severability-of-interests clause as
follows: “The term ‘the insured’ is used severally and not
collectively, but the inclusion herein of more than one insured shall
not operate to increase the limits of the company’s liability.” The
policies must be effective prior to the beginning date of this license
and must remain in force during the term of this license. In the
event of interruption of coverage for any reason, all services under
the license shall cease and shall not resume until coverage has
been restored.
(2) The following are the minimum mandatory types and amounts of
insurance coverage to be carried:
(a) Workers’ compensation: statutory New Jersey limits.
(b) Towing liability personal injury liability: $2,000,000, combined
single limits. In lieu of a combined single limit of $2,000,000, a
policy with split limits of $1,000,000, $2,000,000 and $100,000
is acceptable.
(c) Towing including hoist, fire, explosion, theft, riot, civil
commotion, vandalism and malicious mischief (VMM) and
collision: (VMM deductible: $25; collision deduction: $100).
(3) Neither approval by the City nor failure to disapprove certificates
of insurance furnished by the licensed towing operator shall
release the licensed towing operator of full responsibility for all
§ 269-16 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 269-16
267:575
liability and casualty claims or losses. Insurance is required as a
measure of protection and the licensed towing operator’s liability
is not limited thereto.
(4) The aforesaid insurance policy shall also be written as to include
coverage to the licensed towing operator with respect to the
property of others which is in the care, custody or control of the
licensed towing operator. Such insurance policy shall also provide
coverage to the licensed towing operator for any losses due to fire,
theft or vandalism of any passenger automobile, truck or motor
vehicle of other persons in its possession.
(5) The aforesaid insurance policy shall be so endorsed to include the
City of Pleasantville as a named insured and shall provide a
standard severability-of-interest clause. The insurance policy shall
also provide that the City of Pleasantville shall be defended and
indemnified by said insurance company.
G. The licensed towing operator shall on the first day of each month
provide, in writing, to the City Clerk and Police Chief of Pleasantville, or
his designee, that month's list of all passenger automobiles, trucks and
motor vehicles in the possession of that licensed towing operator over
the course of the previous month. Said list shall state the makes and
models of all motor vehicles, the years of same, the registration
numbers of the motor vehicles, the vehicle identification numbers and a
detailed list of all charges and expenses relating to said motor vehicles
and the dates the vehicles were towed. [Added 2-18-2009 by Ord.
No. 1-2009]
H. A licensed towing operator shall provide a compound, which must be
located within the City of Pleasantville, and shall at all times be in
compliance with all New Jersey statutes and regulations, as well as all
ordinances promulgated by the City of Pleasantville. [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009]
(1) Said compound shall be enclosed by an eight-foot-high fence and be
of sufficient size to accommodate at least 50 passenger vehicles at
one time. At no time will any motor vehicles towed by any licensed
towing operator be stored in any other location. Said fence shall be
enclosed with privacy slates.
(2) The compound shall be staffed by a licensed towing operator
during business hours, which will be defined as between 8:00 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday, inclusive. The towing
operator will, with prior notification, make a vehicle available to be
retrieved by the public after normal business hours. The towing
operator may charge an additional fee for this service, as follows:
(a) Within three hours of closing, service fee of $15.
(b) After three hours of closing, on weekends and holidays, a
service fee of $25.
§ 269-16 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 269-16
267:576
§ 269-17. Nonliability of City.
§ 269-18. Licensing of operators.
(3) The compound shall be adequately lighted.
I. All licensed towing operators who provided private property towing
service shall provide the Chief of Police, or his designee, with a signed
copy of the agreement between the property owner and the towing
firm. [Added 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009]
J. Disposing of the vehicle. [Added 7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 14-2014]
(1) Upon towing of a vehicle at the direction of the City, the Police
Department shall, within five to seven business days, provide notice
to the owner of vehicle of the vehicle’s location and reason for tow.
(2) If the vehicle has not been retrieved by the owner and the Police
Department no longer needs the vehicle for investigation, the
Police Department shall execute a written release of the vehicle to
the licensed towing operator no less than 30 calendar days after
the towing. The Police Department shall store the original release
on file, and provide copies to the registered owner and licensed
towing operator.
(3) Once the vehicle is released to the licensed towing operator, the
licensed towing operator shall proceed to dispose of the vehicle in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:10A-7 through N.J.S.A. 39:10A-20.
A. The licensed towing operator agrees to make no claim against the City
of Pleasantville, its agents, representatives and/or employees for the
following:
(1) Towing fees or charges.
(2) Storage fees or charges.
(3) Road service fees or charges.
(4) Any other fees, charges or items whatsoever.
(5) Failure or delay to obtain auctionable title for any vehicle.
B. This section shall apply to any and all passenger motor vehicles, trucks
and motor vehicles that are stored or towed by the licensed towing
operator, including those abandoned and unclaimed by the owners
thereof.
A. All towing operators, in order to provide towing service in the City of
Pleasantville, shall be licensed with the Clerk of the City of
Pleasantville.
§ 269-16 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 269-18
267:577
B. The Clerk of the City of Pleasantville shall take an application for the
licensing of a towing operator from any towing operator who asserts
that he can comply with the provisions of this article.
C. The application form shall be prescribed by the Clerk of the City of
Pleasantville and shall include the name, business address and
telephone number of the towing operator, the location of the compound,
the name of its insurance company, the insurance policy number and
any other information the Clerk deems relevant and appropriate.
D. Each licensed towing operator shall purchase a mercantile license from
the City Clerk. Said licensing fee shall be paid upon the submission of
the signed application to the Clerk of the City of Pleasantville.
E. The towing operator must date and sign the application and certify that
he has read this article and agrees to abide by all of the terms and
specifications of the same.
F. The Chief of Police of the City of Pleasantville shall conduct an
investigation of the towing operator and its operation. This
investigation shall consist of an inspection of the proposed compound
and inspection of the tow trucks and such other relevant inquiries as
the Chief of Police deems appropriate to determine that the towing
operator meets with the requirements of this article.
G. If the Chief of Police of the City of Pleasantville after due investigation
deems the towing operator in compliance with all provisions of this
article, the Chief of Police shall report to the Clerk, in writing, whether
or not the towing operator meets the requirements of this article. If the
towing operator meets with the requirements of this article, said towing
operator shall be added to the list of licensed towing operators in the
City of Pleasantville.
H. If the Chief of Police deems the towing operator not in compliance with
any provisions of this article, he shall report, in writing, to the Clerk of
the City of Pleasantville his findings, with reasons for his rejection of
the application of the towing operator. The Chief of Police shall supply a
copy of his report to the towing operator.
I. Any towing operator who is aggrieved by the actions of the Chief of
Police rejecting his application shall serve notice upon the Clerk within
30 days of such rejection, entitling the operator to a hearing by the full
Council of the City of Pleasantville.
J. Towing operators authorized pursuant to this article will be placed
alphabetically on a rotation list of all licensed towing operators. In the
event that more than one towing operator shall become a licensed
towing operator, the towing services needed shall be rotated among
licensed towing operators alphabetically on the rotation list. After
reasonable attempt is made to contact a towing operator without
success, the next towing operator will be called.
§ 269-18 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 269-19
267:578
§ 269-19. Fees.
§ 269-20. Violations and penalties.
When a violation of Article I or II occurs, the violator may be fined and/
or have his mercantile license suspended or revoked, according to the
A. All towing charges and storage charges for automobiles that are
damaged in accidents or recovered after being stolen shall conform to
the State of New Jersey mandate regarding the same, which fee
schedule shall be adopted as the schedule for the City of Pleasantville.
Fees for tows authorized by the City for other than the aforementioned
shall be as follows: [Amended 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009]
(1) For initial tow from scene to the storage facility (City or rotary list
storage facility), the fee shall not exceed the maximum allowed
under the fee schedule.
(2) The storage fee for vehicles towed from the scene shall be $25 per
day.
(3) The storage fee shall be in effect 24 hours after the initial tow from
the scene.
B. This fee schedule shall be made available to the public during normal
business hours of the City of Pleasantville. The schedule is subject to
change by resolution of City Council.
C. Licensed towing operators shall tow disabled City vehicles at no charge
from any location within Atlantic County. If a City vehicle is disabled
anywhere outside of Atlantic County then the licensed towing operator
shall only bill the City at a rate of $4 per mile. The City of Pleasantville
shall not be billed for any additional fee related to the tow. [Added
2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009]
D. If a vehicle is impounded for investigation purposes by the Pleasantville
Police Department, the following procedures will be adhered to:
[Added 2-18-2009 by Ord. No. 1-2009]
(1) If a vehicle is to be brought from a scene for examination, the
vehicle will be transported and left at the Police Department.
Following the examination, the towing operator will be notified and
the vehicle removed from the Police Department to the towing
operator's facility. No additional fees will be assessed to the
vehicle's owners or the City.
(2) Should a vehicle be confiscated and held by the City for
investigation, the vehicle will be towed from the point of
confiscation and transported to a location designated by the
investigating officer. The towing operator will then bill the City $25,
regardless of the amount of time that the vehicle is held.
§ 269-19 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 269-20
267:579
penalties set forth in this article and his/her name may be removed from the
rotary list.
A. For the purpose of determining suspension or revocation of the
mercantile license of any tower, the City Council shall hear all such
cases upon recommendation of the administrator. The administrator
shall be responsible for the notification of the tower of such
recommendation and notice of charges against him. The tower shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard before the City Council and to
respond to all charges before the decision of the City Council is made.
B. Failure of any person, company, corporation or organization to comply
with the requirements of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished
by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days. Each day’s failure to comply with these provisions
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 269-20 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 269-20
267:580
Chapter 276
VEHICLES, ABANDONED OR JUNKED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 48.
Junk dealers and collectors — See Ch. 151
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 281.
§ 276-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABANDONED or JUNKED VEHICLES — Any partially dismantled,
nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded motor vehicle.
§ 276-2. Restrictions on abandonment of motor vehicles.
No person shall abandon any motor vehicle within the limits of the city nor
shall he leave any motor vehicle at any place within the city for such time
and under such circumstances as to cause the same to appear to have been
abandoned.
§ 276-3. Nuisance declared after parking for certain time.
Any abandoned or junked vehicles owned by any person or in his possession
or control parked or permitted to be parked on any property within the city
limits for a period longer than 72 hours is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance.
§ 276-4. Unlawful abandonment and failure to remove.
§ 276-5. Serving violation notice; contents.
The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department designated by
him, after becoming aware of a violation of § 276-4A, shall forthwith give
written notice of such violation to the person in charge or in control of the
property within the city. Such notice shall order the person to whom it is
A. No person in charge or in control of any property within the city,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall park or
allow or permit to be parked any abandoned or junked vehicle, owned
by him or under his possession or control, on such property longer than
72 hours.
B. The failure to remove the abandoned or junked vehicle pursuant to the
notice prescribed by § 276-5 shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 269-20 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 276-5
267:581
directed to remove the abandoned or junked vehicle within 24 hours after
the receipt of such notice.
§ 276-6. Impounding junked or abandoned vehicles; sale at auction.
§ 276-7. Exempt vehicles.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any vehicle in an enclosed
building or on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful
place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business
enterprise.
§ 276-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
Chapter 278
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 95.
Boats — See Ch. 99.
Trailers and mobile homes — See Ch. 166.
Parking of motorbuses on public
streets — See Ch. 167, Art. II.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 178.
Parking of buses in Pleasantville Shopping
Center -- See Ch. 197, Art. II.
Parking at garage and yard sales — See Ch.
223, Art. I.
Repair of motor vehicles on streets — See Ch.
255, Art. IV.
Taxicabs — See Ch. 265.
Towing — See Ch. 269.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 281.
A. Upon the failure to comply with the notice referred to § 276-5, the
abandoned or junked vehicle shall be removed from the property by or
under the direction of the Police Department.
B. Upon taking possession of such abandoned or junked motor vehicle, the
Police Department shall follow the procedures established by L. 1964,
c. 81 (N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq.) to sell such vehicle at public auction.
C. A licensed tow operator who has towed a vehicle at the direction of the
Pleasantville Police Department and has taken possession of the same
shall follow the policies and procedures established under § 269-16.
[Added 7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 15-2014]
§ 276-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 276-8
267:582
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 278-1. Definitions.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Revised Statutes shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used
herein.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE — Any vehicle that operates, either partially or
exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid, or an off-board source, that
is stored on-board for motive purpose. "Electric vehicle" includes:[Added
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT (EVSE) — Electric charging
facilities for electric vehicles, commonly consisting of a connection to the
electrical grid, power supply cables, a mount, and connection to vehicle. An
EVSE shall be comprised of all equipment that connects a motorized electric
vehicle to the electrical grid.[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
§ 278-2. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the City of Pleasantville are hereby repealed,
except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or
punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any
ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 278-3. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 278-4. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by a New Jersey statute,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
A. A battery electric vehicle;
B. A plug-in hybrid electric vehicle;
C. A neighborhood electric vehicle; and
D. A medium-speed electric vehicle.
§ 278-1 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-4
267:583

ARTICLE II
Parking
§ 278-5. Regulations not exclusive; restricted parking spaces.
[Amended 1-23-1991 by Ord. No. 1-1991]
§ 278-5.1. Handicapped parking in front of private residences.
[Added 7-1-2002 by Ord. No. 19-2002]
A. The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as
set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138 or any other New Jersey statutes or as
hereinafter provided.
B. No person shall park a motor vehicle in any parking space on public or
private property appropriately marked for vehicles for the physically
handicapped unless the vehicle is authorized by law to be parked
therein and a handicapped person is either the driver or a passenger in
the vehicle.
C. Any person parking a motor vehicle in a parking space restricted for the
physically handicapped without a special vehicle identification card
shall be liable to a fine of $250 for the first offense and, for subsequent
offenses, a fine of at least $250 and up to 90 days' community service on
such terms and in such form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any
combination thereof. [Amended 4-19-2004 by Ord. No. 5-2004]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the establishment
of handicapped parking spaces on public streets in front of private
residences.
B. Procedure. Parking spaces will be provided upon presenting a
completed application to the City Clerk including the payment of costs
for labor and materials needed for the construction of the sign,
administrative fee for processing the application and verifying that the
applicant has been issued the special identification cards by the
Division of Motor Vehicles. A person whose application is approved
shall, in addition to the above: [Added 9-4-2002 by Ord. No.
27-2002]
(1) Provide a certification on an annual basis, or other form as
provided by the Police Department, stating that they still live at the
address where the sign is located and that they are still in need of
the space and that they still possess a valid special identification
card by the Division of Motor Vehicles. (There shall be no fee
required for the renewal of a reserved handicapped parking space).
C. Legislative authority. This section is enacted in accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:4-197.5 and 40:48-2.46, which does confer upon the City the right to
§ 278-5 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-5.1
267:585
§ 278-6. Parking prohibited at all times.170
establish handicapped parking spaces in order to preserve and
safeguard the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
D. Designation of areas; signs. The spaces shall be marked by signs
indicating the handicapped parking spaces in conformance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways,
most recent edition, on file with the New Jersey State Department of
Transportation, as may be amended from time to time.
E. Record of locations. The Chief of Police shall have the authority and
responsibility of maintaining a list of all handicapped parking spaces
approved under this section.
F. Violations and penalties. The parking of an unauthorized vehicle shall
constitute an offense punishable by a fine not less than $100 nor more
than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
A. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or
parts thereof described in Schedule I (§ 278-32) attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
B. In addition, no person shall park a vehicle in a residential zone on any
surface other than surface parking lots, in structured parking garages
or in mechanical parking facilities. For purposes of this section, a
parking space shall be surfaced concrete, asphalt, or unit pavers.
[Added 6-19-1989 by Ord. No. 12-1989; amended 8-21-2017 by
Ord. No. 13-2017]
C. Parking restricted on public highways and rights-of-way. [Added
10-21-1991 by Ord. No. 17-1991]
(1) No inoperable vehicle, camper, travel trailer, house trailer, mobile
home, self-propelled housing unit, motorboat, sailboat or other
motor craft or any trailer or apparatus for carrying the same, truck
larger than one ton commercial in size, tractor, trailer, semitrailer,
bus or vehicle exceeding 850 cubic feet in size shall be parked in
the City of Pleasantville on a public street, right-of-way or highway
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.171
(2) Said vehicles may be parked in legal parking spaces only for the
purpose of providing the service or delivery of goods and only as
long as necessary to complete the delivery. This includes the
parking of vehicles of local business establishments during the
normal business day on the street in a legal parking space during
170. Editor's Note: See also Art. II, Parking on Public Streets, of Ch. 167, Motorbuses,
particularly § 167-10, Unlawful parking on City streets and highways.
171. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 166, Mobile Homes, § 166-3, regarding emergency parking or
stopping of trailer coaches.
§ 278-5.1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-6
267:586
§ 278-7. Parking prohibited during certain hours. [Amended
8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 31-2001]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule II
(§ 278-33) of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
said Schedule II attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 278-8. Stopping or standing prohibited. [Amended 8-6-2001 by
Ord. No. 31-2001]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle during the time specified in Schedule
III (§ 278-34) of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described
in said Schedule III attached to and made part of this chapter.
the course of the normal business day, in accordance with time
restrictions established by the City.
(3) Police, fire and other municipal vehicles, as well as county, state
and federal vehicles, vehicles of other public bodies and utility
companies shall be exempted from the restrictions hereof, provided
that they are fulfilling legitimate governmental functions.
D. No parking and/or stopping or standing of vehicles shall be permitted
within five feet of either side of a driveway which abuts a public rightof-
way within the City limits. [Added 12-20-1993 by Ord. No.
29-1993]
E. No parking and/or stopping or standing of vehicles shall be permitted
within 50 feet of the bike path, except on streets that dead end into the
bike path. The streets which are the exception are: Willard Avenue,
Maple Avenue and Greenfield Avenue. [Added 6-4-2001 by Ord. No.
13-2001]
F. Notwithstanding any of the provisions of § 278-6: [Added 8-21-2017
by Ord. No. 13-2017]
(1) Not more than one commercial motor vehicle in excess of 10,000
pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) shall be parked or stored
overnight on any occupied property which is primarily used for
residential purposes or on any property in a residentially zoned
area, except for vehicles engaged in construction parked or stored
on an active construction site. This provision shall not apply to
passenger automobiles with commercial motor vehicle registration.
(2) Commercial vehicles, such as, any campers, travel, vacation or
house trailer, vacation house, truck, half ton or larger in size, which
is commercially registered; panel van; tractor; trailer, semitrailer;
jitney; bus; or omnibus, plus commercial vehicles in excess of
10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) as rated by the
manufacturer shall not be permitted to park on residential streets
between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 278-6 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-9
267:587
§ 278-9. Parking time limited. [Amended 8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
31-2001]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule IV (§ 278-35) of any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule III attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 278-10. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the streets or parts thereof
described in Schedule V (§ 278-36) attached to and made a part of this
chapter, except at the angle designated and only within the painted white
stall lines.
§ 278-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-10
267:588
ARTICLE III
Truck Exclusions
§ 278-11. Truck routes established. [Amended 5-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 7-2016]
A. There is hereby established a system of truck routes within the City. All
trucks having a gross weight in excess of four tons shall be excluded
from all streets in the City except the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule VI (§ 278-37), attached to and made a part of this
chapter, which form a part of the system of truck routes upon which
trucks are permitted to travel and operate.
B. Nothing within this section shall be construed as preventing such
trucks from making deliveries of merchandise or other property along
streets from which such trucks are excluded or as excluding from any
street in the City any trucks used by public utility companies in
connection with the construction, installation, operation or
maintenance of public utility facilities.
C. Notwithstanding this section, trucks having a gross weight in excess of
four tons shall be excluded from travelling on Ansley Boulevard from
Main Street to Franklin Boulevard.
§ 278-11 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-11
267:589

ARTICLE IV
One-Way Streets
§ 278-12. One-way streets designated.
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII (§ 278-38),
attached to and made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as oneway
streets in the direction indicated.
§ 278-12 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-12
267:591

ARTICLE V
Stop and Yield Intersections
§ 278-13. Through streets designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 278-39), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall
be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street except where yield signs are provided for in the designations.
§ 278-14. Stop intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule IX (§ 278-40), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 278-15. Yield intersections designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule X (§ 278-41), attached to and made a part of this chapter, are
hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 278-13 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-15
267:593

ARTICLE VI
Special Zones and Areas
§ 278-16. Loading zones designated.
The locations described in Schedule XI (§ 278-42), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 278-17. Taxi stands designated.172
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 278-43), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as taxi stands.
§ 278-18. Bus stops designated.
The locations described in Schedule XIII (§ 278-44), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 278-18.1. Mid-block crosswalks designated. [Added 5-21-2001 by
Ord. No. 10-2001]
The locations described in Schedule XXII (§ 278-52.1) are made part of this
chapter and are hereby designated as mid-block crosswalks.
172. Editor's Note: For provisions regulating taxicabs, see Ch. 265, Taxicabs.
§ 278-16 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-18.1
267:595

ARTICLE VII
Turn Prohibitions and Lane Reservations
§ 278-19. U-turns.
No person shall make a U-turn on any of the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule XIV (§ 278-45), attached to and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 278-20. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule XV (§ 278-46), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 278-21. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule XVI (§ 278-47),
whenever official signs are present prohibiting such turn.
§ 278-22. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule XVII (§ 278-48), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are designated as lane use reservations, and
traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 278-19 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-22
267:597

ARTICLE VIII
Emergency No Parking
§ 278-23. Designation of snow emergency no-parking areas.
§ 278-24. Posting of signs.
§ 278-25. Removal of vehicles.
Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this article shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of
traffic and any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal, before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 278-26. Effectiveness of article.
The effectiveness of this article is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, no vehicle shall be parked on the even side of any
street except that no vehicle shall be parked on either side of any of the
streets or parts thereof described in Schedule XVIII (§ 278-49),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police, or in his absence the ranking
police officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic.
B. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or will be
posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle which has
been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
§ 278-23 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-26
267:599

ARTICLE IX
Speed Limits
§ 278-27. Limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule XIX (§ 278-50), attached to and made a part
of this chapter, is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated.
§ 278-28. Posting of signs.
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
§ 278-27 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-28
267:601

ARTICLE X
Traffic Control Signals
§ 278-29. Traffic signals established.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule XX (§ 278-51), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 278-30. Installation of signals.
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions of
an Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, shall conform to the design
and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the Department of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
§ 278-29 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-30
267:603

ARTICLE XI
No-Passing Zones
§ 278-31. No-passing zones established.
No-passing zones are hereby established and maintained along those
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XXI (§ 278-52), attached
to and made a part of this chapter, as authorized by the New Jersey
Department of Transportation in accordance with the sketch dated and
numbered as indicated.
§ 278-31 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-31
267:605

ARTICLE XII
Schedules
§ 278-32. Schedule I: No Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-6, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Adams Avenue [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord. No.
46-1999]
Both From New Road (U.S. Route 9)
to a point 50 feet easterly
Adams Avenue [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord. No.
46-1999]
North From New Road (U.S. Route 9)
westerly to the corner of Mill
Road
Adams Avenue [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord. No.
46-1999]
South From New Road (U.S. Route 9)
to a point 190 feet westerly
Bayview Avenue North From Chestnut Street to a point
100 feet west of the
prolongation of the westerly
curbline of Raveling Avenue
Bayview Avenue South From a point 70 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Broad
Street to a point 70 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Broad
Street
Black Horse Pike (U.S.
Route 322/40) [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
Both From Doughty Road to the Egg
Harbor Township boundary line
Brighton Avenue [Added
2-18-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
Both From New Road to Balfour
Avenue
Broad Street Both From Edgewater Avenue to
Bayview Avenue
Cambria Avenue [Added
12-4-2000 by Ord. No.
38-2000]
Both From Doughty Road to its
easterly terminus
Chestnut Street [Added
5-6-1985 by Ord. No.
1-1985]
Both From Black Horse Pike (U.S.
Route 322/40) to a point 120 feet
southerly
Chestnut Street [Added
5-6-1985 by Ord. No.
1-1985]
Both From Black Horse Pike (U.S.
Route 322/40) to West West
Jersey Avenue
§ 278-32 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-32
267:607
Name of Street Side Location
Church Street [Added
5-1-2006 by Ord No.
13-2006]
South From the intersection of Park
Avenue and Church Street, 206
feet east of the southeast edge
of the driveway at 925 Church
Street
Cresson Avenue [Added
11-21-2005 by Ord. No.
31-2005]
North From New Road (U.S. Route 9)
to McCellan Avenue
Decatur Avenue [Added
4-21-2014 by Ord. No.
8-2014]
South Beginning 97 feet from the
southwest corner of Main Street,
running continuously westerly
along the south side of Decatur
Avenue to a point of 235 feet
from the southwest corner of
Main Street and Decatur Avenue
Decatur Avenue [Added
4-21-2014 by Ord. No.
8-2014]
North Beginning 126 feet from the
northwest corner of Main Street,
running continuously westerly
along the north side of Decatur
Avenue, to a point 243 feet from
the northwest corner of Main
Street and Decatur Avenue
Decatur Avenue [Added
2-4-1991 by Ord. No.
2-1991]
South From the railroad tracks west to
U.S. Route 9
Delilah Road North From Linden Avenue to a point
100 feet southeast thereof
Delilah Road North From Main Street to a point 105
feet northwest thereof
Delilah Road South From Main Street to Linden
Avenue
Devins Lane [Added
7-7-2010 by Ord. No.
10-2010]
West The entire length of Devins Lane
between the intersections of
Noah's Road and Washington
Avenue
Doughty Road [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
East From Church Street to U.S.
Route 9
Doughty Road [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
East From Park Avenue to U.S. Route
9
Doughty Road [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
West From Church Street to a point
35 feet northerly and southerly
§ 278-32 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-32
267:608
Name of Street Side Location
Doughty Road [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
West From Park Avenue to a point 50
feet northerly
Doughty Road [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
West Beginning 150 feet south of the
southerly curbline of U.S. Route
9 to a point 130 feet north of the
northerly curbline of U.S. Route
9
East Merion Avenue
[Added 10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 27-2005]
South From intersection of North Main
Street to intersection of Franklin
Boulevard
East Pleasant Avenue Both From Main Street to Madison
Avenue
East Washington Avenue North From Main Street to Franklin
Boulevard
East West Jersey Avenue Both From Main Street to a point 212
feet easterly thereof
Fourth Street North From Washington Avenue to a
point 212 feet northeast thereof
Franklin Boulevard [Added
5-6-1985 by Ord. No.
1-1985; amended
2-20-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
East From Black Horse Pike (U.S.
Route 322/40) to a point 120 feet
northerly
Franklin Boulevard [Added
5-6-1985 by Ord. No.
1-1985; amended
2-20-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
East From Black Horse Pike (U.S.
Route 322/40) to Decatur
Avenue
Franklin Boulevard [Added
5-6-1985 by Ord. No.
1-1985; amended
2-20-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
West From Black Horse Pike (U.S.
Route 322/40) to a point 120 feet
southerly
Franklin Boulevard [Added
5-6-1985 by Ord. No.
1-1985; amended
2-20-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
West From Black Horse Pike (U.S.
Route 322/40) to East West
Jersey Avenue
Green Street [Added
10-6-2008 by Ord. No.
24-2008]
North From the intersection of Green
Street and Main Street
extending 318 feet east
§ 278-32 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-32
267:609
Name of Street Side Location
Green Street [Added
10-6-2008 by Ord. No.
24-2008]
South Beginning at a point 132 feet
east of the intersection of Main
Street and Green Street
extending 65 feet east to a point
197 feet east of the intersection
Linden Avenue [Added
12-20-1993 by Ord. No.
29-1993]
East From Leeds Avenue south 110
feet
Linden Avenue [Added
12-20-1993 by Ord. No.
29-1993]
West From Leeds Avenue south 162
feet
Main Street [Added
5-6-1985 by Ord. No.
1-1985]
Both From Black Horse Pike (U.S.
Route 322/40) to Decatur
Avenue
Main Street [Added
5-6-1985 by Ord. No.
1-1985]
Both From Black Horse Pike (U.S.
Route 322/40) to West Jersey
Avenue
Main Street [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
31-2001]
East Between Northfield City and a
point 100 feet north of Milan
Avenue
Main Street [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
31-2001]
East Between a point 170 feet north
of Washington Avenue and
Absecon City line
Main Street West From a point 50 feet northeast
of Milan Avenue to a point 50
feet southwest of West Jersey
Avenue
Main Street [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
31-2001]
West Between Woodland Avenue and
Decatur Avenue
Martin Luther King Jr.
Avenue [Added 4-5-1999
by Ord. No. 12-1999]
West From Martin Luther King
Avenue extending south 180 feet
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
North Between Broad Street and
Doughty Road
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
North Between Main Street and Broad
Street
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
South From Broad Street to a point 35
feet easterly
§ 278-32 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-32
267:610
Name of Street Side Location
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
South From Broad Street to a point 35
feet westerly
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
South From Doughty Road to a point
75 feet easterly
Park Avenue [Added
4-1-1991 by Ord. No.
5-1991]
South Between Harrison Avenue and
Lincoln Avenue
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
South From Main Street to a point 50
feet westerly
Pleasant Avenue North From Main Street to Linden
Avenue
Reading Avenue South From Main Street to Clearview
Avenue
Second Street [Amended
2-20-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
East From Washington Avenue to
Black Horse Pike
Second Street [Added
4-30-2007 by Ord. No.
21-2007]
West From 159 feet north of the
intersection of Washington
Avenue and Second Street
extending 46 feet to 98 feet
south of the intersection of Abby
Lane and Second Street
Sixth Avenue [Added
10-17-2005 by Ord. No.
27-2005]
East Beginning at the entrance south
of Bayview Meadows Condos
continuing south to the dead end
of the street
Sixth Avenue [Added
10-17-2005 by Ord. No.
27-2005]
West Beginning at a point 165 feet
south of California Avenue and
continuing to the dead end of
the street
West Jersey Avenue South From a point 100 feet west of
Main Street to a point 220 feet
west of Main Street
West Leeds Avenue [Added
12-20-1993 by Ord. No.
29-1993]
North Beginning at a point 351 feet
west of the westerly curbline of
Main Street to a point 821 feet
west of the westerly curbline of
Main Street
§ 278-32 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-32
267:611
Name of Street Side Location
West Leeds Avenue [Added
12-20-1993 by Ord. No.
29-1993]
South From the intersection of Linden
Avenue 196 feet east
West Leeds Avenue [Added
12-20-1993 by Ord. No.
29-1993]
South From the intersection of Linden
Avenue 268 feet west
West Mulberry Avenue
[Added 2-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 1-2007]
South From Main Street to a point 25
feet easterly
West Mulberry Avenue
[Added 2-5-2007 by Ord.
No. 1-2007]
South From the stop sign to a point 50
feet westerly
West Washington Avenue
[Added 5-6-1985 by Ord.
No. 1-1985]
North From First Street to a point 71
feet easterly
West Washington Avenue
[Added 5-6-1985 by Ord.
No. 1-1985]
North From First Street to Second
Street
West Wahsington Avenue
[Added 6-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 15-2003]
North From Main Street to East Street
West Washington Avenue North From New Road to a point 80
feet southeast thereof
West Washington Avenue North From Second Street to a point
80 feet west of Second Street
West Washington Avenue South From Main Street to a point 100
feet northwest of New Road
Woodland Avenue North From New Road to a point
837.75 feet southeastwardly
therefrom
Woodland Avenue South From Main Street to Guard
Place
§ 278-33. Schedule II: No Parking Certain Hours. [Amended
12-20-1982 by Ord. No. 17-1982; 8-21-2000 by Ord. No. 20A-2000;
8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 31-2001]
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-7, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
§ 278-32 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-33
267:612
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 10-6-2008
by Ord. No.
24-2008]
North 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon Mondays during
the months of April
through September
Entire length
Atlantic Avenue
[Added 10-6-2008
by Ord. No.
24-2008]
South 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon Tuesdays during
the months of April
through September
Entire length
Guard Place [Added
10-6-2008 by Ord.
No. 24-2008]
Both 7:00 a.m. to 12:00
noon the first
Wednesday of the
month during the
months of April
through September
Entire length
Main Street East 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
each and every Friday
Between Old
Turnpike and Milan
Avenue
Main Street [Repealed 10-4-2010 by Ord. No. 13-2010]
§ 278-34. Schedule III: No Stopping or Standing.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-8, no person shall stop or stand
a vehicle between the times specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Black Horse Pike (U.S.
Route 322/40) [Added
5-6-1985 by Ord. No.
1-1985; amended
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
Both Entire length
Brighton Avenue South Entire length
California Avenue South From the southeast line of U.S.
Route 9 to the continuation of the
eastern line of pavement of the
entrance drive of Holy Spirit High
School
Devins Lane [Added
7-7-2010 by Ord. No.
10-2010]
West The entire length of Devins Lane
between the intersections of Noah's
Road and Washington Avenue
Doughty Road Both Beginning 150 feet south of the
southerly curbline of U.S. Route 9 to
a point 130 feet north of the
northerly curbline of U.S. Route 9
§ 278-33 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-34
267:613
Name of Street Side Location
Doughty Road [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
East From Church Street to U.S. Route 9
Doughty Road [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
East From Park Avenue to U.S. Route 9
Doughty Road [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
West From Church Street to a point 35
feet northerly and southerly
Doughty Road [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
West From Park Avenue to a point 50 feet
northerly
Doughty Road [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
West Beginning 150 feet south of the
southerly curbline of U.S. Route 9 to
a point 130 feet north of the
northerly curbline of U.S. Route 9
East Milan Avenue
[Added 4-3-2006 by
Ord. No. 7-2006]
North From Main Street (Atlantic County
Route 585) extending to a point 387
feet east therefrom
East Milan Avenue
[Added 4-3-2006 by
Ord. No. 7-2007]
South From Main Street (Atlantic County
Route 585) to Franklin Boulevard
Green Street [Added
10-6-2008 by Ord.
No. 24-2008]
North From the intersection of Green
Street and Main Street extending
318 feet east
Green Street [Added
10-6-2008 by Ord.
No. 24-2008]
South Beginning at a point 132 feet east of
the intersection of Main Street and
Green Street extending 65 feet east
to a point 197 feet east of the
intersection
Ireland Avenue [Added
4-5-1999 by Ord. No.
12-1999]
West Entire length
Linden Avenue [Added
12-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 29-1993]
East From Leeds Avenue south 110 feet
Linden Avenue [Added
12-20-1993 by Ord.
No. 29-1993]
West From Leeds Avenue south 162 feet
Main Street [Amended
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
31-2001]
East Between Northfield City line and a
point 100 feet north of Milan Avenue
§ 278-34 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-34
267:614
Name of Street Side Location
Main Street [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
31-2001]
East Between a point 170 feet north of
Washington Avenue and Absecon
City line
Main Street [Added
8-6-2001 by Ord. No.
31-2001]
West Between Woodland Avenue and
Decatur Avenue
Milan Avenue [Amended 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002; repealed
4-3-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
Milan Avenue [Added
3-7-2005 by Ord. No.
6-2005]
North From Main Street (Atlantic County
Route 585) extending to a point 387
feet east therefrom
Milan Avenue
[Amended 2-20-2002
by Ord. No. 1-2002]
South Between Franklin Boulevard and
Main Street
Milan Avenue [Added 3-7-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005; repealed
4-3-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
North Main Street West Between its intersection with West
Adams Avenue and Woodland
Avenue
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
North Between Broad Street and Doughty
Road
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
North Between Main Street and Broad
Street
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
South From Broad Street to a point 35 feet
easterly
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
South From Broad Street to a point 35 feet
westerly
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
South From Doughty Road to a point 75
feet easterly
Park Avenue [Added
8-5-1985 by Ord. No.
18-1985]
South From Main Street to a point 50 feet
westerly
Second Street [Added
4-30-2007 by Ord.
No. 21-2007]
West From 159 feet north of the
intersection of Washington Avenue
and Second Street extending 46 feet
to 98 feet south of the intersection
of Abby Lane and Second Street
§ 278-34 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-34
267:615
Name of Street Side Location
Tilton Road [Added
11-18-1991 by Ord.
No. 21-1991;
amended 2-7-1994 by
Ord. No. 1-1994]
Both From the westerly curbline of Route
9 to 95 feet west therefrom and
from the easterly curbline of Route 9
to 85 feet east therefrom
West Leeds Avenue
[Added 12-20-1993
by Ord. No. 29-1993]
South From the intersection of Linden
Avenue 196 feet east
West Leeds Avenue
[Added 12-20-1993
by Ord. No. 29-1993]
South From the intersection of Linden
Avenue 268 feet west
West Mulberry Avenue
[Added 2-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 1-2007]
South From Main Street 25 feet easterly
West Mulberry Avenue
[Added 2-5-2007 by
Ord. No. 1-2007]
South From the stop sign 50 feet westerly
West West Jersey
Avenue [Amended
10-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 36-2002]
South Between Main Street and Second
Street
§ 278-35. Schedule IV: Time Limit Parking.
A. In accordance with the provisions of § 278-9, no person shall park a
vehicle for longer than the time limit shown between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday upon any of the following
streets or parts of streets:
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Black Horse
Pike
[Amended
2-20-2002
by by Ord.
No. 1-2002]
North 15 minutes All Between Main
Street and a point
137 feet northwest
thereof
Chester
Avenue
[Added
10-17-2016
by Ord. No.
16-2016]
West 3 hours 6:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From Tunis Avenue
to Ansley
Boulevard
§ 278-34 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-35
267:616
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Decatur
Avenue
[Added
4-1-1991 by
Ord. No.
5-1991]
South 15 minutes All Beginning 25 feet
from New Road
easterly to the first
driveway in Block
57, Lot 23
Decatur
Avenue
[Added
6-4-2018 by
Ord. No.
5-2018]
South 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From Main Street
to a point 187 feet
east thereof,
inclusive of 1
driveway to 226
South Main Street
beginning 124 feet
from the corner,
terminating 149
feet from the
corner
East Milan
Avenue
[Added
4-3-2006 by
Ord. No.
7-2006;
amended
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
North 3 hours 6:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
Between Franklin
Boulevard west to
City parking lot
East
Washington
Avenue
[Amended
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
South 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
Between Main
Street and Franklin
Boulevard
East West
Jersey Avenue
[Added
10-21-2002
by Ord. No.
36-2002;
amended
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
North 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
From a point 101
feet west of
Franklin Boulevard
to a point 304 feet
west of Franklin
Boulevard
§ 278-35 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-35
267:617
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
East West
Jersey Avenue
[Added
10-21-2002
by Ord. No.
36-2002;
amended
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
South 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
From a point 177
feet west of
Franklin Boulevard
to a point 161 feet
east of Main Street
East West
Jersey Avenue
[Repealed
10-21-2002
by Ord. No.
36-2002]
Main Street
[Repealed
8-6-2001 by
Ord. No.
31-2001]
Main Street
[Added
8-6-2001 by
Ord. No.
31-2001;
amended
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
East 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
Between a point
100 feet north of
Milan Avenue to a
point 170 feet
north of
Washington Avenue
Main Street
[Added
8-6-2001 by
Ord. No.
31-2001;
repealed
10-4-2010
by Ord. No.
13-2010]
§ 278-35 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-35
267:618
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Old Turnpike
[Added
10-7-2002
by Ord. No.
31-2002;
amended
5-2-2011 by
Ord. No.
8-2011]
North 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Between Main
Street and Franklin
Boulevard
Old Turnpike
[Added
10-7-2002
by Ord. No.
31-2002;
amended
5-2-2011 by
Ord. No.
8-2011]
South 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
Between Main
Street and Franklin
Boulevard
Pleasant
Avenue
[Amended
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
South 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
Between a point 35
feet west of Main
Street and a point
200 feet west of
Main Street
West Milan
Avenue
[Added
10-21-2002
by Ord. No.
36-2002;
amended
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
North 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
From a point 30
feet east of Second
Street to a point
340 feet east of
Second Street
West Milan
Avenue
[Added
10-21-2002
by Ord. No.
36-2002;
amended
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
South 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
From a point 30
feet east of Second
Street to a point
348 feet east of
Second Street
§ 278-35 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-35
267:619
§ 278-36. Schedule V: Angle Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-10, no person shall park a vehicle
upon any of the following streets or parts of streets except at the angle
indicated:
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
West
Washington
Avenue
[Repealed
6-2-2003 by
Ord. No.
15-2003]
West West
Jersey Avenue
[Added
10-21-2002
by Ord. No.
36-2002;
amended
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
North 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
From a point 75
feet west of Main
Street to a point
252 feet west of
Main Street
West West
Jersey Avenue
[Added
10-21-2002
by Ord. No.
36-2002;
amended
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No.
10-2016]
North 3 hours 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00
p.m.
From a point 368
feet west of Main
Street to a point
469 feet west of
Main Street
B. In all parking lots owned and/or operated by the City of Pleasantville,
parking shall be limited to a maximum of three hours per car. [Added
12-19-1983 by Ord. No. 18-1983; amended 5-3-2010 by Ord. No.
8-2010; 10-4-2010 by Ord. No. 13-2010; 4-4-2011 by Ord. No.
6-2011]
§ 278-35 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-36
267:620
Name of Street Side
Angle
(degrees) Location
Milan Avenue [Repealed 4-3-2006 by Ord. No. 7-2006]
East Milan Avenue
[Added 3-7-2005 by
Ord. No. 6-2005;
amended 4-3-2006 by
Ord. No. 7-2006]
North 90º Beginning at a point 87 feet
west of Franklin Boulevard
and extending to a point
334 feet west therefrom
Old Turnpike [Added
8-19-1996 by Ord. No.
18-1996; amended
2-20-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
North 45º Between Main Street and
Franklin Boulevard
West Milan Avenue
[Added 10-21-2002 by
Ord. No. 36-2002]
North 45º From a point 30 feet east of
Second Street to a point
214 feet east of Second
Street
§ 278-37. Schedule VI: Truck Route System.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-11, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as parts of the truck route
system of the City of Pleasantville:
Name of Street Location
Delilah Road (County Road 46) Entire length
Shore Road (County Road 585) Entire length
Washington Avenue (County Road 8) From U.S. Route 9 (New Road) to
the City of Pleasantville Township of
Egg Harbor corporate line
§ 278-38. Schedule VII: One-Way Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-12, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Abbey Lane [Added
10-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 36-2002]
West Entire length
Ansley Boulevard [Amended 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002; repealed
2-5-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
§ 278-36 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-38
267:621
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Ansley Boulevard
[Amended 2-20-2002
by Ord. No. 1-2002]
West Between Franklin Boulevard and
Roosevelt Boulevard
Chester Avenue South From East West Jersey Avenue to
Black Horse Pike (Route 322-40)
Church Street West From its easterly terminus where
the same intersects with the
westerly right-of-way of New
Road (U.S. Route 9) westbound
from New Road to Doughty Road
East Pleasant Avenue East From Main Street to Madison
Avenue
East Wright Street
[Amended 2-20-2002
by Ord. No. 1-2002]
East From Main Street to Franklin
Boulevard
East Wright Street
[Amended 2-20-2002
by Ord. No. 1-2002]
West Between Edgely Avenue and
Franklin Boulevard
Fourth Street [Added
11-1-1999 by Ord.
No. 43-1999]
South Washington Avenue to West West
Jersey Avenue
Green Street East Entire length
Helfrieh's Alley West Entire length
Ireland Avenue [Added
5-3-1999 by Ord. No.
20-1999]
South Entire length
Knoll Place [Added
5-5-1986 by Ord. No.
12-1986]
North Entire length
Lyons Court North From Black Horse Pike (Route
322-40) to East West Jersey
Avenue
Martin Luther King Jr.
Avenue [Added
4-5-1999 by Ord. No.
12-1999; amended
2-20-2002 by Ord.
No. 1-2002]
South Beginning at Martin Luther King
Avenue and extending 180 feet
therefrom
Maxwell Lane [Added
11-4-1991 by Ord.
No. 19-1991]
East Between Florence Avenue and
Linden Avenue
Milan Avenue (north side) [Repealed 3-7-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005]
§ 278-38 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-38
267:622
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Milan Avenue (south side) [Amended 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002;
repealed 3-7-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005]
Roosevelt Boulevard
[Amended 2-20-2002
by Ord. No. 1-2002]
East Between Ansley Boulevard and
Franklin Boulevard
Third Street [Added
11-1-1999 by Ord.
No. 43-1999]
North West Jersey Avenue to
Washington Avenue
Tunis Avenue
[Amended 2-20-2002
by Ord. No. 1-2002]
West From Franklin Boulevard to
Ansley Boulevard
Vola Lane [Added
3-19-1990 by Ord.
No. 2-1990; amended
4-5-1993 by Ord. No.
8-1993]
North Between Washington Avenue and
Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue
West Leeds Avenue
[Added 9-15-1997 by
Ord. No. 41-1997]
East Between Linden Avenue and
Main Street
West West Jersey
Avenue [Added
11-1-1999 by Ord.
No. 43-1999]
East Fourth Street to Third Street
West West Jersey Avenue (channelization southwest of railroad tracks)
[Repealed 10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 36-2002]
West West Jersey Avenue [Repealed 10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 36-2002]
§ 278-39. Schedule VIII: Through Streets.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-13, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through streets. Stop
signs shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the through street except where yield signs are provided for in the
designations.
Through Street Location
Adams Avenue Between Main Street and New Road
Broad Street Between Bayview Avenue and West Park
Avenue
Broad Street Between Park Avenue and Northfield City line
Chestnut Street
[Amended 2-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 1-2002]
Between Edgewater Avenue and Black Horse
Pike
§ 278-38 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-39
267:623
Through Street Location
Church Street Between Doughty Road and Egg Harbor
Township line
Clematis Avenue Between East Park Avenue and Maple Avenue
East West Jersey Avenue
[Amended 2-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 1-2002]
Between Franklin Boulevard and Egg Harbor
Township line
Elmhurst/Seventh Avenue
[Amended 2-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 1-2002]
Entire length
Franklin Boulevard
[Amended 2-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 1-2002]
Between Delilah Road and East Reading
Avenue
Franklin Boulevard
[Amended 2-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 1-2002]
Between Delilah Road and Washington Avenue
Franklin Boulevard
[Amended 2-20-2002 by
Ord. No. 1-2002]
Between Black Horse Pike and Wright Street
Iowa Avenue-Elmhurst
Avenue-Seventh Avenue
Between Leeds Avenue and Nevada Avenue
Leeds Avenue Between Main Street (County Road 585) and
New Road (U.S. Route 9)
Linden Avenue Between Delilah Road and Leeds Avenue
Linden Avenue Between Woodland Avenue and Delilah Road
Martin Luther King Jr.
Avenue [Amended
4-5-1993 by Ord. No.
8-1993]
Between Main Street and New Road
Pleasant Avenue Between Main Street and New Road
Tunis Avenue [Amended
2-20-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
Between Franklin Boulevard and Egg Harbor
Township line
Woodland Avenue Between Main Street and New Road
§ 278-40. Schedule IX: Stop Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-14, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections:
§ 278-39 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-40
267:624
Intersection Stop Sign On
Ansley Boulevard and Franklin Boulevard
[Added 2-5-2007 by Ord. No. 1-2007]
Ansley Boulevard
Atlantic Avenue and Franklin Boulevard
[Amended 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
Franklin Boulevard
Bayview Avenue and Broad Street Broad Street
Bayview Avenue and Maple Avenue Maple Avenue
Bayview Avenue and Portland Avenue Portland Avenue
Broad Street and Park Avenue [Added
4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
Broad Street
Broad Street and Park Avenue [Added
4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
Park Avenue
Broad Street and Tilton Road [Added 10-4-2010
by Ord. No. 13-2010]
Tilton Road
Broad Street and Tremont Avenue [Added
4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988]
Broad Street
Cambria Avenue and Doughty Road [Added
12-4-2000 by Ord. No. 38-2000]
Cambria Avenue
Cedarcrest Avenue and Elmhurst/Seventh Avenue
[Added 3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 3-1992;
amended 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
Cedarcrest Avenue
Chestnut Avenue and Decatur Avenue [Added
3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 3-1992]
Chestnut Avenue
Church Street and Risley Avenue [Added
11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 19-2015]
Risley Avenue
Clearview Avenue and Walnut Avenue [Added
12-20-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
Clearview Avenue
Decatur Avenue and Chestnut Avenue [Added
3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 3-1992]
Decatur Avenue
Doughty Road and Church Street Church Street
Doughty Road and Portland Avenue Portland Avenue
East Park Avenue and Clematis Avenue Clematis Avenue
Edgewater Avenue and Chestnut Street Edgewater Avenue
Edgewater Avenue and Edgely Avenue Edgely Avenue
Edgewater Avenue and Prospect Avenue Prospect Avenue
Elmhurst/Seventh Avenue and Cedarcrest Avenue
[Added 3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 3-1992;
amended 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
Elmhurst/Seventh
Avenue
Fernwood Avenue and McClellan Avenue [Added
6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 8-2016]
Fernwood Avenue
Fernwood Avenue and McClellan Avenue McClellan Avenue
§ 278-40 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-40
267:625
Intersection Stop Sign On
Franklin Boulevard and Roosevelt Boulevard
[Added 4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 7-1988;
amended 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
Ansley Boulevard
Franklin Boulevard and Fernwood Avenue
(Redwood Avenue)
Redwood Avenue
Greenfield Avenue and Prospect Avenue Prospect Avenue
Harrison Avenue and Shaw Avenue [Added
12-20-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
Harrison Avenue
Harrison Avenue and Tremont Avenue [Added
3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 3-1992]
Harrison Avenue
Leeds Avenue and Iowa Avenue [Added
6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 8-2016]
Iowa Avenue
Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue and Ireland
Avenue [Amended 4-5-1993 by Ord. No.
8-1993]
Ireland Avenue
Noah's Road and Risley Avenue Risley Avenue
Ocean Avenue and Nevada Avenue [Added
12-20-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
Ocean Avenue
Old Turnpike Road and Taubel Avenue Taubel Avenue
Park Avenue and Broad Street Broad Street
Princeton Avenue and Iowa/Seventh Avenue
[Added 12-20-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982;
amended 2-20-2002 by Ord. No. 1-2002]
Princeton Avenue
Reading Avenue and Linden Avenue [Added
6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 8-2016]
Linden Avenue
Risley Avenue and Church Street [Added
11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 19-2015]
Church Street
Redwood Avenue and Ocean Avenue [Added
12-20-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
Ocean Avenue
Seventh Avenue and Nevada Avenue [Added
12-20-1982 by Ord. No. 23-1982]
Seventh Avenue
Tilton Road and Broad Street [Added 10-4-2010
by Ord. No. 13-2010]
Broad Street
Tremont Avenue and Harrison Avenue [Added
3-2-1992 by Ord. No. 3-1992]
Tremont Avenue
§ 278-41. Schedule X: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-15, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
§ 278-40 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-41
267:626
Intersection Yield Sign on
Channelization of West West Jersey Avenue
[Repealed 10-21-2002 by Ord. No. 36-2002]
Park Avenue and Doughty Road Doughty Road
§ 278-42. Schedule XI: Loading Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-16, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones:
Street Side Location
Decatur Avenue [Added
4-30-2007 by Ord. No.
21-2007]
North Beginning at a point 25 feet east of
the intersection of Main Street and
Decatur Avenue and extending 60
feet east, a total distance of 85 feet
from the intersection of South Main
Street and Decatur Avenue
East West Jersey Avenue
[Added 11-6-2017 by
Ord. No. 16-2017]
South From 468 feet west of the
intersection of West Jersey Avenue
and Franklin Boulevard, extending
40 feet west to 508 feet west of the
intersection of West Jersey Avenue
and Franklin Boulevard
Green Street [Added
10-6-2008 by Ord. No.
24-2008]
South Beginning at a point 132 feet east of
the intersection of Main Street and
Green Street extending 65 feet east
Second Street [Added
4-30-2007 by Ord. No.
21-2007]
West From 159 feet north of the
intersection of Washington Avenue
and Second Street extending 46 feet
to 98 feet south of the intersection of
Abby Lane and Second Street
South Second Street
[Added 10-17-2005 by
Ord. No. 27-2005]
West Beginning at a point 25 feet south of
Washington Avenue continuing to a
point 55 feet south of Washington
Avenue
West Washington Avenue
[Added 6-5-1989 by
Ord. No. 8-1989;
repealed 6-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 15-2003]
West Washington Avenue
[Added 6-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 15-2003]
North Beginning at a point 59 feet east of
the First Street curbline and
continuing east to a point 105 feet
east of the First Street curbline
§ 278-41 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-42
267:627
Street Side Location
West Washington Avenue
[Added 6-2-2003 by
Ord. No. 15-2003]
North Beginning at a point 193 feet east of
the First Street curbline and
continuing east to a point 238 feet
east of the First Street curbline
§ 278-43. Schedule XII: Taxi Stands.173
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-17, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands:
Street Side Location
East West Jersey Avenue
[Amended 10-21-2002
by Ord. No. 36-2002]
North From a point 250 feet east of Main
Street to a point 472 feet east of
Main Street
Lenox Avenue [Added
10-20-1997 by Ord. No.
47-1997; amended
2-20-2002 by Ord. No.
1-2002]
North Beginning at a point 25 feet west of
the northwest corner of the
intersection of Lenox Avenue and
Franklin Boulevard to a point 50 feet
west therefrom
§ 278-44. Schedule XIII: Bus Stops. [Amended 10-21-2002 by Ord.
No. 36-2002]
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-18, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Street Side Location
East West Jersey Avenue North From a point 75 feet east of Main
Street to a point 249 feet east of
Main Street
East West Jersey Avenue South From a point 75 feet east of Main
Street to a point 161 feet east of
Main Street
West West Jersey Avenue
[Added 7-21-2008 by
Ord. No. 18-2008]
North 279 feet East of the intersection of
Chestnut Avenue and West West
Jersey Avenue
West West Jersey Avenue
[Added 7-21-2008 by
Ord. No. 18-2008]
South 290 feet East of the intersection of
Chestnut Avenue and West West
Jersey Avenue
§ 278-45. Schedule XIV: U-Turn Prohibitions.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-19, no person shall make a Uturn
at any of the following locations:
173. Editor's Note: For provisions regulating taxicabs, see Ch. 265, Taxicabs.
§ 278-42 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-45
267:628
Name of Street At Intersection of
Main Street Decatur Avenue
Main Street Washington Avenue
Main Street West Jersey Avenue
§ 278-46. Schedule XV: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-20, no person shall make a turn
of the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Intersection
(Location)
Prohibited
Turn
Cresson Avenue to northbound New Road (U.S. Route 9)
[Added 11-21-2005 by Ord. No. 31-2005]
Left
Milan Avenue Parking lot to westbound Milan Avenue
[Added 3-7-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005]
Right
Eastbound Milan Avenue to Milan Avenue Parking Lot
[Added 3-7-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005]
Left
South on Chester Avenue to east on Route 322-40
(Black Horse Pike)
Left
Southbound on Doughty Road to eastbound on Cambria
Avenue (northern approach onto Doughty Road) [Added
12-4-2000 by Ord. No. 38-2000]
Left
§ 278-47. Schedule XVI: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-21, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Location Prohibited Right Turn
(Reserved)
§ 278-48. Schedule XVII: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 278-22, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
§ 278-45 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-48
267:629
Intersection
(Location) Lane Reserved Purpose
Doughty Road and Cambria
Avenue [Added 12-4-2000
by Ord. No. 38-2000]
Westbound right lane of
Cambria Avenue
Right turn only
Doughty Road and Cambria
Avenue [Added 12-4-2000
by Ord. No. 38-2000]
Westbound left lane of
Cambria Avenue
Left turn only
§ 278-49. Schedule XVIII: Snow Emergency No-Parking Areas.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 278-23, no person shall park a vehicle on
the even side of any street except that no person shall park a vehicle upon
either side of any of the streets or parts of streets thereof listed below,
whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers the
street or highway.
Name of Street Location
Adams Avenue Entire length
Bayview Avenue Entire length
Clematis Avenue Entire length
Delilah Road [Added 12-20-1982 by
Ord. No. 26-1982]
Entire length
Doughty Road Entire length
Fernwood Avenue Entire length
Franklin Boulevard [Amended 2-20-2002
by Ord. No. 1-2002]
Entire length
Leeds Avenue Entire length
McClellan Avenue Entire length
New Road Entire length
Park Avenue Entire length
Risley Avenue Entire length
Shore Road Entire length
Tilton Road Entire length
Washington Avenue Entire length
Woodland Avenue Entire length
§ 278-50. Schedule XIX: Speed Limits.
Pursuant to the provisions of § 278-27, speed limits are hereby established
upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
§ 278-48 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-50
267:630
Name of Street
Speed limit
(mph) Location
New Road [Added
6-7-1999 by Ord.
No. 22-1999]
Zone 1 35 Northfield boundary to 290 feet
north of Lafayette Avenue
Zone 2 30 290 feet north of Lafayette Avenue
to Route U.S. 40/322 or Black Horse
Pike
Zone 3 35 Route U.S. 40/322, Black Horse
Pike to Absecon boundary
Reading Avenue
[Added 9-21-1998
by Ord. No.
23-1998]
25 West of Main Street
Reading Avenue
[Added 11-5-2001
by Ord. No.
40-2001]
15 West of New Road (U.S. Route 9) to
Mill Road
§ 278-51. Schedule XX: Traffic Control Signals.
Pursuant to § 278-29, traffic control signals shall be installed at the
following described intersections:
Intersection Signage
Southwest corner of the intersection of
Franklin Boulevard and Ansley Boulevard
[Added 10-17-2016 by Ord. No.
17-2016]
No through traffic
§ 278-52. Schedule XXI: No-Passing Zones.
Pursuant to § 278-31, no-passing zones are hereby established and shall be
maintained upon the following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Doughty Road [Added
8-17-1992 by Ord.
No. 8-1992]
Both From Park Avenue to City
boundary with Egg Harbor
Township
Leeds Avenue [Added
12-18-1995 by Ord.
No. 23-1995]
Both From Mill Road to 120 feet east of
the center of U.S. Route 9, a
distance of approximately 2,480
feet
§ 278-50 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-52
267:631
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Avenue [Added
2-5-1990 by Ord. No.
1-1990; amended
4-5-1993 by Ord. No.
8-1993]
Both From Ireland Avenue to Main
Street, a distance of
approximately 2,690 feet
Old Turnpike [Added
10-4-1993 by Ord.
No. 24-1993]
Both From Main Street to Harris
Avenue, a distance of
approximately 1,040 feet
West Leeds Avenue
[Added 12-20-1993
by Ord. No. 29-1993]
Both Beginning at Main Street and
continuing to New Road (U.S.
Route 9)
§ 278-52.1. Schedule XXII: Mid-Block Crosswalks. [Added
5-21-2001 by Ord. No. 10-2001]
Pursuant to § 278-18.1, mid-block crosswalks shall be located as follows:
Street Across Which
Crosswalk is Located Location
Bayview Avenue 303 feet west of the easterly curbline of
Broad Street, to a point 16 feet west
thereof
Brighton Avenue [Added
2-18-2004 by Ord. No.
1-2004]
Beginning at a point at the curb directly
in front of the main entrance to the
Recreation Center and extending across
Brighton Avenue to the parking lot
Devins Lane [Added
10-15-2001 by Ord. No.
37-2001]
772 feet east of the easterly curbline of
Washington Avenue, a point 10 feet east
thereof
Doughty Road [Added
10-15-2001 by Ord. No.
37-2001]
844 feet east of the easterly curbline of
Washington Avenue, to a point 13 feet
east thereof
East Decatur Avenue 460 feet west of the easterly curbline of
Chestnut Street, to a point 20 feet west
thereof
East Wright Street 628 feet west of the easterly curbline of
Chestnut Street, to a point 22 feet west
thereof
Glendale Avenue 599 feet west of the easterly curbline of
Broad Street, to a point 13 feet west
thereof
§ 278-52 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-52.1
267:632
Street Across Which
Crosswalk is Located Location
New Road (Route U.S. 9)
[Added 11-18-2002 by Ord.
No. 37-2002]
535 feet south of the southerly curbline
of Washington Avenue, to a point 10 feet
south thereof
Park Avenue [Added
10-15-2001 by Ord. No.
37-2001]
644 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Broad Street, to a point 10 feet west
thereof
Second Street 244 feet north of the northerly curbline
of the Black Horse Pike, to to a point 10
feet north thereof
Shadeland Avenue 612 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Broad Street, to a point 10 feet west
thereof
Tilton Road 528 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Broad Street, to a point 10 feet west
thereof
Tremont Avenue 581 feet west of the westerly curbline of
Broad Street, to a point 18 feet west
thereof
§ 278-52.1 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-52.1
267:633

ARTICLE XIII
Vehicles in School Areas
[Added 12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 29-1993]
§ 278-53. Student pickup zones.
Student pickup zones shall be located as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Leeds Avenue School
Linden Avenue East Beginning at a point 111 feet south of
Leeds Avenue to the intersection of
Lindley Avenue
Linden Avenue West Beginning at a point 163 feet south of
Leeds Avenue to the intersection of
Lindley Avenue
§ 278-54. School crossing roadway markings.
School crossing roadway markings shall be located as follows:
Name of Street Side Location
Leeds Avenue School
West Leeds Avenue Eastbound At a point 950 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Main Street
West Leeds Avenue Westbound At a point 75 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Main Street
§ 278-55. School crossing at Middle and High School. [Added
8-6-1998 by Ord. No. 15-1998]
§ 278-55.1. Vehicle passage prohibited. [Added 10-7-2019 by Ord.
No. 12-2019]
A. In order to provide a specific and safe means for pedestrians to cross
Route 9 and access the City Middle and High Schools, the intersection
of Reading Avenue and Route 9 (New Road) is hereby established as a
school crossing.
B. This designation is in accordance with N.J.S.A. Title 39 which does
confer upon the City of Pleasantville the right to establish certain
regulations in order to preserve and safeguard the public health, safety,
morals and welfare.
A. In order to alleviate the congestion at the intersection of West Leeds
Avenue and Linden Avenue, vehicle traffic is prohibited from accessing
West Leeds Avenue from Linden Avenue, Monday through Friday from
8:30 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. on dates students are
present at the Leeds Avenue Elementary School.
§ 278-53 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-55.1
267:635
B. The Pleasantville Police Department shall restrict vehicles from
accessing West Leeds Avenue pursuant to this chapter through an
officer directing traffic or the placement of a removable barrier
between West Leeds Avenue and Linden Avenue.
§ 278-55.1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-55.1
267:636
ARTICLE XIV
Right Turns Only
[Added 3-7-2005 by Ord. No. 6-2005]
§ 278-56. Applicable intersections.
No person shall make a turn at the below-listed intersection other than a
right turning movement:
Intersection
(Location)
Movement Permitted
Milan Avenue and Main Street
(Atlantic County Route 585)
Westbound on Milan Avenue to
northbound onto Main Street
(Atlantic County Route 585)
§ 278-56 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-56
267:637

ARTICLE XV
Electric Vehicle Parking
[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
§ 278-57. Electric vehicle parking installation.
A. Applicability.
(1) Provisions in this article shall be applicable only to EVSEs located
on public property or in public rights-of-way.
(2) Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to exempt electric
vehicles from vehicle rules and regulations set forth elsewhere in
Pleasantville's ordinances.
(3) Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to prohibit the
installation of private electric vehicle supply equipment for the
charging of vehicles parked on private property.
(4) This article shall not apply to low-speed vehicles classified as such
by the State of New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
B. Establishment of electric vehicle charging parking spaces.
(1) The provision of on-street parking spaces for electric vehicles using
EVSEs is hereby established.
(2) Parking spaces for charging electric vehicles established in this
article shall be those located adjacent to electric vehicle supply
equipment sited and installed by the City of Pleasantville. Siting
shall be subject to the consultation of the Chief of Police, Director
of Public Works, City Engineer, and City Planner.
(3) These parking spaces shall be marked with official signage
pursuant to Subsections D and E of this section.
(4) Parking in these spaces shall be limited to actively charging
electric vehicles. Electric vehicles are not permitted to park in
spaces designated for electric vehicle charging if the vehicles are
not plugged in and charging. Owners and operators of nonelectric
vehicles or noncharging electric vehicles parked in an electric
vehicle charging parking space shall be considered in violation of
this article.
(5) The City Council of the City of Pleasantville shall be permitted to
establish a fee schedule for charging costs at the consultation of
the City's engineering, planning, and financial staff.
(6) The City Council of the City of Pleasantville shall be permitted to
lease and/or purchase services related to the installation,
maintenance, and operation of public EVSE.
C. Installation of public EVSE.
§ 278-57 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 278-57
267:639
(1) EVSEs shall be set back at least 1.5 feet from the face of the curb if
installed for an on-street parking space.
(2) A concrete bollard three feet in height shall be installed on the
street-facing side of the EVSE located between the equipment and
the curb.
(3) EVSE shall be mounted on a device no taller than four feet and shall
contain a retraction device and/or place to hang permanent cords
and connectors.
(4) Lighting sufficient to operate the EVSE shall be provided at all
hours. A light-sensor shall be installed to automatically adjust
lighting levels.
(5) Parking spaces with EVSE facilities shall be outlined in the street
pavement in green striped paint.
(6) EVSE shall be ADA accessible.
D. Posting of signs.
(1) The Chief of Police shall, at the consultation of the City's
engineering, planning, and public works staff, erect signage
indicating the presence of electric vehicle supply equipment at the
equipment's site/parking space.
(2) Signage shall indicate the limitations and conditions of the space's
use, a contact number for reporting malfunctions, a reference to
the ordinance's violation/penalties, and that the space is reserved
for charging electric vehicles only.
(3) Signage shall be mounted on top of the EVSE and be two-sided. The
sign shall not exceed 24 inches by 24 inches in length and width.
E. Violations and penalties. Any individual, person, or entity found guilty
of a violation of this article shall be subject to penalties described at
§ 278-4.
§ 278-57 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 278-57
267:640
Chapter 281
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boats — See Ch. 99.
Storage by junk dealers and collectors — See
Ch. 151.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 207.
Storage by secondhand dealers — See Ch.
231.
Towing — See Ch. 269.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 278.
Land use and zoning — See Ch. 290.
§ 278-57 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 278-57
281:641

ARTICLE I
Commercial Properties
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. I of Ch. 201 of the
1982 Code]
§ 281-1. After business hours.174
§ 281-2. During business hours.
During daytime business hours, all vehicles (customer and business-related)
must be parked on the premises in designated (painted) parking areas.
§ 281-3. Storage of auto parts.175
§ 281-4. Parking on sidewalks.176
No inoperable or unregistered vehicles using any off-street parking space
on private property shall extend into the public sidewalk.
§ 281-5. Violations and penalties.177
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days. Each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such.
A. All auto repair shops, auto body and paint shops and service stations
located in any commercial or industrial zone must store all customer
vehicles, business-related vehicles and vehicles for sale inside their
place of business or in a fenced or buffered area in the rear of the
property after normal daytime business hours.
B. All businesses in existence at the time of passage of this article shall be
given six months to comply with this section.
A. Auto parts and supplies must be stored either inside at all times or in an
outdoor buffered area approved by the Planning Board.
B. Parts and supplies for sale may be displayed outside during business
hours only.
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 281-1 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 281-5
281:643

ARTICLE II
Residential Properties
[Adopted 11-4-1991 by Ord. No. 20-1991]
§ 281-6. Purpose. [Amended 11-3-1997 by Ord. No. 50-1997]
It is the purpose of this article to control off-street parking on residential
properties, to prevent destruction of landscaped and grassed areas, to
minimize noise and other environmental impacts of excessive numbers of
inoperable vehicles parked on private parcels of land and to minimize any
and all other hazards of excessive numbers of inoperable vehicles on private
property.178
§ 281-7. Parking on sidewalk.
No inoperable or unregistered vehicles using any off-street parking space
on private property shall extend into the public sidewalk.
§ 281-8. Parking on residential properties. [Amended 11-3-1997 by
Ord. No. 50-1997]
No inoperable or unregistered vehicle or vehicles shall be permitted on
residential properties.
§ 281-9. Applicability.
This article shall not apply to inoperable or unregistered vehicles parked
within a legal, totally enclosed garage structure.
§ 281-10. Violations and penalties.179
Any person who violates the terms of this article by parking an inoperable
or unregistered vehicle in violation of these provisions or who permits or
allows the owner of such a vehicle to be parked on private property in
violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
178. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 171, Noise.
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 281-6 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 281-10
281:645

ARTICLE III
Recreational Vehicles and Boats
[Adopted during codification (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II)]
§ 281-11. Regulations.
One recreation vehicle (a self-propelled or towed vehicle equipped to serve
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel purposes
and which is used solely as family or personal conveyance) and/or boat shall
be permitted on residential properties under the following conditions:
§ 281-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
A. It must be in operable condition and well maintained. It cannot be in a
deplorable condition.
B. It must be registered by the appropriate state agency.
§ 281-11 VEHICLES, STORAGE OF § 281-12
281:647
Chapter 285
WATER
§ 281-12 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 281-12
285:648
ARTICLE I
Installation of Water Mains
[Adopted 6-7-1982 by Ord. No. 11-1982 as Art. III of Ch. 188 of the
1982 Code]
§ 285-1. Purpose.
The provisions of this article are deemed necessary and essential to better
fire protection in the city.
§ 285-2. Permit required.180
No person owning land in the city shall install or cause to be installed any
mains for the purpose of the transmission of water in any of the streets
or highways of the city without obtaining a permit from the existing water
franchise.
§ 285-3. Application for permit.181
All persons owning land in the city desiring to install mains for the
transmission of water in any of the streets and highways of the city shall
make application to the City Engineer for a permit for such installation,
specifying:
§ 285-4. Compliance with excavation regulations.182
No person owning land in the city shall make application to the City
Engineer for a street opening permit for the installation of mains for the
transmission of water until compliance is had with the provisions of Chapter
255, Streets and Sidewalks, Article II, Street Openings.
A. The size of the water main to be installed.
B. The proposed length it is to extend.
C. To what existing main it is to be connected.
D. Whether the installation for which the permit is requested is for the
purpose of supplying water to one dwelling or a series of dwellings and,
if so, how many.
E. Where such dwelling or dwellings are located or to be located with a
plan or blueprint showing such location annexed to the said application.
F. Such other pertinent facts as the applicant for the permit may deem
necessary and proper.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 285-1 WATER § 285-5
285:649
§ 285-5. Size of water main.
No water main for the purpose of the transmission of water may be installed
by any owner of land in the city in any of the streets and highways of the
city which shall be less than six inches in diameter by inside measurement.
§ 285-6. Violations and penalties.183
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days and/or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 285-7. Enforcement.184
This article will be enforced by the Code Official, Subcode Official, City
Engineer and other city representatives as appropriate.
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
184. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 285-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 285-7
285:650
Chapter 290
(RESERVED)
Chapter 300
LAND MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 80.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 108.
Unfit buildings — See Ch. 111.
Private campgrounds — See Ch. 115.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 119.
Fences — See Ch. 127.
Uniform Fire Safety Code — See Ch. 135, Art.
II.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 139.
Housing standards — See Ch. 143.
Mobile homes — See Ch. 166.
Noise — See Ch. 171.
Plot plans — See Ch. 199.
Sand and gravel removal — See Ch. 227.
Temporary signs — See Ch. 243.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 251.
Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 281.
§ 285-7 WATER § 285-7
285:651

ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Applicability
§ 300-1. Establishment.
This instant chapter is adopted by the City of Pleasantville, County of
Atlantic, State of New Jersey, as a comprehensive ordinance for the
purposes of supporting and advancing the principles, objectives and
recommendations contained in the City's 2008 Comprehensive Master Plan
Update by:
§ 300-2. Short title.
The short form by which this chapter may be known shall be the "Land
Management Code of the City of Pleasantville."
§ 300-3. Conformance with Municipal Land Use Law.
A. Establishing the regulatory powers to guide and regulate the orderly
growth, development and redevelopment of the City of Pleasantville in
accordance with a well-considered plan and to manage the use and
development of lands and buildings in the City;
B. Establishing standards for the regulation of building envelopes and
yard areas in the various sections of the City;
C. Establishing standards for the density and distribution of population
within the City;
D. Dividing the various sections of the City into zoning districts of such
number, shape and area and of such different classes according to use
of land and buildings, height and bulk of buildings, intensity of use of lot
areas, areas of open space and other classifications as best suited to
regulate development;
E. Adopting a Zoning Map for the City, depicting the boundaries and
classifications of such zoning districts;
F. Establishing rules, regulations and standards governing the subdivision
of lands within the City;
G. Providing for procedures for the grant of variances from such
regulations, standards, restrictions and limitations;
H. Establishing a Planning Board and a Zoning Board of Adjustment for
the City;
I. Establishing regulations pertaining to preexisting lots, structures and
uses which do not conform to the regulations, standards, restrictions
and limitations established by this chapter; and
J. Prescribing penalties for the violation of any provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-1 WATER § 300-3
285:653
A. The New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.)
grants municipalities the power to manage the physical development of
the lands within their corporate boundaries and provides the following
guiding purposes to be achieved by their land use/development
regulations:
(1) To encourage municipal action to guide the appropriate uses or
development of all lands in this state, in a manner which will
promote that public health, safety, morals and general welfare;
(2) To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade
disasters;
(3) To provide adequate light, air and open space;
(4) To ensure that the development of the City does not conflict with
the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and state as a whole;
(5) To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities
and concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of
persons, neighborhoods, communities and regions and
preservation of the environment;
(6) To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public
funds by the coordination of public development with land use
policies;
(7) To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational and commercial and
industrial uses and open space, both public and private, according
to their respective environmental requirements in order to meet
the needs of all New Jersey citizens;
(8) To encourage the location and design of transportation routes
which will permit the free flow of traffic while discouraging location
of such facilities and routes which will result in congestion or
blight;
(9) To provide a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements;
(10) To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open
space, energy resources and valuable natural resources in the state
and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment
through improper use of land;
(11) To encourage planned unit developments which incorporate the
best features of design and relate the type, design and layout of
residential, commercial, industrial and recreational development of
the particular site;
(12) To encourage senior citizen community housing construction;
§ 300-3 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-3
285:654
§ 300-4. Interpretation of standards.
§ 300-5. General applicability.
(13) To encourage coordination of the various public and private
procedures and activities shaping land development with a view of
lessening the cost of such development and to the more efficient
use of land;
(14) To promote utilization of renewable energy resources; and
(15) To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of
recyclable materials from municipal waste through the use of
planning practices designed to incorporate the State Recycling
Plan goals and to complement municipal recycling programs.
B. The City of Pleasantville affirms its commitment to these purposes and
adopts same as general guidelines for this chapter.
A. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, morals and general welfare in the City.
B. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restriction than
those of any provision of law, statute, rule or regulation, the provisions
of this chapter shall control. Where the provisions of any law, statute,
rule or regulation impose greater restrictions than this chapter, the
provisions of such law, statute, rule or regulation shall control.
C. In the event of any conflict in terminology of any section or part of this
chapter, the more restrictive provision shall control.
D. This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of the City and its
inhabitants, shall be construed liberally to effect the purposes thereof.
A. Jurisdiction. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all structures,
lands and land uses within the corporate limits of the City of
Pleasantville, Atlantic County, New Jersey.
B. General application.
(1) All buildings and structures erected hereafter, all uses of land or
buildings established hereafter, all structural alterations or
relocations of existing buildings occurring hereafter and all
enlargements of, additions to, changes in and relocations of
existing uses occurring hereafter shall be subject to the regulations
of this chapter. Existing buildings, structures and uses which do not
comply with the regulations of this chapter shall be allowed to
continue, subject to the provisions of § 300-20, addressing
preexisting nonconformities.
(2) All applicable requirements of this chapter shall be met prior to any
erection, enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use of a
§ 300-3 WATER § 300-5
285:655
structure and shall apply to the entire structure or structures,
whether or not the entire structure or structures were the subject
of the erection, enlargement, alteration, moving or change in use.
C. General prohibition. No building or structure, no use of any building,
structure or land, and no lot of record or other lot now existing shall,
after the adoption of this chapter, be created, erected, altered, moved,
added to, enlarged, divided, used or maintained for or in any manner or
purpose except as authorized by and in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Utility uses.
(1) The following utility uses are permitted in all zoning districts,
subject to the provisions of this chapter: poles, wires, cables,
conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves or any other similar
equipment, but not including substations located on or above the
surface of the ground for the distribution to consumers of
telephone, cable, television or other communications, electricity,
gas or water or for the collection of sewage or surface water.
(2) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a development
proposed by a public utility for installation in more than one
municipality for the furnishing of service if, upon a petition of the
public utility pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-19, the Board of Public
Utility Commissioners shall, after a hearing of which the City of
Pleasantville shall have been given notice, decides that the
proposed installation is reasonably necessary for the service,
convenience or welfare of the public, nor shall it apply to any public
utility use to the extent authorized by a decision of the Board of
Public Utility Commissioners as follows.
E. General exemptions.
(1) Private agreements. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
repeal, abrogate, annul or otherwise impair or interfere with any
easement, covenant or other private agreement or legal
relationship; provided, however, that where the regulations of this
chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants or other private
agreements or legal relationships, the regulations of this chapter
shall govern.
(2) Preexisting approvals.
(a) Any variance or land use approval lawfully issued prior to the
effective date of this chapter, or any amendment to such
variance or land use approval which was lawfully issued
pursuant to the provisions in effect after the effective date of
this chapter, shall be deemed to be and continue valid after
such effective date. Any structure or use lawfully authorized by
any such variance land use approval which could not be so
§ 300-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-5
285:656
issued after such effective date shall be allowed to continue,
subject to the provisions of § 300-20, addressing preexisting
nonconformities.
(b) Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change
in the plans, construction or designated use of any structure in
the event that:
[1] A building permit for such structure was lawfully issued
prior to the effective date of this chapter or any
amendment thereof;
[2] Such permit had not by its own terms expired prior to such
effective date;
[3] Such permit was lawfully and properly issued in
accordance with the law prior to such effective date;
[4] There has been a substantial change of position,
substantial expenditures or incurrence of substantial
obligations by the permit holder in good faith and
justifiable reliance on such permit;
[5] Such change of position, expenditures or incurrence of
obligations occurred prior to the time the permit holder
had actual or constructive knowledge of any proposed
amendment to this chapter which would, upon adoption,
make the issuance of such permit illegal;
[6] Construction pursuant to such permit commenced prior to
the expiration of such permit and within 90 days following
the effective date and is thereafter diligently pursued to
completion.
(3) Occupancy as a nonconformity. Upon completion of a structure
which does not comply with the regulations made applicable to it
by this chapter pursuant to a preexisting building permit as
authorized by § 300-5E(2)(b) above, such structure may be
occupied by and a certificate of occupancy or occupancy permit
shall be issued for the use designated on such permit, subject
thereafter to the provisions of § 300-20, addressing preexisting
nonconformities.
F. Pending applications.
(1) Applicability. This chapter and any amendment thereof to which
this section is expressly made applicable shall apply to all
applications pending and not yet finally decided on the effective
date of this chapter. Applications pending on the date of any
amendment of this chapter to which this section is not expressly
made applicable by the terms of the ordinance adopting such
§ 300-5 WATER § 300-5
285:657
amendment shall be decided in accordance with the law in effect
on the date such application was filed.
(2) Duty of City officials.
(a) Within 20 days following the effective date of this chapter or
any amendment thereof to which this section is expressly made
applicable, any City official, agency, board or department then
having pending before it any application to which this chapter
or such amendment applies shall transmit a copy of such
application to the Zoning Officer.
(b) Within 30 days following the effective date of this chapter or
any amendment thereof to which this section is expressly made
applicable, or such shorter time as may be necessary to comply
with time limits for processing applications imposed by other
provisions of this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall inform each
applicant named on each application referred pursuant to
Subsection F(2)(a) above that such application is subject to
amended regulations and will be processed in accordance with
such amended regulations; that the applicant may, within 30
days following the mailing of such notice, refile such
application without additional application fee, but with any
such additional escrow fees as may be required for any thirdparty
professional to process such application on behalf of the
City official, agency, board or department; and that if he/she
does not so refile, the application may be denied for
noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter, as amended.
(3) Duty of applicant.
(a) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, it shall be the
responsibility of each applicant having an application pending
on the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereof
to which this section is expressly made applicable, to modify
such application in accordance with the terms and provisions
of this chapter, as amended, and the failure to do so may result
in denial of such application for failure to comply with this
chapter, as amended.
(b) Any modification or refiling of an application pending on such
effective date in order to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, as amended, shall be permitted at any time prior to
the final disposition of such application and shall be permitted
without payment of any additional application fee, but shall
require such additional escrow fees as may be necessary for
any third-party professional to process such application on
behalf of the City official, agency, board or department. Such
refiling shall start anew any time limits imposed by this
chapter on the processing of such application.
§ 300-5 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-5
285:658
§ 300-6. Continuance of authority.
§ 300-7. Severability.
The several provisions and sections of this chapter shall be severable in
accordance with the following rules:
§ 300-8. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(4) Processing. Upon the refiling of any pending application as
provided for herein, or upon notification from the applicant that he/
she will not refile or modify the application or to prosecute the
application in accordance with the time limits otherwise applicable
to the processing of such application, whichever occurs first, such
pending application shall be processed in accordance with the
terms of this chapter, as amended.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the authority of
the Zoning Officer, Planning Board, Board of Adjustment and City
Council to regulate development in the City of Pleasantville is hereby
authorized to continue pursuant to this chapter.
B. Members of the Pleasantville Planning Board and Pleasantville Zoning
Board of Adjustment serving on such Boards on the effective date of this
chapter shall continue in office until the completion of their terms as
provided by law immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter.
Any new appointments or reappointments to said Boards shall be
governed by the provisions of this chapter.
A. Should any provision of any article, section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this chapter be judged invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or
invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph,
subdivision or clause of this chapter and, to this end, the provisions of
each article, section, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
B. Should any court of competent jurisdiction adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this chapter to a particular property,
building or structure, such judgment shall not affect the application of
said provision to any other property, building or structure.
A. Civil and administrative enforcement. Should any building or structure
be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or
maintained, or any building, structure or land be used, or any work be
done in violation of this chapter, the City and its designated agents or
any interested party may, in addition to other remedies:
(1) Institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such
unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair,
conversion, maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such
§ 300-5 WATER § 300-8
285:659
violation; to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or
land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or
about such premises; and/or
(2) Revoke any permit or approval issued or granted pursuant to this
chapter without regard to whether work has begun or a use has
been commenced pursuant to such permit or approval.
B. Violations and penalties.
(1) In addition to the civil remedies provided herein, the owner,
general agent or contractor, lessee or tenant of any part of a
building or premises in which a violation of the provisions of this
chapter has been committed or found to exist, and the general
agent, architect, builder, contractor or any other person who
commits, takes part in or assists in such violation shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the City of Pleasantville, be
punished for each offense by a fine of not less than $250 and not
more than $2,000, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days in the county jail or in any place provided by the City of
Pleasantville for the detention of prisoners, by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or by any combination
thereof.
(2) Each separate provision of this chapter violated and each and every
day on which any such violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. The Municipal Judge before whom any such
person may be convicted of violating any provision of this chapter
shall have power to impose any fine or term of imprisonment not
exceeding the maximum fixed herein.
(3) Any person convicted of any such violation under this section shall
pay all costs and expenses incurred by the City in determining such
violation.
(4) Penalties for such violations shall be collected and violations of this
chapter shall be prosecuted in the manner prescribed by law or
ordinance effective in the City of Pleasantville.
(5) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as depriving the City of
Pleasantville or the City Council thereof of any other available
remedy.
§ 300-8 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-8
285:660
ARTICLE II
Fees
§ 300-9. Fees enumerated.
A. Every application for land use approval shall be accompanied by a
check or money order, made payable to the City of Pleasantville in
accordance with the Fee Schedule contained in § 300-9J. applicant(s)
shall submit separate checks or money orders for the application fee(s)
and the escrow deposit(s).
B. The application fees and the sum stated for the escrow deposit are
minimums which must accompany the application.
C. application fees are due at time of submission of the application.
Escrow deposits are required before the application is deemed
complete in accordance with this section and § 300-27.
D. Every approval granted and every permit issued pursuant to this
chapter shall, whether or not expressly so conditioned, be deemed to be
conditioned upon payment of fees and escrows as required. Failure to
fully pay any such fee or escrow, when due, shall be grounds for
denying or revoking any permit or approval sought or issued with
respect to the land or development to which the unpaid fee or escrow
relates, including the delay or denial of a certificate of occupancy if
outstanding fees are due and owing.
E. Fees cumulative. Where a single application includes several approval
requests, the sum of the individual fees are required.
F. application fees. application fees shall be used to compensate the City
for the actual costs incurred for time spent by City employees for the
administrative processing of applications. Such fees shall be deposited
into the general account of the City upon receipt and are
nonrefundable.
G. Escrow deposits. Escrow deposits shall be used to pay for the actual
costs incurred by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, for professional services connected with the review of
an application for land use approval, including, but not limited to,
engineering, planning, legal, traffic, environmental or other special
analyses related to the Board's review of the application, or any
necessary studies regarding off-tract improvements. Such review shall
include, but need not be limited to:
(1) Review of applications, plans and accompanying documents;
(2) Issuance of reports setting forth recommendations resulting from
the review of any documents submitted by the applicant;
§ 300-9 WATER § 300-9
285:661
(3) Charges for any telephone conference or meeting requested or
initiated by the applicant, applicant's attorney or any of the
applicant's experts or representatives;
(4) Review of additional documents submitted by the applicant and
issuance of reports relating thereto;
(5) Review or preparation of easements, developer's agreements,
deeds, approval resolutions or the like;
(6) Preparation for and attendance at all meetings by professionals
serving the subject Board; and
(7) The cost of expert advice or testimony obtained by the Board for
the purpose of corroborating testimony of applicant's experts.
H. The Tax Map update escrow deposit is designed to compensate the City
for the actual third-party costs incurred by the municipality for
revisions to the City's Tax Maps and associated G.I.S. database(s)
necessitated by the lot subdivision and consolidation process, resulting
in the creation of new lot(s), the revision of any existing lot(s) and/or the
alterations to the Tax Maps and/or G.I.S. database(s). Such third-party
costs include, but need not be limited to, revisions to existing Tax Map
plates, creation/additions of new Tax Map plates, appropriate revisions
to the City's Key Map(s), updates to the G.I.S. database, reprographic
services for applicable municipal, county and state submission copies,
as well as any reasonable shipping and handling fees involved.
I. Escrow accounts.
(1) Escrow deposits in connection with an application for land use
approval shall be made via separate check or money order from the
check or money order paying the application fee, made payable to
the City of Pleasantville, with the words "escrow deposit" in the
memo field. Such check or money order shall be deposited as a
separate, project-related account by the City's Chief Financial
Officer at the direction of the Board Secretary.
(2) Similarly, the Tax Map update escrow deposit shall be made via
separate check or money order from the check or money order
paying the application fee or escrow deposit referenced in
Subsection I(1) above, made payable to the City of Pleasantville,
with the words "Tax Map update fee" in the memo field. Such check
or money order shall be deposited as a separate, project-related
account by the City's Chief Financial Officer at the direction of the
Board Secretary. Should the subject subdivision or consolidation be
approved, the Tax Map escrow deposit shall be used for its stated
purpose. Should the subject subdivision or consolidation be denied,
the Tax Map escrow deposit shall be returned to the applicant in
accordance with the following procedures.
§ 300-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-9
285:662
(3) All professional charges shall be paid from such account, and
detailed records of such charges, along with a detailed accounting
of each applicant's deposit(s) shall be maintained by the Board
Secretary. A copy of said accounting shall be available to the
applicant upon request.
(4) If, at any time during the review process, the amount in the escrow
fund has been reduced to 40% of the original amount placed in
escrow and the Zoning Officer determines that additional escrow
funds are needed to complete review of the application, the Board
Secretary shall communicate to the applicant, in writing, the status
of the account and shall require such applicant to replenish the
account with such additional sums as may be required to cover
actual professional costs.
(5) No plans, plats, deeds, construction permits, certificates of
occupancy or other similar document requiring final signature by a
Board official shall be processed until a final accounting of all
professional service fees has been undertaken and it has been
determined that no additional escrow funds are required.
(6) Any moneys not expended for professional services may be
returned to the applicant upon written request by the applicant and
upon certification by the Zoning Officer that no activities requiring
the use of such funds shall be required.
(7) All payments charged to the deposit shall be pursuant to invoices
and/or vouchers from the professionals detailing the hours spent,
the hourly rate and the expenses incurred.
(8) No professional submitting charges to the City for any review of an
application for development shall charge for such services at any
higher rate or in any different manner than would normally be
charged to the City for similar work.
(9) Upon written request by the applicant, the City shall render a
written final accounting as to the uses to which the escrow fees
were employed and shall, if requested, provide copies of the
vouchers to the applicant.
J. application Fee and Escrow Deposit Schedule. The following schedule
of fees shall pertain to the applications for development presented to
the Planning Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment and for the
administrative review of zoning permits. Fees pursuant to this schedule
are minimums which must accompany every application: [Amended
10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 18-2016]
Application Fee and Escrow Deposit Schedule
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Deposit
Preapplication conference $100 $300
Extension of approval
§ 300-9 WATER § 300-9
285:663
Application Fee and Escrow Deposit Schedule
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Deposit
Without additional
review
$200 $0
With additional review $200 As if new application
subdivisions
Minor $250 $800
Preliminary major
10 lots or fewer $300 plus $20 per
lot
$2,500
11 to 24 lots $300 plus $20 per
lot
$3,000
25 lots or more $400 plus $20 per
lot
$3,500
Final major
10 lots or fewer $200 plus $15 per
lot
$1,000
11 to 24 lots $250 plus $15 per
lot
$1,500
25 lots or more $300 plus $15 per
lot
$2,000
Tax Map update escrow
deposit
(subdivision or
consolidation)
N/A $65 per lot affected
Site plans
Minor $550 $2,000
Preliminary major
1 to 3 stories1 $800 $4,000
4 stories and above Fee applicable to
preliminary major
site plans plus $50
for each story above
3 stories1
Escrow applicable to
preliminary major
site plans plus
$1,000 for each
story above 3
stories1
Final major
1 to 3 stories $650 $3,000
§ 300-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-9
285:664
Application Fee and Escrow Deposit Schedule
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Deposit
4 stories and above Fee applicable to
final major site plans
plus $25 for each
story above 3
stories1
Escrow applicable to
Final major site
plans plus $500 for
each story above 3
stories1
Site plan amendment
To minor site plan 50% of minor application
To major site plan 50% of final major application
Site plan waiver $300 $1,000
Appeal of decision of
Zoning Officer [N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(a)]
$250 $300
Interpretation or special
question [N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(b)]
$250 $500
Variance [N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(c)]
$250 $300
For first variance plus 50% of such fee/
escrow for each additional variance
Technical "c" variance2 $0 $0
Variance [N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d)]
$550 $600
Certificate of
nonconformity
Within one year from
ordinance change
(administrative review)
$250 N/A
After one year from
ordinance change
(Zoning Board review)
$250 $1,000
Zoning permit
Commercial $60 Landscape plan
review, where
required by Zoning
Officer: $150
Residential $40
Certified list of property
owners for notification
purposes
$0.25 for each name,
$10 minimum3
N/A
§ 300-9 WATER § 300-9
285:665
Application Fee and Escrow Deposit Schedule
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Deposit
Transcript or recordings
of proceedings held
pursuant to this chapter
Actual cost to the
City plus 10% to
defray
administrative
expenses4
N/A
Documents As per N.J.S.A.
47:1A-2
N/A
Publication of notice of
final decision
$405 N/A
Request for amendment
to Land Management
Code
$800 $5,000
Certificate of occupancy
Commercial $60
Residential $40
Occupancy permit
Commercial $60
Residential $40
Transfer of ownership
permit
Commercial $60
Residential $40
NOTES:
1 For fee and escrow calculation purposes only, every 10 feet of
building height shall equal a story. Standard rules of rounding shall
apply (i.e., 40.01 feet to 44.99 feet shall equal four stories, and 45
feet to 49.99 feet shall equal five stories.
2 Defined as variances for preexisting nonconformities not being
caused or exacerbated by the actions proposed under the subject
application.
3 Payable to the City Tax Assessor upon applicant's request of such
list.
4 Payable by deposit of $300 upon ordering of the transcript, with the
balance upon receipt.
5 Due upon the filing of an application.
§ 300-9 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-9
285:666
ARTICLE III
Definitions and Descriptions
§ 300-10. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, and in addition to any terms defined
within the body of this document, the following terms shall have the
meanings as set forth in this section, except when the context clearly
requires otherwise. Terms presented as singular or plural, masculine or
feminine, or present or past tense shall be construed within the context
in which they occur. In addition to specific definitions, the following
general terms shall have the following meanings:
(1) "Abut" shall include the terms "directly across from," "adjacent to,"
"next to";
(2) "Building" shall include the terms "structure," "dwelling" or
"residence";
(3) "Lot" shall include the terms "plot" and "premises";
(4) "May" shall indicate a permissive and discretionary action;
(5) "Occupied" shall include the word "designed" and "intended to be
occupied";
(6) "Person" shall include individuals, firms, corporations,
associations, trusts and similar entities;
(7) "Shall" shall indicate a mandatory and nondiscretionary action;
(8) "Such as" or "i.e.," is intended to introduce a typical or illustrative
item rather than an entirely exclusive or inclusive designation of
permitted or prohibited uses, activities, establishments or
structures;
(9) "Used" shall include the terms "arranged," "designed,"
"constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased" or
"intended to be used"; and
(10) "Zone" shall include the term "district."
B. Any words or terms not defined herein shall have the meaning as
defined in Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary (latest edition) and
at Merriam-Webster's Online Dictionary (http://www.merriamwebster.
com).
C. Whenever a term used in this chapter is defined in the Municipal Land
Use Law or in the Uniform Construction Code [Note: N.J.A.C. 5:23
("UCC")], such term is intended to have the meaning as defined in the
MLUL or the UBC, unless specified to the contrary in this chapter.
D. Terms describing uses, structures or issues which are similar to but not
exactly the same as terms included herein may be interpreted by the
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:667
City, its officials and its boards, in their sole discretion, within the
common parlance context in which the term is employed. For example,
"fast-food service establishment," "fast-food establishment" and "fastfood
restaurant" may be construed to describe the same use, and "fourplex"
and "quad" may be construed to describe the same structural
type.
E. In case of any difference of meaning, interpretation or implication
between the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, table or
appendix, the text shall control.
ACCESSORY BUILDING (STRUCTURE) — A building or structure,
whether permanently anchored to the ground or not, but not to be
construed to include small storage boxes which are otherwise portable
without the use of additional equipment, which is customarily
associated with, subordinate in area, extent and purpose to, incidental
to and designed to support or contribute to the comfort, convenience or
necessity of the occupants, business or industry of a principal building
or structure served. Accessory buildings or structures shall be
nonhabitable, have a gross floor area of not more than 500 square feet,
and, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this
chapter, shall be located on the same lot as the principal use, building
or structure served. An otherwise accessory building or structure which
is attached to a principal building or structure shall be considered part
of the principal building or structure.
ACCESSORY USE — A use which is customarily associated with,
subordinate in area, extent and purpose to, incidental to and designed
to support or contribute to the comfort, convenience or necessity of
the occupants, business or industry of a principal building or structure.
Except as otherwise expressly authorized by the provisions of this
chapter, accessory uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal
use served.
ADA — The Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.).
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE — An establishment primarily engaged in
overall management and general supervisory functions, performed in
a single location or building for third-party clients or divisions of the
same company. Examples include management, personnel, finance and
sales.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER —
For matters pertaining to the Pleasantville City Council: the
Pleasantville City Clerk.
(1)
For matters pertaining to applications, minutes, records
maintenance or other administrative issues or matters relating to
the Pleasantville Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment:
the Planning Board or Zoning Board Secretary, as applicable.
(2)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:668
ADULT ESTABLISHMENT — A facility devoted to the presentation and
exploitation of illicit sex, lust, passion, depravity, violence, brutality,
nudity, immorality and other obscene subjects, etc., used in connection
with the aforementioned activities or purposes, which may be in the
form of a live presentation in private or semiprivate viewing areas,
or the sale, rental or distribution of books, magazines, pamphlets,
photographs, motion pictures, records, video and audio tapes depicting
such activities or purposes.
ADVERSE EFFECT — Conditions or situations created by a proposed
development that impose, aggravate or lead to impractical, unsafe or
unsatisfactory conditions on properties such as, but not limited to,
inadequate drainage facilities, unsuitable street grades, street locations
that fail to compose a convenient system, and failure to provide or make
future allowances for access to the interior portion of adjoining lots or
for other facilities required by this chapter.
ADVERTISING SIGN — See "sign, advertising."
AGE-RESTRICTED HOUSING — (subject to the requirements of any
state or federal regulations) A residential community in a single
building or group of buildings, designed for three or more individuals
over the age of 55 who are not related by blood or marriage to the
operator, which shall contain residential dwelling units, open space
and social, cultural and recreational facilities. Age-restricted housing
may include provisions for food service, housekeeping and maintenance
services, health care and social services which may be normal and
customary for such facilities. Examples of age-restricted housing are
independent or assisted living facilities, congregate senior residences,
adult retirement communities and adult intermediate care facilities.
Age-restricted housing may include provision of adult day care (Note:
Provision of health care, food service and/or recreational, social and
cultural activities and other support services on a daily basis.) to
qualified nonresidents.
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Land uses normally associated
with the production of food and fiber for sale. For the purposes of this
chapter, such uses shall not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacture of agriculturally related
products.
ALLEY — A secondary public thoroughfare of less than 30 feet in width
serving vehicular and pedestrian traffic and affording access to an
abutting property. Regardless of the size (length or width) or extent of
For matters pertaining to the official list of adjacent property
owners for required notices: the Pleasantville Tax Assessor.
(3)
For matters pertaining to the certification of completeness for
a land use application, the issuance of a development permit,
enforcement of this chapter or actions taken pursuant to
complaints regarding the enforcement of this chapter: the
Pleasantville Zoning Officer.
(4)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:669
paving, if at all, all alleys in the City of Pleasantville shall be considered
streets.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or a structure, a change or
rearrangement in the structural members, means of egress or other
component of an existing facility, or an enlargement, whether by
extension of a side or by increasing in height, or by moving from one
location or position to another. Aesthetic changes to the exterior of a
building or structure which do not impact the aforementioned shall not
be considered an alteration.
AMENDMENT — A means for making changes to this chapter or the
Zoning Map.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — Any building, structure or premises which
has for its primary or accessory purpose or function the offering
amusement devices for the entertainment of participants.
AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any coin- or non-coin-operated machine, ride,
game of skill or chance, contrivance or device, which upon activation
by any means is or may be operated by the public generally for use as a
game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score.
Amusement devices shall include, but not be limited to, electronically
operated games, skill ball, mechanical games or operations or
transactions similar thereto, by whatever name they maybe called. Pool
or billiard tables shall not be considered amusement devices.
ANIMATED (MOVING) SIGN — See "sign, animated (moving)."
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms used as a single dwelling unit
and located in a building in which there are three or more such rooms
or suites. With the exception of garden apartments, as defined herein,
no apartment in the City of Pleasantville shall be less than 800 square
feet net habitable area. See "multifamily dwelling."
APARTMENT BUILDING — A structure in which three or more
apartments are located.
APARTMENT, GARDEN (BUILDING) —
A multifamily structure designed to resemble (and conform to bulk
requirements for) a townhouse as defined in § 300-10, except that,
subject to applicable design standards (§ 300-51), multiple garden
apartment buildings may be constructed on a single lot, and further
except that dwelling units in garden apartments may be placed in a
horizontal configuration (i.e., one dwelling unit above the other for
a maximum of one first floor unit and one second floor unit).
(1)
Individual garden apartment buildings shall contain not less than
three and not more than eight pairs of stacked dwelling units.
Each dwelling unit shall have its own sleeping, cooking, sanitary
and general living facilities wherein not more than one person per
household is sheltered or fed for profit.
(2)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:670
APARTMENT, VERTICAL — A residential structure of more than three
stories containing three or more apartments.
APPEAL — A means for obtaining review of a decision, determination,
order or failure to act pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
APPLICANT — The landowner, agent, optionee, contract purchaser,
developer or other person authorized, in writing, to act for the
landowner submitting an application for development or other land use
permit under this chapter.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The forms, fees and all
accompanying documentation required by this chapter for a
preapplication conference, approval of a subdivision plat, site plan,
zoning variance, appeal or direction for issuance of a permit pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34, 40:55D-36 or 40:55D-70a, an interpretation or
special question pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b, a certificate of
nonconformity pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68 or a certificate of
redevelopment plan conformance pursuant to the applicable
redevelopment plan.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Pleasantville Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable, unless as different agency
is designated by this chapter when acting pursuant to the authority
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or by a duly adopted redevelopment plan
when acting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
ARCADE —
Each garden apartment dwelling unit shall be a minimum of 1,000
square feet.
(3)
Off-street parking for garden apartments shall be to the rear of the
buildings and shall be accessible from common driveways.
(4)
A continuous area parallel to and open to the street or to an urban
open space, which is accessible to the public and:
Shall adjoin a front lot line or urban open space boundary,
extend for the full length of such front lot line or urban open
space boundary, and at no point be above the level of adjoining
public sidewalk or urban open space.
(a)
Shall be covered by a permanent canopy or part of a building
allowing at least 10 feet of headroom.
(b)
Shall have a minimum depth of eight feet and a maximum
depth of 20 feet, measured perpendicular to the front lot line
or urban open space boundary.
(c)
(1)
Portions of an arcade that are obstructed by columns, doorways,
building services or similar features shall not be calculated as
part of the required arcade space, but landscaping or works of art
may occupy qualified arcade space, provided that a minimum clear
(2)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:671
ARTERIAL (STREET OR ROAD) — See "street, arterial."
ART GALLERY — A building or portion of a building in which sculpture,
paintings or other artistic works are displayed, whether or not such
works are offered for sale.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — (subject to the requirements of any
state or federal regulations) A licensed, multiunit residential facility
for three or more otherwise self-sufficient persons over the age of 55
who are not related by blood or marriage to the operator, providing
light to moderate personal care and supervision for self-administered
medication, and may also provide communal dining, housekeeping
services, recreational activities, financial and other social services and
transportation.
ATTENTION-GETTING DEVICE — A device designed or intended to
attract attention by sudden, intermittent or rhythmic movement,
physical change or lighting change, such as pennants, banners, flags,
streamers, balloons, propellers, whirligigs, searchlights and flashing
lights.
ATTIC — That part of a building which is immediately below and, wholly
or partly, within the roof framing.
AUTOMOBILE FUELING AND SERVICE (STATION) — A building, land
area or other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be
used for the activities defined under "automobile fueling station" and
"automobile service station."
AUTOMOBILE FUELING (STATION) — A building, land area or other
premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail
dispensing or sale of gasoline or other automobile fuels, but which does
not include the dispensing and/or sale of lubricants (other than motor
oil sold and dispensed by the quart), tires, automotive accessories or
supplies, the parking or storing of automobiles for hire and which does
not engage in the repair or towing of automobiles.
AUTOMOBILE RENTAL (AGENCY) — A place of business, whether
conducted in a building or open yard area, or any combination thereof,
which is used or intended to be used for the display and/or hourly,
daily or weekly rental of new and/or used motor vehicles, motorcycles,
trucks or trailers, in operable condition, where no automobile repair
(other than warranty and other repair service as an accessory use) is
conducted on the premises.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR — The general repair, rebuilding or
reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers.
width of seven feet remains for pedestrian circulation along the
length of the arcade, and further provided that public access from
the street or urban open space is nowhere obstructed for a length
of more than 20 feet or for an aggregate length of more than 65%
of the arcade's total length. Access openings between obstructions
shall not be less than six feet in width.
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:672
AUTOMOBILE SALES (AGENCY) — A place of business, whether
conducted in a building or open yard area, or any combination thereof,
which is used or intended to be used for the display, sale and/or
annualized lease (as opposed to daily or weekly rental) of new and/
or used motor vehicles, motorcycles, trucks or trailers, in operable
condition, where no automobile repair (other than warranty and other
repair service as an accessory use) is conducted on the premises.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE (STATION) — A building containing service
bays, with or without hydraulic lifts, and/or any land area or other
premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the repair
of automobiles, including, but not limited to, facilities for changing
tires, changing oil, engine repair, lubrication, transmission repair, frontend
alignment, installing shock absorbers and like and similar services,
provided that autobody repair, painting, wrecking, recycling, parking
or storing of automobiles for hire, and the operation of more than one
towing vehicle shall not be deemed permissible accessory uses of an
automobile service station.
AUTOMOBILE WASH — See "carwash."
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING — The dismantling or disassembling of
motor vehicles or trailers or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled,
partially dismantled, obsolete or wrecked vehicles or their parts.
AWNING (CANOPY, MARQUEE) — A roof-like structure made of canvas
or other fabric or fabric-like material, installed over a framework and
located above a window, door, patio, deck or other similar construction
and extending therefrom as protection from the sun or rain. No awning,
canopy or marquee shall be lower than 10 feet above the sidewalk
or public thoroughfare. Awnings (canopies, marquees) projecting over
a City right-of-way shall require permission from the governing body
in the form of a revocable license agreement which shall specify the
parties to the agreement; the type of awning (canopy, marquee) or
other improvement to be installed; the extent of the projection over the
right-of-way; the term of the license, including any revocation terms;
insurance and indemnification provisions by the licensee on behalf of
the City; any specific conditions of the license; and such consideration
as the City shall deem appropriate. Awnings (canopies, marquees)
projecting over a county right-of-way may require a license from by the
County Planning Board, at such Board's discretion.
AWNING (CANOPY, MARQUEE) SIGN — See "sign, awning (canopy,
marquee)."
BALCONY — An elevated platform located at the second floor or above
projecting from the wall of a building and enclosed by a railing or
balustrade.
BAR — A licensed establishment under the jurisdiction of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq., wherein alcoholic beverages are served by the drink to the
general public and where no food is served.
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:673
BASEMENT — That portion of a building partly below and partly above
grade and having less than 50% of its clear height below the average
finished grade of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as
a full story. See "cellar."
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A private residence which has been adapted
or converted to offer a homestyle place of lodging that provides 10
or fewer separate dwelling units as defined by the Hotel and Multiple
Dwelling Law (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.) for transient and individual
sleeping accommodations for 25 or fewer persons, is occupied by the
owner of the facility as his/her place of residence during all times that
the facility is used for the lodging of guests, does not allow any guest to
remain for more than 30 successive days or more than 30 days of any
period of 60 successive days, does not offer food to the general public,
and in which the only meal served to guests is breakfast. Such use must
be registered with the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
BEDROOM — A room or portion of a structure with the principal
function of serving as sleeping quarters.
BERM — A natural or man-made mound of soil on a site used to screen,
buffer or otherwise obstruct a view or to vary the grade pattern.
BILLBOARD — An advertising sign exceeding 150 square feet. See
"sign, advertising."
BLACK HORSE PIKE — U.S. Route 40/322 (formerly Verona Boulevard).
BLOCK — The length of a street between two street intersections.
BOARD — The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment of
the City of Pleasantville, as the case may be.
BOARD ENGINEER — The New Jersey licensed professional engineer
specifically retained by the Pleasantville Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, to render engineering
services and advise to the respective Board. In the absence of a specific
appointment, the City Engineer may assume the duties of this office.
BOARDER — An individual other than a member of a family or group
family household, occupying a dwelling unit or any part thereof, who,
for consideration, is furnished sleeping accommodations and may be
furnished meals or other services.
BOARDINGHOUSE — Any dwelling or part thereof in which, for
compensation, two or more persons who are not transients are housed
or lodged by prearrangement for definite periods, with or without
meals. An occupancy permit issued by the City's Code Enforcement
Officer is required for any portion of a dwelling used as a
boardinghouse.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT — See "Zoning Board (of Adjustment)."
BOARD PLANNER — The New Jersey licensed professional planner
specifically retained by the Pleasantville Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, to render planning services
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:674
and advise to the respective Board. In the absence of a specific
appointment, the City Planner may assume the duties of this office.
BOARDWALK — An elevated public pedestrian walkway constructed
over a public street, typically along a waterfront.
BOAT FUELING AND SERVICE STATION — See "watercraft fueling and
service station."
BOAT FUELING STATION — See "watercraft fueling station."
BOAT RENTAL (AGENCY) — See "watercraft rental (agency)."
BOAT SALES AGENCY — See "watercraft sales agency."
BOAT SERVICE STATION — See "watercraft service station."
BUFFER — An area within a property or site generally adjacent to and
parallel with the property line, consisting of natural existing vegetation
or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences, berms or hardscaping
elements, lying between and separating disparate land uses and
designed to provide a continuous visual screen, noise suppression and
masking of activity between such uses. Other than fences and
traditional hardscaping elements, no buildings, structures, driveways,
parking or loading areas or other uses shall be permitted in a buffer
unless otherwise provided by this chapter.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials forming a structure or
extension, part or addition thereto, whether temporary or permanent,
being enclosed via exterior walls and having a roof supported by such
elements as columns, posts, piers or walls, and being intended for the
shelter, business, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property
of any kind. The presence of internal firewalls within a single structure
shall not be construed to create separate buildings within said
structure. See "structure."
BUILDING AREA — The total areas of all outside dimensions of a
Principal building or structure and all accessory buildings or
structures, measured on the horizontal plane at ground level, exclusive
of unroofed porches, terraces or steps having vertical faces less than
three feet above the level of the average finished grade of the property.
BUILDING CODE — The International Building Code, 2006, as may be
amended from time to time.
BUILDING COVERAGE — See "coverage, building."
BUILDING FACADE — See "facade."
BUILDING FRONTAGE — The exterior wall of a building facing the
front lot line.
BUILDING HEIGHT —
The vertical distance measured from finish grade to the highest
point of the roof for flat roofs, to the mean height level of the
distance measured between the eaves and the ridge for gable,
(1)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:675
BUILDING LINE — See "setback line."
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the City's Construction Code
Official prior to any alteration or erection of any building or structure,
or any part thereof, signifying compliance with the provisions of the
International Building Code.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building or structure in which is conducted
the principal or primary use of the site on which such building or
structure is situated. In any district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be
a principal building on the lot on which it is located.
BULKHEAD — A structure separating land and water areas, primarily
designed to resist earth pressures.
BULK REGULATIONS — The regulations of this chapter pertaining
to the permissible or required building height, volume, area, floor
area and coverage; lot width, depth, area, coverage and dimensions;
density requirements; and yard (setback) and open space requirements
applicable to uses and structures.
BULK STORAGE — The stockpiling or warehousing of materials, which
may or may not be enclosed within a structure, including but not limited
to sand, gravel, dirt, asphalt, lumber, pipes, plumbing supplies, metal,
concrete and insulation.
BULLETIN BOARD SIGN — See "sign, bulletin (reader) board."
BUSINESS OFFICE — An establishment which offers a service, as
opposed to a product or merchandise, for sale to the public. Personal
service uses, as defined herein, shall not be considered a business
office.
BUSINESS SIGN — See "sign, business."
BY- (OF-) RIGHT DEVELOPMENT — Development that is fully
consistent with the regulations applicable to the type and location
of development as proposed and therefore requires no discretionary
gambrel and hipped (sloped) roofs and to the deckline for mansard
roofs.
Fully screened mechanical rooms or other roof structures for the
housing of stairways, tanks, ventilation fans, air-conditioning or
similar equipment required to operate and maintain a building,
along with their screening elements, telecommunications/satellite
dish antennas and related systems, skylights, spires, cupolas,
domes, flagpoles, chimneys or similar architectural features may
be erected above the heights prescribed by this chapter herein to
a maximum of 20% of such heights, provided that the aggregate
area covered by all such features does not exceed 20% of the area
of the roof of which they are a part, and further provided that the
screening is found acceptable by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
(2)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:676
approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the
case may be.
CAFRA — See "Coastal Area Facilities Review Act."
CAFRA PERMIT — A permit issued for development within New
Jersey's Coastal Zone in accordance with CAFRA.
CALIFORNIA AVENUE — County Road 636 west of Main Street.
CALIPER — See "tree caliper."
CANOPY SIGN — See "sign, awning (canopy, marquee)."
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real
property or significant construction project which is (typically) financed
through municipal bonds.
CARPORT — A covering or roof to allow the parking of automobiles
underneath. With the exception of supports, a carport shall have no
sides unless such sides are the exterior wall of an adjacent building.
The maximum number of such sides shall be two.
CARRY-OUT RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, drive-in (take-out, carryout)."
CARTWAY — The area of a vehicular right-of-way roadway within which
vehicles are permitted to travel, including travel lanes and parking
areas, but excluding shoulders, curbs, sidewalks, swales or other
auxiliary areas. Where there are curbs, the cartway is that portion
of the right-of-way between the curbs. Where there are no curbs, the
cartway is the paved or graded width.
CARWASH — A facility for the washing, cleaning, waxing and/or other
similar treatment of automobiles and other motor vehicles, either by
hand or by the use of production-line methods, with a conveyor, blower
or other mechanical device to move either the automobile or the water
source; or a semi-enclosed bay with such space, water source, material
and other equipment providing, for a fee, self-service washing and
cleaning of automobiles and other motor vehicles.
CELLAR — That portion of a building partly below and partly above
grade and having 50% or more of its clear height below the average
finished grade of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall be counted as a
half-story. See "basement."
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETENESS — A certificate issued by the
Administrative Officer of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment, signifying that all required (checklist) submission items
have been made in proper form and that an application for development
is complete for Board review.
CERTIFICATE OF NONCONFORMITY — A document, issued pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68, certifying that a nonconforming use or structure
was lawfully in existence on a particular lot or in a particular building
at the time of passage of this chapter, or an amendment to this chapter
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:677
impacting such lot or building, and may therefore be continued upon
such lot or in such building so occupied. A certificate of nonconformity
may be issued by the Administrative Officer within one year of the
adoption of the ordinance which rendered the use or structure
nonconforming, or at any time to the Board of Adjustment.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A certificate issued by the
Construction Code Official upon completion of construction for which
a construction permit has been issued, or upon any change in use of
any building, or upon any change in occupancy of a nonresidential
building, certifying compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
other applicable laws for the use and occupancy of the building in its
several parts. Where a permit for construction or alteration has taken
place, the certificate of occupancy shall certify that the construction
or alteration of the building or structure has been completed in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, any land use
approvals granted by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, and all other applicable requirements,
stipulations or conditions of the permit.
CHANGE IN USE — Any change in the use of a building or structure:
CHILD — For the purposes of this chapter, a "child" shall mean any
person under the age of 13.
CHILD CARE CENTER — Any privately operated home or facility, by
whatever name known, which is maintained for the care, development
(1) From one industrial use to another;
(2) Increasing the number of dwelling units within the structure;
From any nonresidential use to any other use for which any
standard set forth in this chapter is greater or more restrictive;
(3)
(4) From residential to nonresidential;
(5) From an existing or permitted use to a conditional use; and
From any existing or permitted use to a permitted use which can
be classified as a more intense use (i.e., from a lower to a higher
number on the following list):
(a) Single-family residential.
(b) Multifamily residential.
(c) Professional office.
(d) Business office.
(e) Personal service.
(f) Retail business.
(g) Other business or commercial.
(6)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:678
and supervision of six or more children under the age of 13, who are not
the children of the operator, and who attend the facility for less than 24
hours a day, which facility requires a license by the New Jersey State
Department of Human Services under the Child Care Center Licensing
Law (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 to 30:5B-15, supplemented by P.L. 1992, c. 95)
as per the guidelines set forth in the Manual of Requirements for
Child Care Centers (N.J.A.C. 10:122-1.1 et seq.) and any successor
regulations thereto.
CHURCH — See "place of worship."
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for
the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewerage or power by
such means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways,
pipes and conduits and the handling of people and goods by such
means as terminals, stations, warehouses and other storage buildings
or transshipment points.
CITY — City of Pleasantville, Atlantic County, New Jersey, a body
corporate and politic, and unless otherwise indicated, includes its
governing body, elected officials, officers and staff.
CITY CLERK — The City Clerk of the City of Pleasantville, whose office
is assigned to maintain the official files of the municipality.
CITY COUNCIL — The municipal governing body of the City of
Pleasantville.
CITY ENGINEER — The New Jersey licensed professional engineer
appointed by the City Council in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:87-15 to
render engineering services and advice to the City.
CITY PLANNER — The New Jersey licensed professional planner
appointed by the City to render planning services and advice to the City.
CLEAR-SIGHT DISTANCE — The unobstructed visual distance
measured along a line perpendicular to the midpoint of a windowsill in
all directions, vertical and horizontal, forming a cone of vision.
CLINIC — An outpatient facility for the examination, diagnosis and
treatment of the sick or infirm by two or more physicians, dentists,
psychologists, social workers or similar professionals practicing
together and working cooperatively.
CLUB FACILITY (CLUBHOUSE) — The facility of a private organization
formed for the primary purpose of fraternal, social, educational or
charitable group activities which is not an adjunct to or operated by or
in connection with a public tavern, cafe or other public place.
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing within the New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
COASTAL AREA — The coastal area designated by the New Jersey
Coastal Area Facility Review Act rules and regulations or successor
legislation.
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:679
COASTAL AREA FACILITIES REVIEW ACT ("CAFRA") — The specific
body of environmental regulations administered by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection under N.J.S.A. 13:19-1 et seq.,
with rules and regulations promulgated under N.J.A.C. 7:7E et seq.
COASTAL WETLANDS — The coastal wetlands designated by the New
Jersey Wetlands Act (N.J.S.A. 19:9A-1 et seq.).
COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT RULES ("CZM") — New Jersey
Administrative Code 7:7E et seq. The administrative body of regulations
designed to implement the Coastal Area Facilities Review Act, the
New Jersey Wetlands Act of 1970 (N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq.) and the
Waterfront Development Law (N.J.S.A. 12:5-3).
COLLECTOR (STREET OR ROAD) — See "street, collector."
COMMERCIAL BUILDING — A building, the principal use of which is a
commercial use.
COMMERCIAL CENTER — An integrated development consisting of a
combination of commercial uses otherwise individually permitted in the
subject zoning district, housed in an enclosed building or buildings on
a single lot or collection of contiguous lots forming a single parcel,
utilizing such common facilities as customer and employee parking,
pedestrian walkways, truck-loading and -unloading space, utilities and
sanitary facilities, and having a maximum total floor area less than
50,000 square feet.
COMMERCIAL PARKING FACILITY — See "parking area, public,"
"garage, public" and "vertical parking garage."
COMMERCIAL (USE) — Occupied with, engaged in or otherwise
involving the exchange, purchase and/or sale of commodities involving
transportation from place to place. See "retail," "service," "downtownoriented
commercial and service activities," "general commercial and
service activities," "neighborhood commercial and service activities"
and "regionally oriented commercial and service activities."
COMMON OPEN SPACE — An open space area within or related to
a site designated as a development and designed and intended for
the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
Common open space may contain such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the use or
enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE — Any of the following. See also "group
family household."
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY
DISABLED —
Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
30:11B-1 et seq., providing food, shelter and personal
guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more
than 15 developmentally disabled or mentally deficient persons
(a)
(1)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:680
who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in order
to live in the community, and shall include, but not be limited
to: group homes, halfway houses, intermediate care facilities,
supervised apartment living arrangements, and hostels. Such
a residence shall not be considered a health care facility within
the meaning of the Health Care Facilities Planning Act, N.J.S.A.
26:2H-1 et seq.
In the case of such a community residence housing mentally
deficient persons, such residence shall have been approved
for a purchase of service contract or an affiliation agreement
pursuant to such procedures as shall be established by
regulation of the Division of Mental Health and Hospitals of the
Department of Human Services.
(b)
For the purposes of this definition, "developmentally disabled
person" means a person who experiences a disability which
originates before 18 years of age, which has continued or
is expected to continue indefinitely, which constitutes a
substantial disability and which is attributable to mental
deficiency, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism or other conditions
found by the Commissioner of Human Services to give rise
to an extended need for similar services in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2.
(c)
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES
— A community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
30:11B-1 et seq., providing food, shelter and personal guidance,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 persons
with head injuries who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include,
but not be limited to: group homes, halfway houses, supervised
apartment living arrangements, and hostels. Such a residence shall
not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of the
Health Care Facilities Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq. For
the purposes of this definition, "person with head injury" means a
person who has sustained an injury, illness or traumatic changes
to the skull, the brain contents or its coverings which results in
a temporary or permanent physiobiological decrease of mental,
cognitive, behavioral, social or physical functioning which causes
partial or total disability.
(2)
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE TERMINALLY ILL — Any
community residential facility operated as a hospice program,
providing food, shelter, personal guidance and health care services,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 terminally
ill persons.
(3)
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE (SHELTER) FOR VICTIMS OF
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE — Any shelter approved for a purchase
of service contract and certified pursuant to standards and
(4)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:681
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application for development which
complies in all respects with the appropriate (checklist) submission
requirements set forth in this chapter.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as specified in this chapter.
CONDOMINIUM —
procedures established by regulation of the Department of Human
Services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:14-1 et seq., providing food,
shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance, and
other services to not more than 15 persons who have been victims
of domestic violence, including any children of such victims, who
temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to protect their
physical or psychological welfare.
Such an application shall be complete for purposes of commencing
the applicable time period for action by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, when so certified
by the Administrative Officer as provided for in this chapter.
(1)
The applicant may request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the Administrative Officer
shall grant or deny the request within 45 days.
(2)
Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that he/she is entitled
to approval of the application. The Board may subsequently require
correction of any information found to be in error and submission
of additional information not specified in this chapter or any
revisions in the accompanying documents as are reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the
requirements necessary for approval of the application for
development have been met. The application shall not be deemed
incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the
Board.
(3)
A form of ownership of real property under a master deed providing
for ownership by one or more owners of units of improvements
together with an undivided interest in common elements
appurtenant to each such unit. For the purposes of this chapter,
specific characteristics of condominiums shall be as detailed in
N.J.S.A. 46:8B-1 et seq.
(1)
Condominium ownership may be applied to offices, retail or
wholesale space, industrial space and other types of land uses.
(2)
Unless otherwise indicated, the structural types of buildings
defined herein (i.e., single-family, duplex, townhouse, etc.) do not
(3)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:682
CONFERENCE FACILITY — A facility used for conferences and
seminars, with accommodations for sleeping, food preparation and
eating, recreation, entertainment, resource facilities and meeting
rooms. Conference facilities may include a fitness and health center,
retail stores and personal service establishments primarily for
conference attendees and their guests.
CONGREGATE SENIOR RESIDENCE — A multiunit residence for selfsufficient
senior citizens providing communal dining, housekeeping
services, recreational activities, financial and other social services and
transportation.
CONIFEROUS TREE — See "tree, coniferous."
CONSTRUCTION SIGN — See "sign, construction."
CONVENIENCE STORE — A relatively small food market, generally
less than 5,000 square feet, where prepackaged foods, beverages,
magazines and newspapers, cigarettes, dairy products and/or similar
items are sold for off-site consumption or use, and where prepared
foods (e.g., meats, cheeses, salads, etc.) may be sold over the counter in
sandwiches or similar packaging. A convenience store does not include
seating or areas for consumption of products sold on site.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development which complies
with the full lot size and other provisions of this chapter. See "by- (of-)
right development."
COOPERATIVE —
reflect the form of ownership. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-58, all
development regulations pursuant to this chapter shall be
construed and applied with reference condominium structures or
uses without regard to the form of ownership. Accordingly, such
structural type may be held in fee simple, condominium or
cooperative ownership.
Condominiums shall be permitted in any zoning district and under
the same restrictions as the land uses they host and/or the
structural or building types they represent were the common
elements appurtenant to each such unit individually owned.
Condominium ownership shall not negate lot or other requirements
intended to provide adequate light, air, open space and privacy.
(4)
Any system of landownership and possession in which the fee title
to the land and structure is owned by a corporation or other legal
entity in which the shareholders or other co-owners each also have
a long-term proprietary lease or other long-term arrangement of
exclusive possession for a specific unit of occupancy space located
within the same structure.
(1)
Cooperative ownership may be applied to offices, retail or
wholesale space, industrial space and other types of land uses.
(2)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:683
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."
COVERAGE, BUILDING — The percentage of a lot occupied by
buildings as measured in a horizontal plane around the periphery of
the buildings' foundations or, if no foundations are present, where the
vertical exterior members of the structure intersect the ground.
COVERAGE, IMPERVIOUS — The percentage of a lot occupied by
buildings and other impervious surfaces as measured in a horizontal
plane to the limits of the impervious area(s). All parking spaces and
lots, paved or unpaved, swimming pools and other bodies of collected
water, buildings, roads, driveways and walkways, tennis courts, patios
and any other structure, or on-site material or ground condition that
does not permit the natural absorption and permeation by soils of
water, shall be included in the computation of lot coverage.
COVERAGE, LOT — See "coverage, impervious."
COUNTY — The County of Atlantic, State of New Jersey.
COUNTY MASTER PLAN — A composite of the Comprehensive Plan
or Master Plan for the physical development of Atlantic County, with
accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive and explanatory
matter adopted by the Atlantic County Planning Board pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:27-2 and 4.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of Atlantic County
as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.1.
COURT (COURTYARD) — An unoccupied open space on the same lot as
a building, which is bound on two or more sides by the exterior walls of
a building or by a combination of exterior walls and lot lines.
COVERAGE — See "coverage, building" or "coverage, lot."
CRAFT (HOBBY) SHOP — A commercial unit used for sale of specialized
products and raw materials necessary for the creation of one-of-a-kind
artistic or similar items in a home or studio setting. Examples include
art supply stores and studios, photography supply stores and studios,
Unless otherwise indicated, the structural types of buildings
defined herein (i.e., single-family, duplex, townhouse, etc.) do not
reflect the form ownership. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-58, all
development regulations pursuant to this chapter shall be
construed and applied with reference cooperative structures or
uses without regard to the form of ownership. Accordingly, such
structural type may be held in fee simple, condominium or
cooperative ownership.
(3)
Cooperatives shall be permitted in any zoning district and under
the same restrictions as the land uses they host and/or the
structural or building types they represent were the common
elements appurtenant to each such unit individually owned.
Cooperative ownership shall not negate lot or other requirements
intended to provide adequate light, air, open space and privacy.
(4)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:684
knitting and fabric and sewing accessory stores and like and similar
uses.
CRITICAL AREA — A sediment-producing, highly erodible or severely
eroded area.
CROWN — The branches and foliage of a tree; the upper portion of a
tree.
CUL-DE-SAC — See "streets, cul-de-sac."
CUT — See "excavation."
CZM — See "Coastal Zone Management Rules."
DAY — For purposes of computing time limits, the word "day" refers to
a calendar day.
DAY CAMP — A licensed, organized and supervised daytime facility
used typically, but not exclusively, by children for recreational
purposes.
DAY CARE — Daytime care or instruction of three or more children
away from their own homes for more than three but less than 16 hours
per day by an individual, association, corporation, institution or agency,
whether or not for compensation or reward.
DECIDUOUS TREE — See "tree, deciduous."
DECK — An open-sided platform, without roof, which is elevated more
than 12 inches above grade and supported by piers, pillars or posts
rooted in a permanent concrete foundation, and which may be
freestanding or attached to a principal building. Decks shall be fitted
with appropriate railings pursuant to applicable building codes.
DECONVERSION — The return of an illegal, nonconforming building to
its previously conforming condition.
DAY-CARE, ADULT — Day care for three or more senior citizens or
disabled adults.
(1)
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility certified by the New Jersey
Division of Youth and Family Services which provides day care for
children. See also "child-care center" and "family day-care homes."
(2)
DAY-CARE CENTER, ADULT — A facility certified by the New
Jersey Division of Youth and Family Services which provides adult
day care.
(3)
(4) DAY-CARE HOME — See "family day-care home."
DAY-CARE NURSERY — A facility certified by the New Jersey
Division of Youth and Family Services which provides day-care for
three or more children from two to five years of age for up to three
hours per day, whether or not for compensation or reward.
(5)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:685
DEDICATION — The transfer of property from private to public
ownership for a public purpose.
DELILAH ROAD — Aka Atlantic County Road 646.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of
land to be developed.
DENTAL COMPLEXES — See "medical/dental complex."
DESIGNED SHOPPING CENTER — An integrated development
consisting of a combination of commercial uses otherwise individually
permitted in the subject zoning district, housed in an enclosed building
or buildings, on a single lot or collection of contiguous lots forming
a single parcel, utilizing such common facilities as customer and
employee parking, pedestrian walkways, truck-loading and -unloading
space, utilities and sanitary facilities and having a minimum total floor
area of 50,000 square feet
DETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural depression below
ground level designed to collect surface and subsurface water so that
it might impede its flow and to gradually release the same at a rate not
greater than that prior to the development of the property, into natural
or man-made outlets (i.e., storm sewer system or streams).
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure;
or any mining, excavation or landfill, or the clearing, grading or
disturbance of any area for nonagricultural purposes; any use or
change in the use of any building or other structure or land; or the
extension of use of land for which permission may be required pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer
which is required by this chapter as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building and
which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
DENSITY, GROSS (RESIDENTIAL) — The total number of dwelling
units which may be or are developed divided by the total number of
acres of the proposed development site.
(1)
DENSITY, NET (RESIDENTIAL) — The total number of dwelling
units which may be or are developed divided by the total number of
acres of the proposed development site, exclusive of areas used for
streets, easements, open space, commercial uses, industrial uses
and land to be dedicated to a governmental entity.
(2)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:686
the provisions of this chapter or a variance therefrom duly authorized
by the Planning Board under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 or Zoning Board under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70, as the case may be.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Any component of this chapter, the
Official Map, any other ordinance or municipal or other regulation for
the use and development of land, or any amendment thereto, adopted
and filed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or any similar regulation
promulgated by any department, division or agency of the federal
government, the State of New Jersey or any political subdivision
thereof.
DISCRETIONARY APPROVAL — Approval for a development that is not
fully consistent with the regulations applicable to the type and location
of development as proposed (i.e., not a by-right development as defined
herein), and therefore requires discretionary approval by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be; typically
in the form of variance relief from one or more requirements of this
chapter.
Developments which are made subject to discretionary approvals are
generally those which are expected to have unusual impacts either
on their immediate neighborhood or on the City in general. Such
approvals provide special benefits to their developers not generally
available to owners of other property in the same zoning district.
DISPLAY SURFACE (FACE) — The area made available by a sign
structure for the purpose of displaying the message.
DISTANCE OF SIGN PROJECTION — The distance from the exterior
wall surface of a building to the sign element farthest distant from such
surface.
DISTRICT — See "zoning district."
DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE — See "zoning district boundary line."
DOWNTOWN-ORIENTED COMMERCIAL AND SERVICE ACTIVITIES
— Uses designed to provide for the workday convenience and postworkday
entertainment of the employees and residents of the City's
Central Business District. Examples include: grocery/specialty food
stores; pharmacies (including drive-through); convenience stores
without fuel-dispensing facilities; video rental/sales; non-"big box"
general retail/appliance/hardware stores; hair and nail salons/barber
and beauty shops; tailor shops; non-"chain"/nonfranchise craft/hobby/
art supply shops, sporting goods shops, pet shops and book shops;
greeting card/stationery/florist shops; antique/boutique/clothing/
jewelry/gift shops; retail dry cleaners (no commercial cleaning on
premises); shoe repair; and like and similar activities.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land
by drains, grading or other means and includes control of runoff to
minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
development, and thereby:
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:687
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
and maintenance of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or lands
required along a natural stream or watercourse to provide for drainage.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT (ESTABLISHMENT) — See "restaurant, drivein."
DRIVEWAY — A private road connecting a house, building, garage,
accessory building or parking area with a public right-of-way.
DRUGSTORE — See "pharmacy."
DUPLEX — See "single-family semidetached dwelling unit."
DWELLING (UNIT) — A room or series of connected rooms containing
living, cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities designed for residential
use and occupied by one housekeeping unit, which shall be selfcontained
and shall not require passage through another dwelling unit
or other indirect route(s) to access any portion of the dwelling, nor
shall there be shared facilities with another housekeeping unit. Unless
otherwise required herein, no dwelling unit in the City of Pleasantville
shall contain less than 800 square feet of net habitable area.
DWELLING UNIT CONVERSION — The rebuilding, remodeling,
addition to, alteration, extension or enlargement of, or conversion in
any manner of an existing building to increase the number of dwelling
units contained therein.
DWELLING UNIT, EFFICIENCY — A dwelling unit consisting of not
more than one habitable room, together with kitchen or kitchenette,
plus one room for sanitary facilities.
EARTHBORNE VIBRATION — A cyclic movement of the earth due to
the propagation of mechanical energy.
EASEMENT — A right to use the real property of another created by
deed, plat or other legal means for the benefit of private persons or the
public, for one or more specific purposes, including, but not limited to,
access, drainage, conservation or provision of utility services.
EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENT — A retail food-service
operation for the retail sale of cooked-to-order or ready-to-be-consumed
food and beverages. See "restaurant" (all categories), "bar" and
"tavern."
(1) Assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges;
(2) Induce water recharge into the ground where practical;
(3) Reduce nonpoint pollution;
Maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions;
(4)
(5) Preserve water supply; and
(6) Prevent or alleviate flooding.
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:688
EDUCATIONAL USE — Public, parochial or private elementary or
secondary schools, duly licensed by the State of New Jersey, attendance
at which is sufficient compliance with the compulsory education
requirements of the state, and duly accredited colleges and
universities. Summer day camps shall not be considered as educational
uses or accessories to such uses, nor shall a school or college giving
special or limited instruction, such as a business, art, music or dancing
school.
EDUCATIONAL USE, PROPRIETARY (COMMERCIAL) — The activity or
corporation engaged in instruction for personal gain or profit and not
as an integral part of an educational use, as defined.
EFFICIENCY (DWELLING UNIT) — See "dwelling unit, efficiency."
ELECTRIC VEHICLE — Any vehicle that operates, either partially or
exclusively, on electrical energy from the grid, or an off-board source,
that is stored on-board for motive purpose. "Electric vehicle"
includes:[Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT (EVSE) — Electric charging
facilities for electric vehicles, commonly consisting of a connection to
the electrical grid, power supply cables, a mount, and connection to
vehicle. An EVSE shall be comprised of all equipment that connects a
motorized electric vehicle to the electrical grid.
ELEEMOSYNARY — Of or for charitable or philanthropic purposes.
ELEVATION(S), EXISTING — The elevation(s) of all portions of a site
prior to any site preparation work related to a proposed use for which
approval under or pursuant to this chapter is required.
ELEVATION(S), FINISH — The proposed elevations of the land surface
of a site after completion of all site preparation work related to the
proposed use for which approval pursuant to this chapter is required.
The actual elevations of the land surface of a site after completion of all
such site preparation work.
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building,
an increase in the size of any other existing structure or an increase in
that portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT ("EIA") — A compilation
of studies, reports, documents and findings of fact prepared by an
applicant as part of and for a development application. Said EIA shall
be consistent with, and shall contain all that information, data and
documentation required by, this chapter. An environmental impact
(1) A battery electric vehicle;
(2) A plug-in hybrid electric vehicle;
(3) A neighborhood electric vehicle; and
(4) A medium-speed electric vehicle.
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:689
statement meeting the requirements of N.J.S.A. 13:19-10, as specifically
outlined in N.J.A.C. 7:7E-1.6, promulgated in compliance with CAFRA,
may be accepted in lieu of an EIA.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE SITE — Property which has been
formally designated in the Master Plan or by NJDEP as being of
environmental or scenic significance.
EQUAL DEGREE OF ENCROACHMENT — The delineation of floodplain
limits so that floodplain lands on both sides of a stream are capable of
conveying a proportionate share of flood flows. This is determined by
considering the effect of encroachment on the hydraulic efficiency of
the floodplain along both sides of a stream or significant reach.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice and/or gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan which fully
indicates necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule of
the timing for their installation, which will effectively minimize soil
erosion and sedimentation. Such measures shall be equivalent to or
exceed standards adopted by the New Jersey State Soil Conservation
Council and administered by the Atlantic County Soil Conservation
District in conformance with N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Underground utility (Note: gas, electrical,
telephone, telegraph, steam or water.) transmission or distribution
systems and normal aboveground appurtenances thereto, including,
but not limited to, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables,
emergency responder call boxes, light standards, poles, traffic signals,
hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service
for public health, safety and general welfare.
EVERGREEN TREE — See "tree, coniferous."
EXCAVATION — Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried,
uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
EXCAVATION WORK — The removal, replacement, repair, construction
or other disturbance of any portion of the public improvements within a
public street or drainage right-of-way. Public improvements include, but
are not limited to, curbs, sidewalks, driveways and driveway aprons,
drainage structures and conduits, pavements, base courses, gutters,
retaining walls, channels, head walls, railings, guardrails or any other
public improvement existing within the public right-of-way. For the
purposes of this chapter, work performed outside of the public rightof-
way but requiring the storage of materials or the operation of
equipment within the public right-of-way in such a manner as may
cause damage to any of the aforementioned public improvements shall
be deemed excavation work, as shall the construction, addition,
installation or other provision of the whole or portions of the
improvements within a public street, drainage right-of-way or public
way or public grounds by persons other than those exempt from the
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:690
provisions of this chapter, including privately sponsored construction of
curbing, sidewalks, pavement extensions, aprons, drainage or any other
public improvement or portion thereof.
EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT — Site plan and/or subdivision approval shall
not be required prior to the issuance of a development permit for the
following:
EXISTING ELEVATION(S) — See "elevation(s), existing."
EXTENDED CARE FACILITY — See "nursing home."
EXTENSION — An increase in the amount of existing floor area used
for an existing use within an existing building.
EXTERIOR WALL — See "wall, exterior."
FACADE — The total wall surface, including doors and windows, of the
subject face of a building, typically expressed as front, sides and rear or
by compass direction. In the case of a corner building which fronts on
Construction, additions or alterations related to individual singlefamily
detached and duplex dwelling units or their accessory
structures on individual lots.
(1)
Development involving no new subdivision or resubdivision of land,
and not requiring any variance relief.
(2)
Interior alterations which do not increase the required number of
off-street parking spaces and which conform to the performance
standards of this chapter.
(3)
(4) Any change in occupancy which is not a change in use.
Individual applications for accessory mechanical equipment,
accessory storage structures and accessory uses not exceeding
1,000 square feet in area, whose operation and location conform to
the design and performance standards of this chapter and whose
installation is on a site already occupied by an active principal use
for which site plan approval is not otherwise required.
(5)
Sign(s), when installation is on a site already occupied by a
principal use for which site plan approval is not otherwise required,
provided that such sign(s) conform to the applicable design and
zoning district regulations of this chapter and further provided that
a permit is obtained.
(6)
Construction of a parking lot or an addition to an existing parking
lot, provided that the new lot or the proposed addition contains
three spaces or fewer whose location and design conform to the
standards and zoning district requirements of this chapter.
(7)
The division and conveyance of property so as to combine existing
lots which are not considered to be subdivisions in accordance with
the definitions of "subdivision" contained in this chapter.
(8)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:691
more than one street, the front facade shall be all facades which abut
the adjoining public rights-of-way.
FACADE SIGN — See "sign, building-mounted."
FAMILY — One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption
or guardianship living together on a permanent basis as a single,
nonprofit housekeeping unit, as defined herein, or a collective number
of persons living together in one dwelling unit on a permanent basis,
whose relationship is of a distinctive domestic character, and cooking
as a single group family household, as defined by this chapter.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — Any private residence approved by the
Division of Youth and Family Services or an organization with which
such Division contracts for family day care pursuant to the Family
Day-Care Provider Registration Act (N.J.S.A. 30:5B-16 et seq.) in which
child-care services are regularly provided to no less than three and no
more than five children for no less than 15 hours per week. For the
purposes of this definition, a "child" shall mean any person under the
age of 13.
FARM — Any parcel of land, three acres or larger in size, which is used
for gain in the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry, dairy
products or horticulture.
FARM BUILDING — Any building used for the housing of agricultural
equipment, produce, livestock or poultry or for the incidental or
customary processing of farm products, provided that such building
is located on, operated in conjunction with and is necessary to the
operation of a farm as defined by this chapter.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, fast food."
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
FENCE — A structure, typically made of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or other manufactured material, or combination of materials,
erected as an enclosure, boundary or barrier to a part or whole of a
property. Landscaped hedges may serve as a fence if planted for such
A child being cared for who is legally related to the provider shall
not be included in the total number of children receiving child-care
services, nor shall a child being cared for as part of a cooperative
agreement between parents for the care of their children by one
or more of the parents, where no payment for the care is being
provided.
(1)
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.4,185 a family day-care home shall
be considered to be a home occupation, as defined herein, for
the purposes of permitted uses. Family day-care homes are to be
permitted uses in all residential zoning districts.
(2)
185. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.4 was repealed by L. 1998, c. 139, § 1, effective
5-11-1998.
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:692
purpose. A wall may serve as a fence if not functioning as a structural
member of a building or structure and if constructed for such purpose.
FENCE, OPEN — A fence in which 66% of the area between grade level
and the top cross member is not obstructed.
FILL — The deposit on land, whether submerged or not, of sand, gravel,
earth or other materials of any composition whatsoever.
FILLING (EXPRESS FILLING) STATION — See "automobile fueling
station."
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, taken on a preliminary
approved major subdivision or site plan, after all conditions,
engineering plans and other requirements have been satisfied and the
required improvements have either been installed or guarantees for
such installation have been properly posted. Final approval may be
conditioned upon the posting of such guarantees at the discretion of the
approving Board.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of a site plan or
subdivision which is presented to the Planning Board for final approval
in accordance with the provision of this chapter and which, as
approved, is to be filed with the proper County Recording Officer.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A facility wherein monies are handles in
a fiduciary manner. Examples include banks, check-cashing facilities,
credit unions and loan offices.
FINISH ELEVATION(S) — See "elevation(s), finish."
FLASHING SIGN — See "sign, flashing."
FLAG LOT — See "lot, flag."
FLOOR — A story of a building.
FLOOD FRINGE AREA — That portion of the flood hazard area not
designated as floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — The floodway and any additional designated
portions of the floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN — The (typically relatively flat) maximum land surface
area adjoining the channel of a natural stream or other body of water
which has been or may be inundated or covered by floodwater, typically
during a high tide or storm event.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a natural stream and portions of the
floodplain adjoining the channel which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge the floodwater or flood flow of any natural stream.
FLOOR AREA —
FLOOR AREA, GROSS ("GFA") — The sum of the gross horizontal
areas of all floors within a building measured between the outside
face of the exterior walls, or from the center line of a common wall
(1)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:693
separating buildings. In the case of residential structures, such
area shall be finished in accordance with the requirements of the
International Building Code. Basements which satisfy applicable
construction code definitions of habitable space are included in
the GFA for residential uses. Any cellar, garage, crawl space,
unfinished attic or space of any nature, or accessory building, shall
not be included.
The gross floor area of an attached residential dwelling unit
(i.e., duplex, townhouse, apartment, etc.) shall be measured
from the center of the interior walls and the outside or exterior
walls.
(a)
Any space with a clear ceiling height of four feet or more,
but less than the minimum ceiling height prescribed in the
International Building Code for the type of building concerned,
shall not be included when in excess of 10% of the floor area
which complied with such prescribed ceiling heights.
(b)
In the case of all multistory buildings, the first floor area shall
be considered to be the first level or levels of the structure
extending over the full perimeter of the structure and which
is above the average finished grade of the adjoining ground,
whether or not such level is constructed on a concrete slab or
other such floor. In the case of a bi-level multistory building,
the first floor area shall be considered to be the first level or
levels of the structure over the full perimeter of the structure
which are above the average finished grade of the adjoining
ground and constructed on other than a concrete slab or other
such floor. Any floor area which is located at grade or on such
a slab may, however, be included in the calculations of gross
floor area, provided that it complies with the other terms of
this definition.
(c)
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE ("HFA") — The sum of the gross
horizontal areas of all floors of a dwelling measured between the
inside face of the exterior walls or from the center line of the
walls separating two dwelling units, having a clear ceiling height of
seven feet four inches or greater, but not including any unfinished
attic, cellar or accessory building space, but including the floor
area of roofed porches, balconies, terraces and patios. See also
"habitable room."
(2)
FLOOR AREA, NET HABITABLE ("NHFA") — The actual occupied
area fully enclosed by the inside surfaces of walls, windows, doors
and partitions and including working, living, eating, cooking and
sleeping areas, but excluding garages, carports, parking spaces,
halls, storage areas, closets, bathrooms, cellars, half-stories and
unfinished attics and basements.
(3)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:694
FOOD PRODUCTION USES — A facility for the preparation or
manufacture of foodstuffs for on-site retail sale or off-site wholesale
supply. Examples include bakeries and confectioneries.
FOOTCANDLE — A unit of illumination; technically, the illumination at
all points one foot distant from a uniform point source of one footcandle
power.
FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION — A group of people formally organized
for a common interest, business or pleasure. Such groups shall be
defined to be similar but not limited to organizations as the Masonic
Lodge, Knights of Columbus, etc.
FRONTAGE, LOT — See "lot frontage."
FRONT LOT LINE — See "lot line, front."
FRONT YARD — See "yard, front."
FULL-SERVICE RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, full service."
FUNERAL HOME — See "mortuary."
GARAGE — A detached accessory building or structure or an attached
portion of a principal building or structure, located on the same lot as
the principal building or structure, used for the parking or temporary
storage of motor vehicles or for the storage of other, typically
household, items, provided that such motor vehicles or stored items
belong to the occupants of the principal use for which the garage is
intended.
FLOOR AREA RATIO ("FAR") — The sum of the area of all floors of
buildings or structures (gross floor area) divided by the total area
of the lot, site or tract.
(4)
FLOOR AREA, NET — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
floors of a commercial building which are used for the display of
merchandise to and accessible to the general public, including any
areas occupied by counters, showcases or display racks and aisles,
but excluding entranceways, arcades or other such public areas as
well as storage, preparation or other back-of-the-house functions
not accessible to the general public.
(5)
FLOOR AREA, SALES — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of
all floors of a commercial building which are used for the display
of merchandise to the general public, and including any areas
occupied by counters, showcases or display racks and any aisle,
entranceways, arcades or other such public areas.
(6)
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A garage used for the storage of not more
than four passenger motor vehicles owned by the occupants of
the principal building or structure and excluding the provision for
repairing or servicing such vehicles for profit.
(1)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:695
GAS (GASOLINE FILLING) STATION — See "automobile fueling
station."
GENERAL COMMERCIAL AND SERVICE ACTIVITIES — Uses designed
to provide for the routine needs of the citizens of Pleasantville.
Examples include: pharmacies (including drive-through); convenience
stores with fuel-dispensing facilities; non-"big box" general retail/
appliance/hardware stores; financial institutions; non-
"chain"/nonfranchise craft/hobby shops, sporting goods shops, pet
shops, toy stores and book shops and newspaper and magazine stands;
antique/boutique/clothing and shoe/jewelry/gift shops; music stores,
including those that sell recorded music and musical instruments, and
like and similar activities.
GENERAL OFFICE — The office or offices of one or more member(s)
of an executive or administrative occupation, and which is used or
intended to be used solely for the operation, administration and
management of such occupants' business. Examples include advertising
agencies, auditing and bookkeeping offices, data processing, detective
agencies, employment agencies, general administrative offices and
medical laboratories.
GLARE — The projection of light, or reflection of such light, of whatever
type or source, beyond the lot lines where such light is produced.
GOLF COURSE — An area of 50 or more contiguous acres not
designated as tidal wetlands under N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq., on which
is constructed or otherwise placed at least nine holes of tees, greens,
fairways, rough, hazards, etc, together with the necessary and usual
accessory uses and structures, such as, but not limited to, clubhouse
facilities, dining and refreshment facilities, swimming pools, tennis
courts and the like, provided that the operation of such facilities is
incidental and subordinated to the operation of the golf course.
GOLF COURSE, MINIATURE — Any area not more than 1/4 acre of
land on which is constructed tees, greens and hazards (typically alleys,
bridges and tunnels) in a themed or novelty design, intended for family
recreation, together with the necessary and usual accessory uses and
structures.
GOVERNING BODY — The City Council of the City of Pleasantville.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A building or structure or part thereof, other
than a private garage, used for the storage, care or repair of motor
vehicles for profit, or in which any such vehicles are kept for
hire, but excluding any sale of motor vehicles, fuels or accessories
unless otherwise permitted in the zoning district where the public
garage is located.
(2)
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building or structure and associated lands
in which the maintenance, servicing or painting of motor vehicles
is conducted for profit, and may include facilities for washing,
polishing, spraying or other cleaning of motor vehicles.
(3)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:696
GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY — As applicable, the government of the
United States of America; the State of New Jersey or any other state;
their political subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities; and interstate
and regional agencies exercising powers of government.
GOVERNMENTAL SIGN — See "sign, governmental."
GRADE — A reference plane representing the mean finished elevation
of the earth along the wall of the building that faces the primary
frontage of the lot. To calculate such mean, measurements shall be
taken at both ends and at the center of such primary frontage.
GROUND COVER — Low-growing plants or sod that in time forms a
dense mat covering the area in which it is planted, preventing the
growth of unwanted plants while holding the soil in place.
GROUND COVERAGE — See "coverage, impervious."
GROUND SIGN — See "sign, ground."
GROSS DENSITY — See "density, gross."
GROUP FAMILY HOUSEHOLD — A group of four or more persons, not
related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together in a dwelling
unit as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping
management based on an intentionally structured relationship of
mutual responsibility, providing an organization and stability essentially
equivalent to that found in families based on relationships of marriage
and blood.
GRADE, EXISTING — The existing, undisturbed elevation of land,
ground and topography preexisting or existing on a lot, parcel or
tract of land prior to disturbance for development purposes.
(1)
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surface of lawns, walks and
roads brought to grade as shown on the official plans and designs
relating thereto or as existing if no plans or designs have been
approved.
(2)
When properly regulated to avoid possible adverse physical effects
on residential neighborhoods, stable groups formed on the basis
of nontraditional relationships (i.e., relations having many aspects
in common with the traditional family relationship but not based
exclusively on ties of blood or marriage) can provide a valid
alternative lifestyle with recognized cultural and social value for
the City. Consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 et seq., group family
households may occupy dwelling units within the City located in
any zoning district in which residential uses are permitted.
(1)
No group family household shall be established or maintained
unless a zoning permit evidencing the compliance of such group
family household with this definition and other applicable
provisions of this chapter shall have first been issued in accordance
with § 300-34.
(2)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:697
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA — Floor area in a habitable room, which
room has a clear floor-to-ceiling height of not less than 7 1/2 feet
over an area having no horizontal dimension of less than seven feet;
provided however, that no floor area where the ceiling height over such
Any question of whether a particular group constitutes a group
family household under this definition shall be determined by the
Zoning Officer pursuant to his/her authority to interpret the
provisions of this chapter. In making such determination, the
Zoning Officer shall consider all available information and,
specifically, the following factors (The Zoning Officer shall consider
all facts and circumstances, and the presence or absence, in whole
or in part, of any particular factor shall not be deemed controlling.):
Whether the group contains within it and is formed around one
or more families as defined in this chapter;
(a)
The extent to which the group recognizes one or more of its
members as the head or heads of the household;
(b)
Whether the group includes children, as well as adults, and, if
so, the group's mechanism for carrying out the child-rearing
function;
(c)
The extent to which group membership is based upon express
covenants or agreements of unlimited duration, including the
past stability of group membership and expectations for
stability in the future;
(d)
The extent to which a group decisionmaking process controls
not only housekeeping arrangements but also personal aspects
of the members' lives;
(e)
The extent to which the group functions as a single economic
unit, with members sharing financial resources and
obligations;
(f)
The extent and nature of the division of labor within the group
regarding such common household activities as food
preparation, housecleaning and laundry;
(g)
The extent to which household possessions, such as furniture,
appliances and automobiles, are commonly owned and shared
by all members of the group;
(h)
The extent to which all members of the group have free access
to all areas of the dwelling unit; and
(i)
The extent to which some religious, moral or other common
belief forms the basis of the group's association.
(j)
(3)
(4) See "community residence."
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:698
floor area is less than five feet shall be considered "habitable floor
area."
HABITABLE ROOM — Any room within a building used for the purposes
of sleeping, eating, the preparation of food, offices, the selling of
merchandise, public gatherings or assembly. All habitable rooms within
a dwelling unit shall have natural light, ventilation and heat. Garages,
bathrooms, closets, storage areas, hallways and stairs are not
considered, in and of themselves, to be habitable rooms.
HALF-STORY — That portion of a building under a sloped (gable, hip or
gambrel) roof, the wall plates of which, on at least two opposite exterior
walls, are not more than two feet above the floor of such half-story. See
"story." A "basement" shall be counted as a story, and a "cellar" shall be
counted as a half-story.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS (SUBSTANCE) — Materials that are
considered harmful to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
The "environmental hazardous substances" on the Environmental
Hazardous Substance List adopted by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to N.J.S.A. 34:5A-4 consistent, to
the maximum extent possible, with and including the list of hazardous
substances adopted by the federal Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to Section 311 of the federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, P.L. 92-500, as amended by the Clean Water Act
of 1977, P.L. 95-217 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.); the list of toxic pollutants
designated by Congress or the federal Environmental Protection
Agency pursuant to Section 307 of that act; and the list of hazardous
substances adopted by the federal Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to Section 101 of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, P.L. 96-510 (42
U.S.C. § 9601 et seq.). Such materials and substances include, but
are not limited to, inorganic mineral acids of sulfur, fluorine, chloride,
nitrogen, chromium, phosphorus, selenium and arsenic and their
common salts; lead, nickel and mercury and their inorganic salts or
metallo-organic derivatives; coal tar acids such as phenols and cresols
and their salts; petroleum products and radioactive materials.
HEALTH-CARE FACILITY — A facility or institution, whether public
or private, engaged in providing services for health maintenance
organizations, diagnosis or treatment of human disease, pain, injury,
deformity or physical condition, including, but not limited to, a general
hospital, specialist hospital, mental hospital, public health center,
diagnostic center, treatment center, rehabilitation center, extendedcare
facility, nursing home, skilled nursing home, intermediate care
facility, bioanalytical laboratory (except as specifically included herein)
or central services facility servicing one or more such institutions, but
excluding institutions that provide healing solely by prayer or holistic
medicine, and excluding such bioanalytical laboratories as are
independently owned and operated and are not owned, operated,
managed or controlled, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by
any one or more health-care facilities, and the predominant source of
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:699
business of which is not by contract with health-care facilities within
the State of New Jersey and which solicit or accept specimens and
operate predominately in interstate commerce.
HIGH-PERMEABILITY MOIST SOILS — See "wet soils."
HIGH-WATER LINE — A line showing the upper inland wetlands
boundary (a biological high-water line) on a series of maps prepared
by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection for Lake's
Bay and Absecon Bay, and their tributaries in accordance with the
provisions of the Wetlands Act (N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq.), said line being
established from photographs and each of these maps being on file
in the offices of the City Clerk, County Clerk and the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — One or more historic sites and intervening
or surrounding property which significantly affects, or is significantly
affected by, the historic nature, character or quality therein.
HISTORIC SITE (STRUCTURE) — Any real property, man-made
structure, natural object or configuration, or any portion or group of
the foregoing which has been formally designated in the Master Plan
as being of historical, archeological, cultural, scenic or architectural
significance.
HOBBY SHOP — See "craft shop."
HOLIDAY DECORATIONS — Temporary ornamentation in the nature
of decorations, clearly incidental to and customarily and commonly
associated with any national, local or religious holiday.
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, profession, occupation, trade or
other use, customarily conducted for gain, entirely within a dwelling
unit or residential building or a structure accessory thereto, which
is carried on exclusively by the residents thereof, and which use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the building for dwelling
purposes.
When properly limited and regulated, such activities can take place
in a residential structure without changing the character of either
the neighborhood or the structure. In order to protect and maintain
the residential character of established neighborhoods while
recognizing that certain professional and limited business activities
have traditionally been carried on in residential structures, home
occupations, where permitted by this chapter, shall be strictly
defined as detailed herein.
(1)
Any home occupation that is customarily incidental to the principal
use of a building as a dwelling shall be permitted in any dwelling
unit. Any question of whether a particular use is permitted as
a home occupation under this definition shall be determined by
the Zoning Officer pursuant to his/her authority to interpret the
provisions of this chapter.
(2)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:700
No home occupation shall be established or maintained unless a
zoning permit evidencing the compliance of such home occupation
with this definition and other applicable provisions of this chapter
shall have first been issued in accordance with § 300-34.
(3)
In addition to the use limitations applicable in the zoning district in
which it is located, no home occupation shall be permitted unless it
complies with the following:
All activities associated with such home occupation shall be
conducted entirely within the principal dwelling unit or a
permitted private garage accessory thereto. No exterior
storage is permitted, and in no event shall such use be
apparent from any public right-of-way or adjacent property.
(a)
No alteration of any structure shall be made which changes the
character and appearance thereof as a dwelling or accessory
structure thereto.
(b)
No inventory shall be maintained, and no stock-in-trade shall
be displayed or sold, on the premises.
(c)
Other than telephone, facsimile machines, computers and
related equipment which are normal and customary to
standard business practices, no mechanical, electrical or other
equipment shall be used, and no work shall be conducted
as part of a home occupation which causes or produces, by
reason of vehicular traffic, equipment use or other cause, any
emission, noise, sound or vibration; glare; heat, humidity,
fumes, odors, smoke, dust or other particulate matter;
electrical or magnetic radiation or interference (e.g., with a
neighbor's radio and/or television reception); or other
nuisance, noxious, offensive or hazardous situation outside the
residential or accessory structure in which the home
occupation is conducted.
(d)
The use of the property devoted to any aspect of the home
occupation shall not encompass more than the lesser of 25% of
the net habitable floor area of all structures on the premises or
400 square feet.
(e)
The home occupation shall not generate the need for more
than two employees (the member of the household residing on
the premises plus one nonresident employee) on site at any one
time.
(f)
The home occupation shall not generate the business or care
of more than two clients at any one time and shall be by
appointment only.
(g)
The home occupation shall not include the breeding, raising,
care, boarding or maintenance of animals.
(h)
(4)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:701
The home occupation shall not necessitate the need to park
more than one vehicle at any time in addition to those
ordinarily used by the residents of the premises. Said vehicles
shall be limited to passenger automobiles and/or other vehicles
not exceeding a three-quarter-ton capacity and must be parked
off-street. No other vehicles owned or operated in conjunction
with the home occupation shall be parked or stored overnight,
or repaired, either on or off the premises.
(i)
All parking related to the home occupation shall be restricted
to the side and rear yard area of the lot on which the home
occupation is conducted. All parking areas with three or more
spaces shall be screened with a hedge or fence.
(j)
The home occupation shall not reduce the parking or yard
requirements of the dwelling.
(k)
Not more than one unlighted nameplate sign, not exceeding
one square foot in area, shall be permitted. Such sign shall
be limited to displaying the name, occupation, address if not
otherwise displayed on the building and telephone number of
the home occupation.
(l)
Particular home occupations permitted. Except as provided in
Subsection E(4)(n) hereinbelow, customary home occupations
include all occupations which meet the purposes, standards
and requirements of Subsections E(4)(a) through (l) of this
definition and, in particular, include, but are not necessarily
limited to, the following list of examples:
Individual instruction to not more than two students at a
time, except for occasional groups;
[1]
Child care of not more than six nonresident children, as
further defined under § 300-10;
[2]
[3] Professional offices;
Office facilities for clergy not included in places of
worship;
[4]
Offices for sales representatives and manufacturer's
representatives when no retail or wholesale sales are
made or transacted on the premises;
[5]
Arts and crafts, photography, literary, musical composition
or similar studios; and
[6]
Homebound employment of a physically, mentally deficient
or emotionally disabled person who is unable to work away
from home by reason of such condition.
[7]
(m)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:702
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN — See "sign, home occupation."
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — An incorporated, nonprofit
organization operating under a recorded land agreement through
which each lot owner, condominium owner, stockholder under a
cooperative development or other owner of property or interest in
the project shall be a member; through which each dwelling unit is
subject to a charge for proportionate share of the expenses for the
organization's activities and maintenance, including any maintenance
costs levied against the association by the municipality, and through
which each owner and tenant has a right to use a common property.
HOSPITAL — A building or series of buildings forming an institution
providing medical diagnosis, treatment and care, including surgical
care, for persons suffering from physical or mental deficiency, disease,
injury and like and similar conditions, and including as an integral
part thereof, such related facilities as short-term residential recovery
facilities, laboratories, outpatient facilities, clinics, training facilities,
central service facilities and staff offices. For the purposes of this
chapter, the definition of "hospital" shall not include residential nursing
Particular home occupations prohibited. Permitted home
occupations shall not, in any event, be deemed to include:
The manufacture, repair, education of or other workings
related to blades or firearms;
[1]
[2] Nursing homes or private sanatoria;
[3] Lodging or boarding homes;
Funeral homes, mortuaries and embalming
establishments;
[4]
[5] Beautician, barber, hair stylist or similar shop;
[6] Restaurants;
[7] Stables, kennels or veterinary hospitals;
[8] The letting of more than one rooming unit;
[9] Clubs, including fraternities and sororities;
Health clinics, hospitals or the general practice of
medicine, dentistry or veterinary medicine;
[10]
Instruction of more than two students at a time, except for
occasional groups;
[11]
[12]Day-care centers as defined in § 300-10; and
Retail or wholesale businesses of any kind involving
transactions on the premises.
[13]
(n)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:703
homes, doctor's offices, nonresidential medical-care centers or like and
similar uses.
HOTEL — A building or group of buildings which collectively contain,
but are not necessarily solely comprised of, six or more rooms or
groups of rooms forming multiroom suites, and which are designed,
designated and intended to be used, let or hired out for compensation
for transient occupancy to the general public by reservation or walkup
without reservation, but in any case without lease, with or without
meals, for occupancy in periods of not less than one night and not more
than 20 continuous nights. A hotel shall have full-time, on-site resident
management which shall not be subject to the occupancy limitation,
and shall:
HOTEL UNITS — Transient lodging units within a hotel which:
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together in a
single dwelling unit on a nonseasonal basis and sharing living, sleeping,
cooking and sanitary facilities on a nonprofit basis.
IDENTIFICATION SIGN — See "sign, identification."
ILLUMINATED SIGN — See "sign, illuminated."
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — See "coverage, impervious."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any natural or man-made surface which
does not permit infiltration of water and causes surface runoff. All
buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks and any areas in
concrete and asphalt shall be considered impervious surfaces within
(1) Contain a common public lobby or registration office or area;
Have at least 75% of rooms or suites accessed by principal
entrances from an interior hallway common to more than two
rooms or suites; and
(2)
Provide amenities such as restaurants, retail outlets, conference
rooms, recreation facilities and personal service establishments.
(3)
Are accessed solely through a common public lobby area by
elevator or other conveyance system.
(1)
Contain, at a minimum, one bedroom and one separate bathroom,
which shall be internal to the hotel unit.
(2)
Contain not less than 350 square feet of net habitable floor area
for traditional hotel units, defined as a transient lodging unit
consisting of a single sleeping and living room with separate,
internal bathroom and 450 square feet of net habitable floor area
for hotel suites, defined as a transient lodging unit consisting of a
more than one sleeping and/or living room with separate, internal
bathroom.
(3)
(4) Other than an iron/ironing board, shall contain no laundry facilities.
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:704
the meaning of this definition. In addition, other areas determined
by the Board Engineer to be impervious within the meaning of this
definition will also be classed as impervious surfaces. For purposes of
building and impervious surface coverage calculations required in this
chapter, porous asphalt, concrete and concrete pavers shall be deemed
to be impervious surfaces.
IMPROVED STREET — A public right-of-way which is curbed and paved
in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter or,
alternately, a public right-of-way which has been improved to the
standards specified by the City Engineer upon approval and acceptance
by the governing body of the City, the governing body of Atlantic County
or the appropriate state agency.
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITY — An age-restricted residential
development that emphasizes social and recreational activities but may
also provide communal dining, personal services, limited health
facilities and transportation (Note: aka an "adult retirement
community.").
INDUSTRIAL — Relating to fields of economic activity whose intensity
exceeds that which is normally intended for the general public,
including, but not limited to, forestry, fishing, hunting and trapping,
mining, construction, manufacturing, transportation, communication,
electric, gas, sanitary services and wholesale trade.
INSTITUTION — A medical, educational, correctional, religious or
social service organization founded for the promotion of a specific
identified cause and chartered as a public, governmental or
eleemosynary entity.
INTERESTED PARTY — In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding
arising out of this chapter, any citizen of the State of New Jersey. In
the case of a civil proceeding arising out of or involving this chapter
INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY — The treatment, fabrication, reshaping,
reworking, assembly combining or processing of products from
raw materials or the production of articles or finished products
from raw or prepared materials by giving them new forms or
qualities, wherein such activities or materials create hazard from
fire or explosion, or produce toxic or corrosive fumes, gas, smoke,
obnoxious dust or vapor, offensive noise or vibration, glare, flashes
or objectionable effluent.
(1)
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT — The fabrication, production, reshaping,
reworking, repair, assembly, packaging, bottling, combining,
compounding or processing of materials or products from
previously prepared goods or materials, wherein such activities or
materials do not generate hazard from fire or explosion; produce
toxic or corrosive fumes, gas or smoke; obnoxious or unpleasant
dust, vapor or odors; offensive noise or vibration; glare; flashes,
objectionable effluent, pollutants or recognized deleterious
substances.
(2)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:705
in any court, or in any administrative proceeding under this chapter,
any person, whether residing within or without the City of Pleasantville,
whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is or may be affected by
any action taken under this chapter, or whose right to use, acquire or
enjoy property under this chapter or under any other law of this state or
of the United States has been denied, violated or infringed by an action
or a failure to act under this chapter.
INTERIOR OR INSIDE LOT — See "lot, interior."
INTERIOR STREET (ROAD) — See "street, interior."
INTERMEDIATE CARE FACILITY — See "nursing home."
INTERNAL STREET (ROAD) — See "street, internal."
JUNK (SALVAGE) YARD — Any area and/or structure, or part thereof,
whether inside or outside a building, used or intended to be used
for the sale, purchase, trade, collection, storage, keeping, dismantling,
demolition, salvage, resale, recycling or abandonment of used or
discarded metals, glass, paper, cordage, fabrics, other goods or
materials, or any used, waste or disabled fixtures, vehicles, machinery
or equipment of any kind. The storage of more than one disabled,
inoperable, unregistered or uninsured vehicle on a lot for more than
three days shall constitute a junkyard under this definition.
KENNEL — Any building, structure or lot on (in) which four or more
domesticated animals more than four months of age are housed,
groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold for profit or gain as a
commercial operation.
LAKE — A natural or man-made body of water with a surface area
greater than two acres, measured under ten-year storm conditions,
which normally contains or retains water for extended periods. The
shoreline of a lake is measured at the perimeter of the surface of the
water, under ten-year storm conditions, as certified by the applicant's
licensed professional land surveyor and approved by the City Surveyor.
LAND — Includes improvements and fixtures thereon, above or below
grade.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving the clearing, grading,
transporting or filling of land and any other activity which causes land
to be exposed to the danger of erosion.
LAND MANAGEMENT CODE — This Chapter 300 of the City Code of
the City of Pleasantville, along with any exhibits, maps and other and
materials related hereto and specified herein.
LANDSCAPE/LANDSCAPING — The orderly, planned installation of
shrubs, ground cover, flowering plants (perennials and annuals), trees,
rocks, water, sculpture, art, walls, fences, berms, decorative mulches,
gravels, pavers and other natural and man-made materials to produce
an aesthetically pleasing appearance, satisfy ground stabilization
requirements and/or provide a visual buffer or screen, arranged and
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:706
implemented in accordance with proper design and horticultural
practices and the requirements of this chapter.
LANDSCAPE SCREEN — A visual and auditory barrier between
adjoining lots or uses, typically composed of evergreen growth. See
"buffer."
LAND SURVEYOR — A person who, by reason of special knowledge
of the mathematical sciences, the principles of determining and
establishing accurate field measurements by means of land surveying
procedures, the law pertaining to land and the methods whereby land
boundaries are so marked, defined and described that they remain
forever fixed, all acquired by professional training and experience, is
qualified to practice land surveying as attested by a valid New Jersey
license as a professional land surveyor.
LAND USE APPROVAL — Approval for the development of one or more
lots issued by any relevant permitting agency, including, but not limited
to, the Pleasantville Zoning Officer, Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
LAUNDROMAT — An establishment providing washing, drying or drycleaning
machines, or both, on the premises for rental use to the
general public for family laundering or dry-cleaning purposes.
LESS RESTRICTIVE ZONING DISTRICT — See "more/less restrictive
zoning district."
L.F. — Linear feet.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — See "industrial, light."
LOADING SPACE — An unobstructed, hard-surfaced parking space or
berth, no part of which is located in any street or public right-of-way,
either within a building or group of buildings or in the open and on the
same lot with such building or group of buildings, the principal use of
which is for the temporary standing (parking) of commercial vehicles
while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
LOCAL REDEVELOPMENT AND HOUSING LAW — The New Jersey
Local Redevelopment and Housing Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.).
LOCAL STREET — See "street, minor."
LODGE — See "private club (lodge)."
LODGING HOUSE — See "boardinghouse."
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY — See "nursing home."
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a
plat or otherwise as permitted by law, under single ownership and
undivided by any street or private road, and occupied, used by or
designated to be developed for building(s) or use(s) as permitted by this
chapter, together with such open spaces and yards as are designed and
arranged or required by this chapter to be used with such building, use
or development.
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:707
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area of land, typically expressed in
acreage and/or square feet, which is determined by the limits of the
lot lines bounding such area, and not including any portion of a public
right-of-way but including any portion which may be dedicated for a
public right-of-way as a condition of land use approval. Portions of lots
encumbered by easements shall be included in calculating lot area.
LOT AREA, MINIMUM — The smallest lot on which a particular use or
structure may be located in a particular zoning district.
LOT, CORNER — A lot on the junction of and abutting two or more
intersecting streets, or a lot bounded on two sides by a curving street
where it is possible to draw two intersecting tangents (one each
commencing at each of the two points of intersection of the lot lines and
street line) which intersect with each other to form an interior angle of
less than 135°.
LOT COVERAGE — See "coverage, impervious."
LOT DEPTH — The shortest distance between the front lot line and a
line drawn perpendicular to the front lot line through the midpoint of
If the interior angle exceeds 135°, the lot shall be deemed an
interior lot.
(1)
Any portion of a corner lot whose nearest frontage measured along
the front lot line is more than 50 feet from the point of intersection
of the two street lines or the two tangents shall be subject to the
regulations applicable to an interior lot.
(2)
For the purposes of calculating lot width, lot depth and required
setbacks in accordance with this chapter, the lot frontage(s) of a
corner lot shall be those frontages which abut a public right-of-way,
with any remaining lot lines being designated side yards and rear
yards, respectively. The designation of the primary lot frontage, any
secondary lot frontage(s), lot side(s) and lot rear(s) shall be noted
on the survey, plot plan or other documentation submitted as part
of the application for land use approval.
(3)
Side and rear yards designations shall be based on the primary
lot frontage of the subject building. Where side yard regulations
include both a minimum and total side yard requirement and only
one side yard exists (thereby precluding a total side yard
calculation), only the minimum side yard requirement shall be
applied.
(4)
The front yard setback for a secondary front yard on a corner lot
may be decreased by not more than 25% of the required front yard
setback in the zoning district in which the lot is located, unless
a driveway is located in such secondary front yard, wherein a
reduced front yard setback shall not be permitted.
(5)
(6) See "lot depth" and "yard, side."
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:708
the rear lot line, provided that, in irregularly-shaped lots or lots having
no readily discernible rear lot line, the distance shall be measured
to the midpoint of a line parallel to the front lot line, which shall be
not less than 10 feet in length, measured to a point where such line
intersects with the two side lot lines.
On corner lots, one side lot line shall be considered a rear lot line for
the purpose of determining lot depth only.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot having frontage on two
nonintersecting streets.
LOT, FLAG — A large lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements,
where access to the public right-of-way is by a narrow, private driveway.
LOT FRONTAGE — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured along and coexistent with a street line. The minimum lot
frontage shall be the same as the minimum lot width, except that where
the lot frontage is a curve with an outside radius of less than 500 feet,
the minimum lot frontage shall not be less than 75% of the minimum
lot width. See "lot frontage, primary" and "lot frontage, secondary" for
regulations pertaining to lot frontage for a corner lot.
In the case of an unimproved street or a street of varying or undefined
width, lot frontage shall parallel the center line of the street at a
distance of 50% of the statutory right-of-way width therefrom. For the
purposes of this chapter, only continuous, uninterrupted lot lines shall
be accepted as meeting the lot frontage requirement.
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:709
LOT FRONTAGE, PRIMARY — In the case of a corner lot, that lot
frontage on which the principal entrance to the building or structure
is located.
LOT FRONTAGE, SECONDARY — In the case of a corner lot, any lot
frontage that is not a primary lot frontage.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot. See "lot, corner."
LOT LINE — A line bounding a lot which divides one lot from another
or from a street or any other public space or a private road.
LOT OF RECORD — A parcel of land that, on the effective date of this
chapter, is a lot in a subdivision recorded on the records of the recorder
of deeds of Atlantic County or that is described by a metes and bounds
description which has been so recorded.
LOT WIDTH — The shortest horizontal distance between the side lot
lines, measured at front yard setback line. When the side lot lines are
not parallel, the mean width of the lot measured generally parallel to
the front lot line. The minimum lot width as required by this chapter
shall be maintained for at least 75% of the minimum lot depth, as
measured continuously from the front setback line, except for lots
which front the bulb of a cul-de-sac, in which case lot width at the front
setback line may be reduced to 50% of the required lot width, provided
that the mean lot width does not fall below 75% of the required lot
width.
LOT LINE, FRONT — A lot line or portion thereof which is
coexistent with a street line and along which the lot frontage is
calculated. In the case of a corner lot, each street line separating
such lot from a street shall be considered a front lot line.
(1)
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line most distant from, and generally
opposite and parallel to, the front lot line. See "lot depth."
(2)
(3) LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a Front or Rear lot line.
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:710
MAIN STREET — County Road 585.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY (SURETY) — Any security, other than
cash, which may be accepted by the City for the maintenance of any
improvements required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., including but not
limited to surety bonds and letters of credit as specified in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.5.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — See "site plan, major."
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, major."
MALL — A public promenade or pedestrian way which may be open
or enclosed, and, for the purposes of this chapter, includes commercial
activity.
MANUFACTURING — See "industrial, heavy."
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET (ROAD) — See "street, marginal access."
MARINA — A small harbor, inlet or boat basin devoted to the purpose of
providing docks, berths, slips or tie-ups for boats and other watercraft,
along with associated amenities, including, but not limited to, bait and
tackle shops, food and beverage outlets (restaurants or snack bars),
fueling facilities, sewage pumpout stations, fish cleaning stations and
necessary supportive utilities. See "watercraft"-related definitions.
MARINE ACTIVITIES — Any fishing, boating or otherwise water-related
use or facility, whether for recreation or commercial purposes. See
"watercraft"-related definitions.
MARQUEE SIGN — See "sign, awning (canopy, marquee)."
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one or more written or graphic
proposals for the development of the City as set forth in and adopted
by the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 and including
all subsequent amendments thereto and reexaminations thereof. See
"2008 Comprehensive Master Plan Update."
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City of Pleasantville.
MEDICAL/DENTAL COMPLEX — An integrated development consisting
of a combination of general and/or specialized medical, dental and/or
related uses, but in no case medically oriented residential uses, housed
in an enclosed building or buildings on a single lot or collection of
contiguous lots forming a single parcel, utilizing such common facilities
as patient and employee parking, pedestrian walkways and seating
areas, utilities and sanitary facilities, and having a minimum total floor
area of 3,000 square feet
MEMORIAL SIGN — See "sign, memorial."
MENTALLY DEFICIENT PERSON — A person who is afflicted with
a mental deficiency as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-25.1, whose reduction
of social competence is so marked that persistent social dependency
requiring guardianship of the person shall have been demonstrated or
be anticipated.
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:711
MINOR SITE PLAN — See "site plan, minor."
MINOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, minor."
MINOR, STREET — See "street, minor."
MORE (LESS) RESTRICTIVE ZONING DISTRICT — For the purposes
of this chapter, a more restrictive zoning district shall be deemed to be
that zoning district which is subject to regulations which prohibit the
particular use intended to be made on said lot, or which regulations
require higher standards with respect to setbacks, coverage, yards,
screening, landscaping, off-street parking, density of population, bulk
of buildings and similar requirements. By way of example, residential
districts are generally more restrictive than commercial districts, and
commercial districts are generally more restrictive than industrial
districts. Interpretation of more or less restrictive zoning districts shall
be made by the Zoning Officer at time of certification of completeness.
MORTUARY — An establishment operated by a licensed mortician in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:7-1 et seq.,186 for the purposes of
processing deceased individuals for burial, cremation or like or similar
purpose.
MOTEL (MOTOR COURT, MOTOR HOTEL) — A building or group of
buildings which contains, but is not necessarily solely comprised of,
six or more units which are designed, designated and intended to be
used, let or hired out for compensation for transient occupancy to the
general public by reservation or walk-up without reservation, but in any
case without lease, with or without meals, for occupancy in periods of
not less than one night and not more than 20 continuous nights, and
wherein more than 25% of the motel units have individual entrances
from the exterior of the building within convenient access to a parking
space or parking spaces for the use of the unit's occupants. A motel
shall have full-time, on-site resident management which shall not be
subject to the occupancy limitation, and may provide amenities such as
restaurants, conference rooms and recreation facilities.
MOTEL UNITS — Transient lodging units within a motel which:
Contain, at a minimum, one bedroom and one separate bathroom,
which shall be internal to the motel unit.
(1)
Contain not less than 350 square feet of net habitable floor area
for traditional motel units, defined as a transient lodging unit
consisting of a single sleeping and living room with separate,
internal bathroom and 450 square feet of net habitable floor area
for motel suites, defined as a transient lodging unit consisting of a
more than one sleeping and/or living room with separate, internal
bathroom.
(2)
(3) Other than an iron/ironing board, shall contain no laundry facilities.
186. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 45:7-1 through 45:7-23 were superseded by L. 2012, c. 24. See now
N.J.S.A. 45:7-35 et seq.
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:712
MOTOR VEHICLE FUELING STATION — See "automobile fueling
station."
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE STATION — See "automobile service
station."
MOVING SIGN — See "sign, animated."
MULCH (MULCHING) — The application to the land surface of plant
residue or other suitable organic or inorganic material that is not
readily subject to movement by wind or water, in order to conserve
moisture, hold soil in place, prevent weed growth, protect plants from
extremes of heat and cold and aid in establishing plant cover.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING (BUILDING, STRUCTURE) — A building
containing three or more dwelling units, as defined, designed for
residential occupancy by three or more housekeeping units living
independently of each other in separate dwelling units, each with its
own cooking and sanitary facilities wherein not more than one person
per household is sheltered or fed for profit. For the purposes of this
chapter, townhouses are not considered multifamily buildings. See
"apartments."
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment
or City Council of the City of Pleasantville, when acting pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and this chapter.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Pleasantville.
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW ("MLUL") — N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
NAMEPLATE SIGN — See "sign, nameplate."
NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL AND SERVICE ACTIVITIES — Uses
designed to provide for the routine needs of the residents living in
the vicinity of the subject use. Examples include: grocery/specialty
food stores; convenience stores without fuel-dispensing facilities; video
rental/sales; non-"big box" general retail/dry goods stores; fabric
stores; hair and nail salons/barber and beauty shops; tailor shops;
greeting card/stationery/florist shops; retail dry cleaners (no
commercial cleaning on premises); shoe repair; and like and similar
activities.
NEIGHBORHOOD HEALTH CENTER — A clinic organized as a
voluntary, nonprofit enterprise to provide health care services to a
broad socio-economic mix of patients within a specific service area.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Buildings or structures for which the start of
construction commences on or after the effective date of this chapter.
NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY AFFAIRS ("NJDCA") —
The New Jersey Department of Community Affairs and, by extension,
the individual divisions and/or offices therein, including the Office of
Planning Advocacy and the Urban Enterprise Zone Authority.
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:713
NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
("NJDEP") — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and, by extension, the individual divisions within NJDEP responsible for
implementation of the Coastal Zone Management Rules, CAFRA and
other environmental regulations.
NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION ("NJDOT") —
The New Jersey Department of Transportation and, by extension, the
individual divisions within NJDOT.
NEW ROAD — U.S. Highway 9.
NOISE — For the purposes of this chapter, any sound, of whatever type
or source, emanating from a lot, building, structure or use, whether
principal or accessory, which impacts the quiet enjoyment and/or the
routine activities of neighboring or nearby lots, buildings, structures or
uses.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING (STRUCTURE) — A building or
structure, the use, size, dimension or location of which was lawfully
existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment
thereto, but which, after such effective date of or amendment to this
chapter, fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which such building or structure is located. Any building containing
more than one dwelling unit beyond to the number permitted by the
regulations in the zoning district where such building is located shall
be deemed to be a nonconforming use rather than a nonconforming
building.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area, dimension or location of
which was lawfully existing prior to the effective date of this chapter,
or any amendment thereto, but which, after such effective date of or
amendment to this chapter, fails to conform to the requirements of the
zoning district in which such lot is located.
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD — A lot of record which does not
comply with the lot requirements for any permitted use in the district
in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign lawfully existing on the effective
date of this chapter, or any amendment to it rendering such sign
nonconforming, which does not comply with all of the standards and
regulations of this chapter or any amendment hereto.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawfully
existing prior to the effective date of this chapter, or any amendment
thereto, but which, after such effective date or amendment, fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which such use or
activity is located.
NON-POINT-SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other
than a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, but
not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, forestry, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff.
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:714
NUISANCE — An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious item or
practice; a cause or source of an annoyance, especially a continuing
or repeating invasion or disturbance of another's rights, including the
actual or potential emanation of any physical characteristic of activity
or use across a lot line which can be perceived by or affect a human
being; the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of
people or items, including, but not limited to, noise; dust; heat; smoke;
fumes; odor; glare; flash; vibration; shock wave; heat; electronic
impulses, radiation; effluent; or other externality, including by
congregation of people, especially at night; traffic; or the transportation
of items by truck, rail or other means.
NURSERY SCHOOL — See "day care."
NURSING HOME (FACILITY) — A licensed establishment which
provides full-time convalescent or chronic care, or both, for three or
more individuals who are not related by blood or marriage to the
operator and who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or
infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. No care for the acutely
ill or surgical or obstetrical services shall be provided in such an
establishment. A hospital shall not be construed to be included in this
definition.
O.C. — On center. The spacing between the centers of planted trees,
light standards or other vertical elements.
OCCUPANCY — The specific purpose for which a lot or building is
designed, used or maintained.
OCCUPANCY PERMIT — A permit issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer or designee certifying that a dwelling unit or apartment is fit
for human habitation and that such dwelling unit or apartment is in
compliance with all other ordinances of the City of Pleasantville. A
dwelling unit shall be deemed to be unfit for human habitation where
conditions exist therein which are dangerous to the health or safety
of the units occupants or of the residents of the City. Such conditions
may include, but need not be limited to, defects increasing the hazard
of fire, accidents or other casualty; lack of adequate ventilation, light
or sanitary facilities; dilapidation, disrepair or structural defects; or
uncleanliness.
ODOROUS MATTER — Any material that produces a positive or
negative olfactory response in a human being.
OF- (BY-) RIGHT DEVELOPMENT — See "by- (of-) right development."
OFFICE OF PLANNING ADVOCACY — The New Jersey Office of
Planning Advocacy (successor to the Office of Smart Growth and the
Office of State Planning) within the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs.
OFFICE OF SMART GROWTH ("OSG") — See "Office of Planning
Advocacy."
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:715
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — The map, with changes and additions
thereto, adopted and established, from time to time, by resolution of
the Board of Chosen Freeholders of Atlantic County pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:27-5.
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance by the governing body
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq., which shall be deemed
conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets and public
drainage ways and the location and extent of flood control basins and
public areas, whether or not such streets, ways, basins or areas are
improved or unimproved or are in actual physical existence.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question, but
within the property (of which the lot is a part) which is the subject of a
development application, or on a contiguous portion of a street right-ofway
or drainage or utility easement.
OFF-SITE (COMMERCIAL) ADVERTISING SIGN — See "sign,
advertising."
OFF TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street right-ofway
or drainage or utility easement.
OLD TURNPIKE — County Road 697 east of Franklin Boulevard.
ON SITE — Located on the lot in question.
ON-SITE INFORMATIONAL SIGN — See "sign, on-site informational."
ON TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street right-ofway
or drainage or utility easement.
OPEN DECK — See "deck."
OPEN PORCH — See "porch, open."
OPEN SPACE — Any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public
or private use or enjoyment, or for the use and enjoyment of owners
and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space, and
improved only by buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking
and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — Open space held in private ownership
and regularly available for use by the occupants of more than one
dwelling.
(1)
OPEN SPACE, PERIMETER LANDSCAPED — A landscaped open
space intended to enhance the appearance of parking lots and
other outdoor auto-related uses or to screen incompatible uses
along zoning district boundary lines by means of appropriate
landscaping or screening. Except as expressly provided in this
chapter, such open space shall extend along the entire length of
(2)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:716
the lot line in question and shall have a width equal to 15 feet
or the depth or width of the yard required along the lot line in
question, whichever is greater. Perimeter landscaped open space
shall be broken only by required accessways, shall be suitably
surfaced with grass, ground cover or decorative paving material
or any combination thereof, and shall contain landscaping such as
ornamental trees and shrubs or appropriate screening devices such
as decorative walls, fences or berms, or any combination thereof,
sufficient to create a permanent screen not less than eight feet in
height, wherein not more than 30% of such screen shall consist of
walls or fences. The space shall be so designed and maintained as
to preserve unobstructed vision of the street and sidewalk at points
of access. Where a perimeter landscaped open space is required,
a landscaping plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer for
review.
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE — Open space held in private ownership,
the use of which is normally limited to the occupants of one
dwelling.
(3)
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — Open space conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education,
federal, state or county agency or other public body for recreation
or conservation purposes.
(4)
OPEN SPACE, UNOCCUPIED — An unoccupied area, including
natural and man-made watercourses, streams, lakes, ponds and
grassed, wooded or landscaped area, open to the sky on the same
lot with a principal and/or accessory building and other site
features. Improved sidewalks, paved paths or other pedestrian
ways within an unoccupied open space area which exceed four feet
in width shall be deducted in determining the unoccupied open
space area.
(5)
OPEN SPACE, URBAN — A landscaped public open area which:
(a) Is accessible to the public at all times;
Extends along a street line for a length of at least 30 feet and
is directly accessible from the public sidewalk for a length of
at least 30 feet;
(b)
(c) Has a depth of not less than 30 feet;
(d) Is not more than three feet above or below t.o.c.; and
Is landscaped with trees, shrubs or other plant materials and
may include tables and chairs for alfresco dining, sculpture,
fountains or similar features, provided that the surface area
occupied by such planting or features does not exceed 66% of
the area of the urban open space and that the balance of the
(e)
(6)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:717
OWNER — An individual, family, group, firm, association, syndicate,
partnership or corporation having proprietary interest in land which is
the subject of a development proposal.
PARKING AREA (LOT) — A paved open area, other than a street or
other public way, used for the open storage of motor vehicles, and
including any driveways and access drives, as well as accessory
incidental structures or improvements such as curbing, drainage,
lighting and signage.
urban open space is suitable for walking, sitting and similar
pursuits.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE — Open space which is open and
unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except for roof
overhangs not in excess of five feet, and which is accessible to and
usable by residents residing on the lot. Usable open space may
include areas at the ground level and on roofs, terraces, decks and
balconies, provided:
The minimum dimensions for usable open space at the ground
level is 10 feet with a minimum area of 100 square feet;
(a)
The minimum dimensions for usable open space located on
roofs or decks is 20 feet with a minimum area of 400 square
feet;
(b)
The minimum dimensions for usable open space for a balcony
is five feet with a minimum area of 50 square feet
(c)
(7)
PARKING AREA (LOT), ACCESSORY — A parking area or lot which
is on the same lot as another use and for which it provides parking.
(1)
PARKING AREA (LOT), FREESTANDING — A parking area or lot
which is not accessory to a particular use but which is itself the
primary use.
(2)
PARKING AREA (LOT), PRIVATE — A paved open area, other than
a street or other public way, used for the open storage of privately
owned motor vehicles and not for public use, and including any
driveways and access drives, as well as accessory incidental
structures or improvements such as curbing, drainage, lighting and
signage.
(3)
PARKING AREA (LOT), PUBLIC — A paved open area, other than a
street or other public way, used for the parking of motor vehicles
and available to the public, whether for a fee, free or as an
accommodation of clients or customers, and including any
driveways and access drives, as well as accessory incidental
structures or improvements such as curbing, drainage, lighting and
signage.
(4)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:718
PARKING FACILITY, PUBLIC — A building, structure, garage, outdoor
space, plot, place, lot, parcel, yard or enclosure, or any portion thereof,
where motor vehicles may be parked, stored, housed or kept, for which
any charge is made, and which is open to the general public.
PARKING GARAGE — See "garage, public."
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space provided for the parking of
a motor vehicle, exclusive of driveways, access drives, fire lanes and
public rights-of-way, which is located either at grade or within a
structure designed for such purpose. Private driveways for dwelling
units shall be considered off-street parking spaces, provided that no
portion of the parking space shall extend into the public right-of-way.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — For purposes of public notice,
any applicant for development, the owners of the subject property
and all owners of property and government agencies entitled to notice
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
PATIO — An open-sided area or platform, without roof, which is at grade
or elevated less than 12 inches above grade, and which is surfaced with
hardscape material such as brick, stone, pavers, cement or lumber, and
which is typically used for recreation purposes.
PEEP SHOW — See "adult establishment."
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security, other than cash, which
may be accepted by the City in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter, including, but not limited to, surety bonds and letters of
credit as specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5.
PERIMETER SETBACK — See "setback, perimeter."
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this
chapter. The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed
to include any nonconforming use.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A facility in which an
individual utilizes his/her skills and/or talents for the provision of
services involving the care of a person or his/her personal goods or
apparel. Examples include hair and nail salons, barber and beauty
shops, tailor shops, shoe repair, and like and similar activities.
PHARMACY — A retail establishment wherein prescription and
nonprescription medications and related items are prepared and
dispensed by a licensed professional, and which may include the sale
PARKING AREA (LOT), COMMERCIAL — A paved open area, other
than a street or other public way, used for the parking of motor
vehicles in return for a fee and which is not directly operated by
and on behalf of a use permitted in the zone in which located, and
including any driveways and access drives, as well as accessory
incidental structures or improvements such as curbing, drainage,
lighting and signage.
(5)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:719
of prepackaged foods, cosmetics, books and magazines, sundries and
miscellaneous articles and dry goods.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building or group of buildings used by
congregations for public worship, including cathedrals, chapels,
churches, meetinghouses, mosques, synagogues, temples and similarly
used buildings, as well as accessory uses such as religious education,
social halls, parish houses, rectories and like and similar uses.
PLANNING AND REDEVELOPMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE — A
committee consisting of the Planning Board Chair (or Class IV designee
selected by the Planning Board Chair), the City Administrator (or
designee), the City Planner (or designee), the Zoning Officer and the
member of the governing body who is the (Class III) member of the
Planning Board, with additional technical assistance provided by the
City Solicitor, City Engineer or other City staff or professionals as may
be determined on a case-by-case basis.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Pleasantville,
established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23 and § 300-11 herein.
The Planning and Redevelopment Advisory Committee shall
function in an informal manner, and as such shall establish its
own rules and procedures as necessity dictates. Accordingly, and
regardless of the capacity in which such Committee shall function,
all Committee meetings shall be nonbinding work sessions and
not public hearings as defined in the Open Public Meetings Act
(N.J.S.A. 10:4-6) and thereby subject to public notice.
(1)
The Planning and Redevelopment Advisory Committee shall be
chaired by the City Administrator or his designee, and shall
function as an ex-officio administrative arm of the City, with duties
including, but need not be limited to:
Review and recommendation to City policymakers regarding
land use and development-related issues.
(a)
Informal review of project concepts and description of project
elements proposed by prospective developers prior to making
formal application to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, in order to provide insight
with respect to the concepts and to offer nonbinding
suggestions and recommendations for the improvement of the
concepts.
(b)
Administrative review of items as specifically authorized by a
redevelopment plan adopted by the City pursuant to the New
Jersey Local Redevelopment and Housing Law.187
(c)
(d) Any other appropriate issue as assigned by the City.
(2)
187. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:720
PLANNING BOARD ENGINEER — See "Board Engineer."
PLANNING BOARD PLANNER — See "Board Planner."
PLAT — One or more maps of a subdivision or a site plan which show
the location, boundaries and ownerships of individual properties.
PLEASANTVILLE — See "City."
PLEASANTVILLE HOUSING AUTHORITY ("PHA") — The Housing
Authority of the City of Pleasantville, an independent agency of the
City charged with administering federally sponsored [Note: Under the
auspices of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development ("HUD").] low-income housing programs on behalf of the
City.
PLEASANTVILLE URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE ("PUEZ") — The office
of the Urban Enterprise Zone for the City of Pleasantville, operating
under the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act (N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60
et seq.) and unless otherwise indicated, includes its appointed Board of
Trustees, officers and staff.
PLOT — See "lot."
POLE SIGN — See "sign, pole."
POLITICAL SIGN — See "sign, political."
POND — A natural or man-made body of water with a surface area,
measured under ten-year storm conditions, of two acres or less, which
normally contains or retains water for extended periods. The shoreline
of a pond is measured at the perimeter of the surface of the water,
under ten-year storm conditions, as certified by the applicant's licensed
professional land surveyor and approved by the City Surveyor.
PORCH — An open-sided, roofed platform, which is elevated more
than 12 inches above grade and supported by piers, pillars or posts
rooted in a permanent concrete foundation, and which projects from
the exterior wall of a principal building, has direct access from that
principal building, and has at least three of its perimeter sides
unobstructed in any manner between floor and ceiling except for roofsupport
elements and insect screening. Porches shall be fitted with
appropriate railings pursuant to applicable building codes.
PLAT, FINAL — The map or maps of all or a portion of the
development prepared and submitted to the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, for final site
plan or subdivision approval. Final plat shall also include and be
synonymous with the term "final site plan."
(1)
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — The map or maps of all or a portion of
the development prepared and submitted to the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, for preliminary
site plan or subdivision approval. Preliminary plat shall also include
and be synonymous with the term "preliminary site plan."
(2)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:721
PORCH, OPEN — A porch having not less than 70% of the total area of
the vertical planes forming its perimeter unobstructed in any manner
between floor and ceiling except by insect screening.
PORTABLE SIGN — See "sign, portable."
PORTICO (PORTE-COCHERE) — An open-sided roofed structure
projected from the exterior wall of a principal building, with direct
access from that building, and sheltering an entrance to that building.
A portico may also be considered as a roofed area forming a porch. The
roof of a portico shall be supported by piers, pillars or posts rooted in a
permanent concrete foundation. In no case shall a portico be construed
as a carport (i.e., open-sided garage) for the parking of motor vehicles
or other outdoor storage.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-48 and 40:55D-49 prior to final approval,
after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by
the applicant and the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — See "project
concepts and description of project elements."
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, or multiple lots, plots
or parcels, forming a tract of land, together with the buildings and
structures thereon, held under a single ownership or control. See "lot."
PRIMARY BUILDING (STRUCTURE) — See "principal building or
structure."
PRIMARY USE — See "principal use."
PRINCIPAL BUILDING (STRUCTURE) — A building or structure in
which is conducted the main or primary use of the lot on which said
building is situated. No lot shall have erected upon it more than one
principal building or structure unless otherwise specified in this
chapter.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary purpose for which a building, structure
or lot is used. No lot shall be used for more than one principal use
unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
PRIVATE CLUB (LODGE) — A building and related facilities owned or
operated by a corporation, association or group of persons for social,
educational or recreational purposes for members regularly paying
dues, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is
customarily carried on as a business.
PRIVATE SALE (EVENT) SIGN — See "sign, private sale (event)."
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office or offices of one or more
member(s) of a recognized, licensed profession, and which is used
or intended to be used solely for the administrative function of such
occupants' business and/or profession. Examples include offices for
accountants, architects, attorneys, clergy, engineers, financial or
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:722
investment counselors, funeral parlors, insurance brokers, medical and
dental practitioners, planners, real estate brokers, stock, commodity
or investment brokers, veterinarians and like and similar professional
occupations.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE BUILDING — A building in which is located
one or more professional offices.
PROHIBITED USE — A use which is not specifically allowed or
permitted in a particular zone and for which the granting of a variance
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d would be necessary in order to provide that
use. Uses not expressly permitted by this chapter shall be prohibited.
PROJECT CONCEPTS AND DESCRIPTION OF PROJECT ELEMENTS
— Architectural drawings and associated narrative, graphic and
budgetary information prepared during early and introductory stages
of the design of a project, illustrating, in a schematic form, the project
scope, scale, relationship to its site and immediate environs and
exterior colors and finishes.
PROJECTING SIGN — See "sign, projecting."
PROPERTY LINE — See "lot line."
PROPOSED ELEVATION — See "elevation, finish."
PUBLIC AREAS — Areas dedicated to any governmental agency for use
as public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas;
other public open spaces; scenic and historic sites; and sites for schools
and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A master plan, redevelopment
plan, capital improvement program or other proposal for land
development adopted by the appropriate public body or governmental
agency, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches, or required
along a natural stream or watercourse, for preserving the biological
habitat and drainage function of the channel in order to provide for
the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage,
sedimentation and erosion, to assure the adequacy of existing and
proposed culverts and bridges, to induce water recharge into the
ground, where practical, and to lessen nonpoint pollution.
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT — Any improvement, facility or service,
together with its associated public site or right-of-way, necessary to
provide transportation, drainage, utility, energy or similar essential
services, including but not limited to streets, drives, sidewalks,
walkways and other vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems,
together with customary improvements and appurtenances such as
signaling, signage, curbs and gutters, shade trees and landscaped
buffers or parkways and street furniture; facilities incidental to a public
transportation system such as loading zones, turnarounds, passenger
waiting areas protected from inclement weather and pedestrian
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:723
linkages between loading areas and activity areas; storm sewers and
appurtenances, drainageways, culverts, flood control basins and
devices, retention and detention basins or areas to control storm runoff,
erosion and sediment control structures and devices and other drainage
structures, devices and facilities; water supply and distribution
facilities and appurtenances both for domestic use and for fire
protection; sanitary sewage disposal and treatment facilities and
appurtenances; public utility facilities and appurtenances for gas,
electric and telephone service; and facilities and appurtenances for the
production, conversion, distribution and storage of energy necessary
for essential residential, commercial and industrial uses permitted by
this chapter.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — See "open space, public."
PUBLIC PARKING FACILITY — See "parking facility, public."
PUBLIC PURPOSE USE — The use of land or buildings by the City,
a City agency, Board of Education, federal, state or county agency or
other public body.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — A right-of-way or easement for a street
transportation corridor, utility corridor, waterway or drainageway
owned or to be owned by a government agency.
PUBLIC SITE — An area devoted to or planned for use as a public park,
public school, federal, state, county or City building or facility or other
public use or facility.
PUBLIC UTILITY (CENTRAL) SUBSTATIONS — An assembly of
equipment in a delivery system which is owned and operated by a
recognized public utility, for the purpose of transmission, distribution,
interconnection, transformation, conversion, switching, control or
monitoring of the utility product (typically electricity, water, sanitary
sewerage, telecommunications and natural gas) for the benefit of the
public. For the purposes of this definition, sewerage pump stations
shall be considered a public utility (central) substation. Such facilities
shall be fully secured by a surrounding fence or an enclosing structure,
provided that any such structure shall be designed to conform and
harmoniously blend with the architecture of neighboring or nearby
buildings. No permanent storage of material or equipment not
necessary for the function of the substation shall be permitted within
the subject building or on the subject lot.
PUBLIC UTILITY CABINETS — A minor assembly of equipment,
typically in one or more self-contained installations no greater than
five feet in width by five feet in diameter by six feet in height, in a
delivery system which is owned and operated by a recognized public
utility, for the purpose of transmission, distribution, interconnection,
transformation, conversion, switching, control or monitoring of the
utility product (typically electricity and telecommunications) for the
benefit of the public.
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:724
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of a
municipal agency.
RADIOACTIVE USE — Any natural or artificially produced substance or
combination of substances which emits radiation spontaneously.
REACH — A hydraulic engineering term describing longitudinal
segments of a stream or river, generally including the segment of the
flood hazard area where flood heights are influenced by a man-made or
natural obstruction, or the segment of a stream or river between two
consecutive bridge crossings.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — See "sign, real estate."
REAR LOT LINE — See "lot line, rear."
REAR YARD — See "yard, rear."
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
RECHARGE BASIN — A detention basin designed not only to relocate
water gradually into a natural or man-made outlet but also to permit
water to percolate into the ground consistent with subsurface strata.
RECREATION AREA — A facility and/or open space area set aside,
designed, improved, equipped and/or used for recreation purposes,
which may include but shall not be limited to play fields, playgrounds,
swimming pools, tennis and other court games, tot-lots, parks, picnic
areas, nature preserves and boating and fishing areas and facilities.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE ("RV") — A portable vehicular-type
structure constructed on a chassis and without permanent foundation,
which can be towed, hauled, driven or otherwise transported from
place to place, whether by motor power or other means, and is
primarily designed as temporary living accommodations for recreation,
camping and travel use, and which contains cooking, sleeping and
sanitary facilities. Examples include, but are not limited to, campers,
house trailers, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and selfpropelled
motor homes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (TRAILER COACH, RV) PARK — Any plot
of ground upon which two or more recreational vehicles, occupied for
dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located, regardless of whether or not
a charge is made for such accommodations.
RECYCLING AREA — Space allocated for collection and storage of
source-separated recyclable materials.
REGIONALLY ORIENTED COMMERCIAL AND SERVICE ACTIVITIES
— Uses designed to provide for the needs of the citizens of eastern
Atlantic County. Examples include: supermarkets; pharmacies
(including drive-through); convenience stores, including those with
fuel-dispensing facilities; package liquor stores; furniture stores; "bigbox"
retail/appliance or home improvement stores; department stores;
"chain"/franchise craft/hobby stores, sporting goods stores, pet stores,
toy stores and bookstores; medical appliance or supply stores;
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:725
photocopy, printing or reproduction shops; mail packaging services,
general appliance repair; upholstery/furniture repair; financial
institutions; professional, administrative or consulting service offices;
and like and similar activities.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY, NET — See "density, net (residential)."
RESOURCE PROTECTION AREA — A natural area or feature
containing natural resources protected by this chapter wherein
improvement and/or alteration may be restricted or prohibited or
conservation required. Resource protection areas may include wooded
areas, floodplains, natural drainage areas, watercourses, ponds, lakes,
stream corridors, riparian lands, wetlands, marshland, wildlife habitats,
archaeological sites and steep slopes.
RESTAURANT — An eating and drinking establishment, however
designated, at which food is sold to the general public for consumption
on the premises, normally to patrons seated within an enclosed building
but also permitting alfresco dining, (subject to the applicable provisions
of § 300-51) and where the consumption of food in motor vehicles on
the premises is neither encouraged nor permitted. A snack bar or
refreshment stand at a public or community playground, park, field
or other recreation facility, which snack bar or refreshment stand is
operated solely by the agency or group operating the recreation facility,
and for the convenience of patrons of the facility, shall not be deemed
to be a restaurant.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN (TAKE-OUT, CARRY-OUT) —
An eating and drinking establishment which, by the design of
the physical facility or by service or packaging procedures,
encourages and permits customers to purchase prepared,
ready-to-eat food and beverages intended for consumption:
On the premises, but outside the confines of the principal
building;
[1]
[2] In automobiles parked upon the premises; or
Off-premises, regardless of whether or not, in addition
thereto, seats or other accommodations are provided for
on-site consumption.
[3]
(a)
With the exception of ice cream service, no transaction may be
made through a window to a patron on the street or sidewalk.
(b)
(1)
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An eating and drinking
establishment in which a limited or specialized list of quickly
prepared or pre-prepared food items, utilizing mechanized,
standardized preparation and packaging techniques, is offered for
on- and/or off-site consumption, including operations where food
may be directly ordered from and/or directly served into
automobiles queued for such purpose. Such drive-in or outside
(2)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:726
RESUBDIVISION — The further division or relocation of lot lines of
any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law, or the alteration of any streets or the
establishment of any new streets within any subdivision previously
made and approved or recorded according to law, but not including
conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RETAIL — The sale of goods or articles individually or in small
quantities directly to the consumer.
RETAINING WALL — A structure more than 18 inches in height,
erected between lands of different elevations to protect structures and/
or to prevent the washing or erosion of earth from the upper slope level.
RETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural body of water of a depth
of not less than four feet which is designed to contain water at all times,
the level of which will be increased as a result of the flow into it of
surface water, collected therein and released gradually into natural or
man-made outlets.
REVERSE FRONTAGE (LOT) — A lot wherein access is not possible
from one of the parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which it fronts;
where access is from an accessory street, rather than the collectors.
REVETMENT — A facing of stone, concrete or similar material
constructed to protect a sharp embankment or shore structure against
erosion by wave action or current.
RIPARIAN LANDS — Those tidal lands of the State of New Jersey which
are now or were formerly flowed by mean high water.
RIPARIAN LICENSE — A legal instrument issued by the State of New
Jersey which allows the use of riparian lands in the manner prescribed
by that instrument as required, generally, by N.J.S.A. 12:3-1 et seq.
RIPARIAN PERMIT — A legal instrument issued by the State of New
Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 12:5-3 prior to the development or
improvement of the waterfront.
ROOF SIGN — See "sign, roof."
ROOMER — See "boarder."
ROOMING HOUSE — See "boardinghouse."
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — A parabolic apparatus which is
designated for the purpose of receiving television, radio, microwave,
satellite, or other similar signals.
SERVICE STATION — See "automobile service station."
SCHOOL — See "educational use."
ordering and service may be the sole form of food service or may
be used in combination with ordering and service from a counter
inside of the building.
(3) RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE — See "restaurant."
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:727
SCHOOL, PAROCHIAL — A school supported and controlled by a place
of worship.
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH LABORATORY — A building or group of
buildings in which activities are limited to experiment, testing and
other forms of research, such as product design and development,
provided that the use shall not include any processing or manufacturing
except as may be incidental to the research or testing process. There
shall be no commercial production of goods, materials or any other
substances for sale, except as may be produced by a small pilot facility
necessary to the research activity.
SCREEN — See "landscape screen."
SECONDARY USE — See "accessory use."
SEDIMENT — Solid mineral or organic material, in suspension, which
is being or has been transported from its site of origin by air, water, ice
or gravity or other natural means as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The transport deposition of sediment.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier or dam built at suitable locations to
retain sediment.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of buildings
containing separate, individual and privately lockable storage spaces of
varying sizes available for lease or rent to the general public for varying
periods of time.
SERVICE — Useful labor that does not produce a tangible commodity.
Work done or duty performed for another or others.
SERVICE ACCESS — That portion of any required yard area which is
set aside for the sole purpose of access from the right-of-way adjoining
the premises to the loading or unloading area on the premises in order
to service the building erected for the use conducted thereon.
SETBACK — The clear, unoccupied and unobstructed horizontal
distance between the vertical walls of a building or structure and any
front, side or rear lot line, measured perpendicular to such lot lines, and
extending from grade to sky, except for encroachments permitted by
§ 300-51A(1). Accessory uses may be a permitted encroachment where
indicated, subject to the limitations set forth in this chapter.
SETBACK LINE — A line drawn parallel with a street or lot line
establishing the minimum horizontal distance from the street line or lot
line beyond which a building or part of a building is not permitted to
extend as specified in this chapter. In order to create an aesthetically
pleasing building facade along the front or side of a building, bay
windows or other architectural detailing may extend into the front or
side yard setback a maximum of 12 inches. All yard requirements are
measured to the setback line.
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:728
SETBACK, PERIMETER — A clear and unoccupied space extending
along the entire lot line to a depth specified in the applicable provisions
of this chapter. The depth of the perimeter setback area shall be
measured at right angles to the lot lines of the property.
S.F. — Square foot.
SHRUBS — Generally multistemmed, deciduous or evergreen plants
classified in size by (typically low) height and (typically wide) spread.
SIDEWALK — A public way for carrying pedestrian traffic. Sidewalks
may be located within a right-of-way provided for within a street or may
be located adjacent to a property line, between lots, and laid out so
that it may provide pedestrian traffic along a street or road or within a
subdivision connecting two streets.
SIGHT TRIANGLE (EASEMENT) — A triangular area abutting two
intersecting streets formed by connecting a line between the
intersecting street lines and a point on each street line a set distance
from the intersection in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter. The purpose of a sight triangle is to form an area at a corner
or driveway intersection which is free of visual obstructions, including
grading, planting, fencing or other structure, but not including street
signs, fire hydrants or light standards, in order to prevent interference
with a driver's ability to see oncoming traffic when stopped at such
corner or driveway intersection.
SIGN — An object, device, display, building or structure, or portion
thereof, which is located outdoors, or which is located indoors but is
visible to the general public from outdoors, on which is affixed, painted
or otherwise represented, directly or indirectly, words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, insignia, illumination or projected
images forming a name, identification, description, display or
illustration, or combination thereof, which is designed or intended
to advertise, announce, declare, demonstrate, display, direct, attract
attention to, identify, illuminate or otherwise visually communicate or
promote the interest of an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, activity, event or location by any means.
Lighting used to highlight or outline a part of a building but not
communicate any visual message, works of art which in no way
communicate any visual message and scoreboards located on
athletic fields shall not be considered signs. Graffiti shall never be
considered a sign.
(1)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:729
Signs shall include motor vehicles and pictures, models or other
representations of products or services incorporated in a window
display when utilized for such purpose, but shall not include the
flag, badge, insignia or emblem of any nation, organization of
nations, state, City or public, quasi-public, charitable, fraternal,
religious or civic organization; official court or public office notice;
or official traffic control device.
(2)
Definitions of particular functional and structural types of signs
are:
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which advertises, announces,
declares, demonstrates, displays, directs or attracts attention
to, identifies, illuminates or otherwise visually communicates
or promotes the interest of an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, activity, event or
location, by any means, which is sold, conducted, offered or
otherwise located other than on the premises where the sign
is located. Aka "off-site advertising sign," "off-site commercial
advertising sign," "commercial advertising sign."
(a)
SIGN, ADVERTISING VEHICLE — Any vehicle or trailer having
attached thereto or painted thereon any sign, the primary
purpose of which is to advertise any product or business, as
opposed to a sign, the primary purpose of which is intended to
identify the owner or operator of the vehicle.
(b)
SIGN, ANIMATED (MOVING) — Any sign or part of a sign
which changes physical position or appearance, including text
message or pictorial content, by any movement or rotation,
or which gives the visual impression of such movement or
rotation (e.g., rotating louvered signs); this definition shall not
include LCD, LED, or digital signs. [Amended 9-3-2014 by
Ord. No. 18-2014]
(c)
SIGN, AREA (OF) — The area defined by the outside edge
of the frame surrounding the sign or backing on which the
sign is mounted (unless mounted directly on a building, in
which case the sign shall not be considered to have a backing),
including any decorative or architectural elements attendant
to such frame. Where no frame or backing exists, sign area
shall be measured by the smallest projected, enclosed, foursided
regular (right-angled, straight-edged) geometric shape
necessary to encompass each and every word, letter, figure,
design, symbol, fixture, color, insignia, illumination, projected
image or component thereof, forming the visual
communication. Where a portion of a sign has a frame or
backing and a portion does not, the area of the sign shall be
the area formed by the combination of all signage elements.
(d)
(3)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:730
SIGN, AWNING (CANOPY, MARQUEE) — A sign that is
mounted or painted on, or attached to, an awning, canopy
or marquee that is otherwise permitted by this chapter. No
such sign shall project above, below or beyond the physical
dimensions of such awning, canopy or marquee or be lower
than 10 feet above the sidewalk or public thoroughfare.
(e)
SIGN, BUILDING-MOUNTED — A sign which is affixed or
inscribed upon the face of a building and whose face is,
generally, parallel to the building facade. See "sign, wall."
(f)
SIGN, BULLETIN (READER) BOARD — A sign which identifies
an institution or organization on whose premises it is located
and which contains the name of the institution or organization,
the name or names of the person or persons connected with it
and greetings, announcements of events or activities occurring
at the institution or similar messages.
(g)
SIGN, BUSINESS (IDENTIFICATION) — See "sign,
identification."
(h)
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — A temporary sign erected on the
premises on which construction is taking place during the
period of such construction, indicating the names of the
architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors,
artisans and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors,
governmental agencies and similar entities having a role or
interest with respect to the structure or project.
(i)
SIGN, CURRENT RATE — A sign indicating the (then current)
hourly charge for parking in a commercial surface parking lot,
structured parking garage or mechanical parking facility in the
CBD, NC, GC, RC, LI and BMU Zoning Districts in accordance
with § 300-63D, and in the Bayside Mixed-Use and City Center
Support Overlay Districts in accordance with § 300-62C. See
also, "sign, tariff."
(j)
SIGN, ENVIRONMENTAL (INFORMATION, DESIGNATION) —
A sign designed to provide information on the environmental
qualities of a site.
(k)
(l) SIGN FACADE — See "sign, building-mounted."
SIGN, FLASHING — Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign
which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color
effects by any means whatsoever.
(m)
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign which is supported by
independent uprights or braces placed upon the ground and
not attached to or relying on any building for support.
(n)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:731
SIGN, GOVERNMENTAL — A sign erected and maintained
pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental function or
required by any law, ordinance or governmental regulation.
(o)
SIGN, GROUND — Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed
upon or supported by the ground independently of any other
structure.
(p)
SIGN HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured between
finished grade and the highest point of the highest element of
the sign, excluding any incidental structural element such as
uplift cable for a projecting sign.
(q)
SIGN, HISTORICAL (ARCHITECTURAL) DESIGNATION — A
sign designed to provide information on the architectural or
historical qualities of a structure, building or site.
(r)
SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION — A sign containing only the name
and occupation of a permitted home occupation.
(s)
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign which advertises,
announces, declares, demonstrates, displays, directs or
attracts attention to, identifies, illuminates or otherwise
visually communicates or promotes the interest of an object,
person, institution, organization, business, product, service,
activity, event or location, by any means, which is sold,
conducted, offered or otherwise located on the premises where
the sign is located. Such sign may include the name, logo,
trademark or other identifying symbol, address, or any
combination thereof, of the building, business, development or
establishment on the premises where such sign is located.
(t)
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION, JOINT — A sign which serves as
common or collective identification for two or more
nonresidential uses sharing an office plaza, shopping center,
industrial park or similar facility, and which is located on such
premises. Such sign shall be limited in content to identification
of the plaza, center, park or similar facility and shall not
contain any reference to the individual uses sharing such
facility.
(u)
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — A sign lighted by or exposed to
artificial lighting, either by lights on or in the sign or directed
towards the sign.
(v)
SIGN, MEMORIAL SIGN — A sign or tablet memorializing a
person, event, structure or like or similar person, issue or item.
(w)
SIGN, NAMEPLATE — A sign giving the name or address, or
both, of the owner or occupant of a building or premises on
which it is located.
(x)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:732
SIGN, ON-SITE INFORMATIONAL — A sign commonly
associated with and limited to information and directions
necessary or convenient for persons coming on the property,
including signs marking entrances and exits, parking areas,
one-way drives, rest rooms, pickup and delivery areas and like
and similar messages.
(y)
SIGN, PRIVATE EVENT — A temporary sign advertising private
not-for-profit events. Examples include picnics, carnivals,
bazaars, game nights, fairs, craft shows and like and similar
events.
(z)
SIGN, PRIVATE SALE — A temporary sign advertising private
sale of personal property at private property. Examples include
garage sales, rummage sales and like and similar events.
(aa)
SIGN, POLE — A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole
or other supports so that the bottom edge of the sign face is
not less than 10 feet above grade.
(bb)
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign announcing or
supporting political candidates or issues in connection with
any national, state or local election.
(cc)
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign that is not permanently affixed to a
building, structure or the ground.
(dd)
SIGN, PROJECTING — A sign which is wholly or partially
attached to or suspended from and dependent upon a structure
for support, and which extends from such structure in a
manner which is other than parallel to such structure more
than 12 inches from such structure, including a sign hung
under an awning or canopy. Signs projecting over a City rightof-
way shall require permission from the governing body in
the form of a revocable license agreement which shall specify
the parties to the agreement; the type of awning (canopy,
marquee) or other improvement to be installed; the extent of
the projection over the right-of-way; the term of the license,
including any revocation terms; insurance and indemnification
provisions by the licensee on behalf of the City; any specific
conditions of the license; and such consideration as the City
shall deem appropriate. Signs projecting over a county rightof-
way may require a license from by the County Planning
Board, at such Board's discretion.
(ee)
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of
the premises or a portion of the premises on which the sign is
located.
(ff)
SIGN, ROOF — A sign that is mounted upon the roof of a
building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for
support, and which projects more than six inches above the
(gg)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:733
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT — A freestanding
structure designed for residential occupancy by a single family or
housekeeping unit situated on an individual lot with no common party
walls with other structures and having sleeping, cooking, sanitary and
general living facilities wherein not more than one person is sheltered
or fed for profit.
highest point of a building with a flat roof, the eaveline of a
building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deckline of a
building with a mansard roof.
SIGN, TARIFF — A sign indicating the annual rate schedule
and the name, mercantile license number and address of the
operator of a commercial surface parking lot, structured
parking garage or mechanical parking facility in the CBD,
NC, GC, RC, LI and BMU Zoning Districts in accordance with
§ 300-63D, and in the Bayside Mixed-Use and City Center
Support Overlays in accordance with § 300-62C. See also "sign,
current rate."
(hh)
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sgn or advertising display constructed
of cloth, canvas, fabric, paper, plywood or other light material
and designed or intended to be displayed for a short period of
time.
(ii)
SIGN, WALL — Any sign fastened to, painted on or otherwise
affixed to a wall of a building or structure in such a manner
that the wall becomes the supporting structure for or forms
the background surface of the sign, and unless otherwise
permitted, does not project more than 12 inches from such
building or structure. The wall sign shall consist of business
name with address only, except for franchises where logos are
used. [Amended 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 11-2015]
(jj)
SIGN, WARNING — Signs limited to messages of warning,
danger or caution.
(kk)
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign which is applied or attached to the
exterior or interior of a window or located within three feet
of the interior of a window and which can be seen from the
exterior of the structure.
(ll)
SIGN WITH BACKING — A sign that is displayed upon, against
or through any material or color surface or backing that forms
an integral part of such display and differentiates the total
display from the background against which it is placed.
(mm)
SIGN WITHOUT BACKING — A word, letter, emblem, insignia,
figure or similar character or group thereof that is neither
backed by, incorporated in or otherwise made part of any
larger display area.
(nn)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:734
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING UNIT (DUPLEX) — A
structure designed for residential occupancy by two independent
families or housekeeping units in separate dwelling units, with an
unpierced (vertical) common party wall between the dwelling units
extending from ground floor to roof. Each such dwelling unit shall have
its own sleeping, cooking, sanitary and general living facilities wherein
not more than one person per household is sheltered or fed for profit.
Such structures shall have not more than one dwelling unit per duplex
side for a total of two dwelling units per building. Each duplex side shall
be of equal size and located on an individual lot.
SITE — Any plot, parcel or parcels of land.
SITE COVERAGE — See "coverage, impervious."
SITE PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on which is
shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not
necessarily limited to:
Topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, marshes and
waterways;
(1)
The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities,
utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, lighting and
screening devices; and
(2)
Any other information that may be reasonably required in order
to make an informed determination concerning the adequacy of
the plan pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Any development plan not classified as
a minor site plan or an exempt development.
(a)
SITE PLAN, MINOR — A development plan for one or more
lots which is (are) subject to development that proposes the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure which:
Requires site plan approval (is not an exempt
development);
[1]
Meets the requirements set forth in this chapter and
contains the information needed to make an informed
determination as to whether the requirements established
by this chapter for approval of a minor site plan have been
met;
[2]
Does not require the construction of on- or off-site
drainage facilities or the outfall of drainage onto an
adjoining property, whether or not such property is owned
by the applicant;
[3]
(b)
(3)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:735
SITE TRIANGLE — See "sight triangle (easement)."
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin
and overlying bedrock and which can be readily excavated.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Cape Atlantic Soil
Conservation District, a governmental subdivision of the State of New
Jersey encompassing the City of Pleasantville, and which was organized
in pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-2 et seq.
SOILS, WET — Soils with a depth of seasonal high-water table less
than or equal to three feet, as delineated by the United States Soil
Conservation Service in a National Cooperative Soil Survey, unless the
soils are loamy sand or coarser, in which case they are soils with a
depth to seasonal high-water table less than or equal to five feet.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM —
Does not involve the construction of a new building and/
or an addition to an existing building in excess of 1,000
square feet of gross floor area;
[4]
Does not involve the mining, excavation, landfill, clearing,
grading or other disturbance of land for nonagricultural
purposes;
[5]
Does not increase parking requirements by more than
three spaces, nor entail or propose the construction of a
total of more than five parking spaces;
[6]
Conforms to the floodplain management standards of
Chapter 139 of the Code of the City of Pleasantville;
[7]
[8] Will not require the issuance of a CAFRA permit;
Does not involve any new street or the extension of any
existing street; and
[9]
Does not involve the extension or construction of any offtract
improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
[10]
A renewable energy system that converts solar energy into a usable
electrical energy, heats water or produces hot air or similar
function through the use of solar collectors which:
(a) Are used to generate electricity; and
(b) Have a nameplate capacity of 100 kilowatts or less;
Includes solar panels, a generator and associated equipment,
including any base, foundation, structural support, wire(s),
batteries or other components necessary to fully utilize the
solar generator.
(c)
(1)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:736
SOLID WASTE — Garbage, sludge, refuse, trash, rubbish, debris or
other discarded solid materials, including recyclable materials so
designated by the Atlantic County Utilities Authority.
SPECIMEN (TREE, SHRUB, PLANTING, ELEMENT) — A tree with a
diameter of 18 inches and greater, regardless of genus and species,
or any individual plant whose genus or species is considered relatively
rare in the City.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION ("SIC") — The
classification of land uses and economic activities in accordance with
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual prepared by the United
States Office of Management and Budget, dated 1972, as updated from
time to time.
STATE PLAN — The New Jersey State Development and Redevelopment
Plan, adopted March, 2001, as it may be amended from time to time.
STEEP SLOPES — Areas where the average slope exceeds 8% which,
because of this slope, are subject to high rates of stormwater runoff and
erosion.
STOOP — An open platform, without roof or walls, consisting of steps
and a landing, which is located at the entrance door to a structure and
being no greater than six feet wide by six feet deep.
STORMWATER RETENTION (FACILITY) — A structure or other means
to control stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — The flow of water across the surface of the
ground resulting from precipitation.
STORY — That portion of a building located between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the next floor above, or, in the
absence of an upper surface of a floor above, the finished ceiling or roof
above.
For the purposes of solar energy systems only, the following
definitions shall apply:
OWNER — The individual, entity and/or property owner that
intends to own and operate the solar energy system in
accordance with § 300-53. Should the property owner be
different than the owner or entity who intends to own and
operate the solar energy system, the property owner shall
provide written consent to the operator to make application for
and operation such solar energy system.
(a)
TOTAL HEIGHT — The vertical distance from finished grade
to the highest point of the solar energy system, including all
related apparatus and associated.
(b)
(2)
A split-level story shall be considered a second story if its floor level
is six feet or more above the level of the line of the finished floor
next below it, except a cellar. A floor under a sloping roof at the top
(1)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:737
STREAM CORRIDOR — The land lying within 50 feet of the edge of any
floodway, channel, brook, stream, pond or lake, or within 25 feet of the
center of any intermittent stream.
STREAM ENCROACHMENT PERMIT — A permit required for the
construction, grading, filling or storage of material, equipment or
structures within a City stream corridor or within freshwater wetlands.
STREET — Any avenue, highway, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct,
alley, drive or other public way or thoroughfare which has been or will
be dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and which has
been improved and accepted as a state, county or municipal roadway,
or which is shown on a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law, or
which is approved by official action as provided by this chapter and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or which is shown on a plat duly filed and
recorded in the office of the Atlantic County Recording Officer prior to
the appointment of the Planning Board and a grant to such Board of
the power to review plats; and includes the land between the street
lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement,
shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas
within the street lines.
of a building which is more than two feet below the top plate shall
be counted as a story or, if less than two feet below the top plate,
shall be counted as a "half-story, provided that not more than 60%
of the floor area is used for rooms, baths or toilets. Otherwise, such
floor shall be counted as that fraction of a story which its floor area,
in rooms, baths or toilets, bears to the entire floor area.
A "basement" shall be counted as a story and a "cellar" shall be
counted as a half-story.
(2)
STREET, ARTERIAL — A street used primarily for fast or heavy
traffic.
(1)
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street used primarily to carry traffic
from a minor street to an arterial street, including the principal
entrance roads of a residential subdivision or development, and
roads for circulation within such subdivision or development.
(2)
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — Dead-end streets providing access to
adjacent lots.
(3)
STREET, IMPROVED — A public right-of-way surfaced with an
all-weather pavement which meets the criteria for design and
construction contained in Chapter 255 of the Pleasantville City
Code.
(4)
STREET, INTERIOR (ROAD) — A public right-of-way that is
developed wholly within a parcel under single ownership and
meeting all municipal standards. This definition shall not apply to
a private right-of-way, regardless of its compliance with municipal
standards.
(5)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:738
STRIPPING — An activity which removes or significantly disturbs
vegetated or otherwise stabilized soil surface, including clearing and
grubbing operations.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — See "alteration."
STRUCTURE — An assembly or combination of materials forming a
construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation, whether installed
on, above or below the surface of a parcel of land, including, but not
limited to, bins, buildings, fences, piers, platforms, sheds, shelters,
signs, stagings, standards, swimming pools, tanks, tents, tennis courts,
towers, trestles and wharves.
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL — See "building, principal."
STUDIO (APARTMENTS) — See "efficiency (dwelling units)."
STREET, INTERNAL SERVICE (ROAD) — A right-of-way used for
internal vehicular circulation within a tract or development.
Internal streets may be private and not dedicated or deeded to the
public, subject to approval by the City Engineer.
(6)
STREET LINE — The line which separates an existing or future
publicly owned or controlled right-of-way from the private property
which abuts such right-of-way, and thereby demarcating the limit
of the highway rights of the public, either existing or contemplated,
as depicted on the adopted Master Plan of the City of Pleasantville.
As distinct from a sidewalk line, curbline or edge-of-pavement
line.
(a)
Where a definite right-of-way has not been established, the
street line shall be assumed to be at a point 25 feet from the
center line of the existing pavement.
(b)
(7)
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS — Streets parallel and adjacent to
arterial streets and which provide access to abutting properties
and protection from through traffic.
(8)
STREET, MINOR (LOCAL) — Streets used primarily for access to
abutting properties.
(9)
STREET, UNIMPROVED — A right-of-way that is not an improved
street. An unimproved street may be constructed of loose gravel,
loose stone or, generally, any type of material that is not solidified
and will not repel water or maintain a stable cross section. In the
event that the Construction Code Official or other City official has
any question as to whether a road is improved, unimproved or
potential drainage problems exist with regard to the issuance of
a development permit, building permit or certificate of occupancy,
such official shall contact the City Engineer for evaluation and
written determination.
(10)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:739
SUBDIVIDER — A person or legal entity commencing proceedings
under this chapter to effect the subdivision of land hereunder.
SUBDIVISION —
The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale or development.
The following shall not be considered a subdivision within the
meaning of this chapter if no new streets are created:
Division of land found by the Planning Board to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres
or larger in size;
(a)
(b) Division of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
Divisions of property upon court order, including, but not
limited to, judgments of foreclosure;
(c)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument; and
(d)
The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels
of land owned by the same person or persons, all of which are
found and certified by the Zoning Officer to conform to the
requirements of this chapter and are shown and designated as
separate lots, tracts or parcels on the Official Tax Map of the
City.
(e)
(1)
The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Any division of land not classified as
a minor subdivision.
(a)
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land for the creation
of not more than two lots, plus the remainder of the original
lot, with each lot fronting on an existing improved street or
streets, and provided that such subdivision does not involve
a planned development, any new street or the extension of
any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be prorated
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42, and provided that the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, finds
that all the following conditions have been met:
Curbs and sidewalks have been installed or that the
developer agrees to install and post performance
guaranties for curbs and sidewalks;
[1]
The subdivision does not require the extension of
municipal facilities at the expense of the City;
[2]
The subdivision and construction resulting therefrom will
not adversely affect drainage patterns of the basin or other
[3]
(b)
(2)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:740
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — A repair, reconstruction or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or
repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being
restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of
the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however,
include either:
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL — A swimming pool that is
operating for profit and open to the public or to a limited number of
members and their guests upon payment of an hourly, daily, weekly,
monthly, annual or other fee, or operated as a service rendered by
a hotel, motel or apartment development whose units are rented to
stormwater management structure in which the lots are
situated;
The subdivision will not adversely affect the development
of the remainder of the parcel or the adjoining property;
[4]
The subdivision is not in conflict with any provision or
portion of the Master Plan, Official Map or this chapter, or
that appropriate variances have been obtained or must be
obtained as a condition of approval;
[5]
In the event that a drainage fund has been established by
the City of Pleasantville or Atlantic County, an assessment
has been charged to the lots and has been paid;
[6]
No portion of the lands involved has constituted a part
of a minor subdivision within three years preceding the
application; and
[7]
Not being deficient in those details and specifications
required of minor subdivisions as specified in this chapter.
[8]
The original (or parent) lot shall be considered any lot in
existence at the time of the adoption of this chapter as shown
on the City Tax Maps.
(c)
Any readjustment of lot lines resulting in no new lots shall be
classified as a minor subdivision for purposes of the land use
approval process.
(d)
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places.
(2)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:741
transient or permanent residents, and having appropriate dressing
room facilities, recreational facilities and off-street parking areas.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE (RESIDENTIAL) — A swimming pool,
whether portable or fixed, located on a lot whose principal use is one
or more dwelling units, and including all buildings, structures and
equipment appurtenant thereto, where such swimming pool is used
as an accessory to the dwelling(s) and is utilized with no admission
charges and not for the purpose of profit.
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC — See "swimming pool, commercial."
TATTOO PARLOR — A place or establishment where tattooing is
performed.
TATTOO (TATTOOING) — Any method of placing designs, letters,
scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin
by means of application of any chemical, dye or any other substance
that results in the temporary or permanent coloring of the skin, without
regard to the type of instrument that is used for such application.
TAVERN — A licensed establishment under the jurisdiction of N.J.S.A.
33:1-1 et seq., wherein alcoholic beverages are served by the drink
to the general public and where cooked-to-order food is prepared and
served on the premises.
TEMPORARY PRODUCE SALES STRUCTURES — A portable or
semiportable table, platform or structure from which fruits, vegetables
or similar agricultural products are intended to be sold at retail to
passing motorists or pedestrians.
TEMPORARY SIGN — See "sign, temporary."
TEMPORARY USE — See "use, temporary."
TERRACE — A level, open area, without roof or walls, projecting from
the exterior wall of a principal building, with direct access from that
principal building, and which has been surfaced with brick, stone or
other landscaping material and which is elevated no greater than three
feet above finished grade.
THREE SEASON PATIO ROOM — A roofed structure projecting from
the exterior wall of a principal residential building and intended to be
used exclusively as seasonal space accessory to the residential use,
with direct access from the residential building, and consisting of a
finished floor, roof and three windowed or screened walls. Such room
shall be limited to a single story, shall be located within the side or rear
yard of the primary residential structure and shall not be heated or air
conditioned. Aka "screened porch," "Florida room," etc.
THREE- TO FOUR-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT ("TRI" OR
"QUAD") — A structure designed for occupancy by three to four
independent families or housekeeping units in separate dwelling units,
situated on a single lot with an unpierced (vertical) common party wall
between the dwelling units extending from ground floor to roof and an
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:742
unpierced floor between the dwelling units extending from exterior wall
to exterior wall, and with one or both sides of the structure constructed
in a horizontal configuration (i.e., one dwelling unit above the other) so
as to contain not more than two dwelling units per building side for a
maximum of four units per building.
THROUGH BLOCK CONNECTOR — A portion of a lot, covered or
open air, which is accessible to the public and provides a pedestrian
connection between two streets which are parallel or approximately
parallel to each other or between urban open spaces or arcades
abutting such streets. A through block connector may be elevated, even
with or recessed below the sidewalk, arcade or urban open space to
which it connects. However, if elevated or recessed, the through block
connector shall transition to the sidewalk, arcade or urban open space
to which it connects in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities
Act. If open, the through block connector shall have a minimum width
equal to not less than the greater than 20% of the height of the highest
abutting wall within 30 feet of its center line or 30 feet. If covered
or enclosed, the through block connector shall have a minimum width
of 15 feet. Columns, lighting standards, vertical circulation elements,
plantings, ornamental fountains, sculptures, displays, kiosks or open-air
cafes are permitted obstructions at the pedestrian level, provided that a
continuous way, not less than 15 feet wide, remains free of obstructions
and available for unimpeded pedestrian circulation. The ceiling height
of a covered or enclosed through block connector shall at no point
be less than 20 feet above the walking surface. Pedestrian bridges,
balconies or mezzanines are permitted overhead obstructions, provided
that they do not cover, in the aggregate, more than 20% of the area of
the through block connector.
TIDELANDS — Lands which are washed by tidal flows in accordance
with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Tideland
Council maps (on file with the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and the City Clerk).
TILTON ROAD — County Road 687 west of New Road.
T.O.C. — See "top of curb."
TOP OF CURB — The median elevation (grade) of the uppermost
horizontal surface of a permanently established curb structure abutting
the frontage of a lot. Where the height of such curb varies, t.o.c. shall
Side-by-side triplex or four-plex units are prohibited in this
structural type. Such structural types are addressed under the
definitions of "townhouse" and "garden apartment."
(1)
Each dwelling unit shall have its own sleeping, cooking, sanitary
and general living facilities wherein not more than one person per
household is sheltered or fed for profit.
(2)
Nothing herein shall preclude a single dwelling unit within such
structure from occupying more than one floor.
(3)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:743
be the average of the two points at either end of the length of the curb
(parallel with the side parcel lines) and the point at the median of the
curb.
TOWNHOUSE (TOWNHOUSE BUILDING) — A structure designed for
occupancy by not less than three and not more than eight independent
families or housekeeping units on individual lots with common (vertical)
party walls between dwelling units. Townhouse dwelling units shall be
side by side (not stacked), with each unit sitting on an individual lot.
TRACT — An area of land consisting of one or more contiguous lots
under single ownership or control, used for development or for a
common purpose. "Tract" is interchangeable with the words
"development area," "site" and "property."
TRAFFIC (IMPACT) STUDY — An analysis of the (typically negative)
influences on existing vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns
anticipated by and resulting from new development. Such studies shall
be conducted in accordance with the guidelines established in
Individual townhouse buildings shall contain not less than three
and not more than eight dwelling units. Each such dwelling unit
shall have its own sleeping, cooking, sanitary and general living
facilities wherein not more than one person per household is
sheltered or fed for profit. Each such unit shall be a minimum of 24
feet wide.
(1)
Exterior (end) townhouse units shall have a minimum twelve-foot
side yard setback, which shall be used as a driveway. In the
alternative, exterior townhouse units may be 24 feet wide, provided
that an additional twelve-foot side yard setback (under some form
of common ownership) is maintained.
(2)
Garages and off-street parking for townhouses shall be accessed
from the rear of the building, which shall be accessible from a loop
road employing end-unit driveways.
(3)
TRACT AREA, GROSS — The total area of land, determined by
a certified boundary survey, excluding any public rights-of-way
and/or lands shown as part of another previously approved or
designated permanent open space.
(1)
TRACT AREA, NET — The gross tract area less the total of any
areas within the tract contained in:
(a) Riparian lands, tidelands and tidal wetlands;
(b) Wetlands and areas with shallow depth to water table;
(c) The one-hundred-year floodplain;
(d) Lakes and ponds; and
(e) Stream corridors and floodways.
(2)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:744
Transportation Impact Analyses for Site Development: An ITE Proposed
Recommended Practice, Institute of Transportation Engineers,
Washington, D.C., 1996.
TRAILER — A wheeled structure which is towed or hauled by another
vehicle and used for short-term human occupancy, carrying materials,
goods or objects, or as a temporary office.
TRAILER COACH — See "recreational vehicle."
TRAILER COACH PARK — See "recreational vehicle park."
TRANSCRIPT — A typed or printed verbatim record, or reproduction
thereof, of the proceedings of a municipal agency.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP PERMIT — A permit issued by the Code
Enforcement Officer or designee for the exclusive and sole purpose
of changing ownership of a dwelling unit or property. The transfer of
ownership permit does not grant the right of occupancy and does not
allow occupancy of the dwelling unit or property. Upon inspection by
the Code Enforcement Officer or designee, the unit and/or property
is found to have City of Pleasantville Property Maintenance Code
violations, the new proposed owner of the property is responsible for
abating outstanding code violations. All outstanding violations must be
corrected by the due date on the permit. Failure to correct identified
and outstanding property maintenance violations by the due date will
result in the issuance of a court summons. Penalties include fines,
community service or imprisonment as defined in § 300-8, Enforcement;
violations and penalties, of Chapter 300, Land Management.[Added
10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 18-2016]
TRANSITIONAL CARE CLIENT (PATIENT) — A person qualifying for
the type of care or treatment permitted to be administered at a
transitional care home.
TRANSITIONAL CARE HOME — A facility in which persons live for
a short period of time while receiving physical, social and/or
psychological therapy and counseling to assist them in overcoming
physical, family living and/or emotional issues which, while not
requiring segregation from society, impede personal independence to
the point of requiring shelter away from their usual residences. Such
use may include on-site professional therapy and counseling in order
to support a gradual reintroduction to full participation in normal
community life, aka "halfway house."
TRAVEL TRAILER — See "recreational vehicle."
TREE — Any woody perennial.
TREE, CONIFEROUS — Trees that do not drop their leaves in
winter (aka evergreens).
(1)
TREE, DECIDUOUS — Trees that drop their leaves before
becoming dormant in winter; not coniferous.
(2)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:745
TREE CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches.
Pursuant to the 2004 edition of the American Standard for Nursery
Stock, published by the American Nursery and Landscape Association
(Note: http://agri.nv.gov/Brochures/ANLAStandard2004.pdf.),
measurement shall be taken six inches above the ground up to and
including four inches caliper size. If the caliper at six inches above
the ground exceeds four inches, the caliper should be measured at
12 inches above the ground. Seldom are tree trunks perfectly round.
The most accurate measurement will result from the use of a diameter
tape. Caliper measurements taken with manual or electronic "slot" or
"pincer" type caliper tools should be the average of the smallest and
largest measurements.
TREE DIAMETER — The width of a tree measured 4 1/2 feet above
grade.
TREE DRIPLINE — The marking where the outer edge of a tree's
branches overhang the ground.
TREE-PROTECTION ZONE — That portion of a lot outside of the
disturbance zone.
TREE REMOVAL — The elimination of a tree, by either chemical or
mechanical means, the transplanting of a tree to a site other than that
under development, or the infliction of damage to a tree that is of such
severity as to show evidence within a period of two years of irreparable
harm leading to the ultimate death of the tree. Examples of serious
damage include, but are not limited to: damage inflicted to the root
system by machinery, storage of materials or soil compaction; changing
the natural grade above, below or around the root system and around
the trunk; damage inflicted on the tree permitting fungus infection or
pest infestation; intentional herbicide application; excessive pruning;
excessive thinning; paving with concrete, asphalt or other impervious
material within such proximity as to be harmful to the tree.
TREE ROOT AREA — The area under a tree extending from the trunk
to the tree drip line.
TWO-FAMILY STACKED (MULTISTORY) DWELLING UNIT — A
structure designed for residential occupancy by two independent
families or housekeeping units situated on a single lot placed in a
horizontal configuration (i.e., one dwelling unit above the other). Each
such dwelling unit shall have its own sleeping, cooking, sanitary and
general living facilities wherein not more than one person per
household is sheltered or fed for profit. Nothing herein shall preclude
a single dwelling unit within such structure from occupying more than
one floor. However, no dwelling unit shall occupy less than an entire
floor (defined as the area of the total footprint of the building).
2008 COMPREHENSIVE MASTER PLAN UPDATE, CITY OF
PLEASANTVILLE, ATLANTIC COUNTY, NEW JERSEY — The duly
adopted Master Plan for the City of Pleasantville. Prepared by
Remington, Vernick & Walberg Engineers, dated September 8, 2008,
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:746
and adopted by the Pleasantville Planning Board on November 13,
2008.
TYPICAL RESIDENTIAL AMENITIES —
UNIT — See "dwelling unit."
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE AUTHORITY ("UEZA") — The New Jersey
Urban Enterprise Zone Authority, the state overseer of Urban
Enterprise Zone activities under N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN OPEN SPACE — See "open space, urban."
USABLE OPEN SPACE — See "open space, usable."
USE — The specific activity or purpose for which a lot, building or
portion thereof is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or
maintained. Unless specifically permitted by this chapter, no use
expressly permitted or permissible in any zoning district pursuant to
this chapter shall be permitted as a use in any other zoning district.
USE, TEMPORARY — A use which is established for a fixed period of
time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of such
time. Temporary uses do not involve the construction or alteration of
any permanent building or structure. Unless specifically permitted by
FOR MULTIFAMILY USES — Those uses detailed under typical
residential amenities for single-family uses, plus cabanas,
clubhouses, rest rooms, changing rooms and refreshment areas.
(1)
FOR SINGLE-FAMILY USES — Such accessory structures and uses
which are normal and customary to a residential use, including,
but not limited to, private automobile garages for the exclusive use
of the residents or guests of the residents, greenhouses, garden
houses, tool sheds, playhouses or play sets, fences and walls,
satellite dish antennas, solar energy systems, electric vehicle
supply equipment, tennis, basketball or similar court games and
residential swimming pools, provided: [Amended 3-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 2-2018]
Such uses are incidental to the residential use of the premises
and are not operated for gain;
(a)
Such uses shall be located in the side or rear yard, and then,
except for fences and walls, shall conform to the setbacks
required for accessory structures. In the case of a corner lot,
the regulations regarding front and side yards shall apply;
(b)
Any machinery used in connection with such use shall be
housed in a soundproofed structure; and
(c)
Any safety or other lighting to illuminate any such use shall
be designed and located so that it does not project any light
or glare on contiguous properties. All bare incandescent light
sources shall be shielded from view.
(d)
(2)
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:747
this chapter, no use expressly permitted or permissible as a temporary
use in any zoning district pursuant to this chapter shall be permitted as
a temporary use in any other zoning district.
USE VARIANCE — See "variance, use."
UTILITY — An essential service supporting a development, including,
but not limited to, storm and sanitary sewer, potable water, electric,
gas, telephone and cable television, and which is regulated by the State
of New Jersey or the federal government.
UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation and
maintenance of a utility.
UTILITY SHED — An accessory building used for the storage of a lot
owner's or occupant's personal property, excluding motor vehicles, and
having a maximum area of 144 square feet.
VARIANCE — Permission granted to an applicant for development by
the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, to depart from the literal requirements of the zoning regulations of
this chapter.
VERTICAL DEVELOPMENT — Development that exceeds three stories
or 40 feet in height, measured from finished grade.
VERTICAL PARKING GARAGE — A multilevel structure constructed for
use as a facility for the parking of motor vehicles whose levels may be
above or below grade, or both, but in no case exceed the maximum
height limitation for the district in which it is located.
VIBRATION — For the purposes of this chapter, any rapid, periodic
motion or oscillation of material, air (typically sound) or fluid from a
position of rest or equilibrium, of whatever type or source, emanating
from a lot, building, structure or use, whether principal or accessory,
which impacts the quiet enjoyment and/or the routine activities of
neighboring or nearby lots, buildings, structures or uses.
WALK-UP ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment which, by design of
physical facilities or by service or packaging procedures, encourages
or permits pedestrians to receive a service or obtain a product without
entering the building.
WALKWAY — See "sidewalk."
WALL — An upright (vertical) structural member, typically made of
wood, stone, brick or similar material, and serving to enclose, divide,
VARIANCE, BULK — A variance granted by the Planning Board or
the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, to depart from
the literal requirements of the zoning regulations of this chapter
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(1)
VARIANCE, USE — A variance granted by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment to depart from the literal requirements of the zoning
regulations of this chapter pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
(2)
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:748
support or protect, and forming a side or inner partition of a building.
A wall may serve as a fence when used for such purpose. See "fence."
WALL, EXTERIOR WALL — Any wall which defines the exterior
boundaries of a building or its courts or of a structure.
WALL SIGN — See "sign, wall."
WAREHOUSE — A structure designed or utilized primarily for the
storage of goods and materials. The term shall include "self-storage,"
"mini-storage" or other forms of commercial warehouse activities.
WAREHOUSE, CONTRACTORS — A building used primarily for the
storage of goods and materials customarily required in the building
trade by a construction contractor.
WARNING SIGN — See "sign, warning."
WASHINGTON AVENUE — County Road 608 west of Franklin
Boulevard.
WATERCRAFT — A motor boat, sailboat, raft or other vessel used for
waterborne transportation, recreation or commercial purposes.
WATERCRAFT FUELING AND SERVICE (STATION) — A building, land
area or other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be
used for the activities defined under "watercraft fueling station" and
"watercraft service station."
WATERCRAFT FUELING (STATION) — A building, land area or other
premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail
dispensing or sale of gasoline or marine fuels, but which does not
include the dispensing and/or sale of lubricants (other than motor oil
sold and dispensed by the quart), watercraft accessories or supplies,
the parking or storing of watercraft for hire and which does not engage
in the repair or towing of watercraft.
WATERCRAFT RENTAL (AGENCY) — A place of business, whether
conducted in a building or open yard area, or any combination thereof,
which is used or intended to be used for the display, sale and/or hourly,
daily or weekly rental of new and/or used watercraft, in operable
condition, where no watercraft repair is conducted on the premises
(other than warranty and other repair service as an accessory use) is
conducted on the premises.
WATERCRAFT REPAIR — The general repair, rebuilding or
reconditioning of watercraft, their engines, sails, trailers or related
appurtenances.
WATERCRAFT SALES (AGENCY) — A place of business, whether
conducted in a building or open yard area, or any combination thereof,
which is used or intended to be used for the display, sale and/or
annualized lease (as opposed to daily or weekly rental) of new and/
or used watercraft, in operable condition, where no watercraft repair
is conducted on the premises (other than warranty and other repair
service as an accessory use).
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:749
WATERCRAFT SERVICE (STATION) — A building containing service
bays, with or without hydraulic lifts, and associated land area or other
premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the repair
of watercraft, including, but not limited to, facilities for changing oil,
engine repair, lubrication, transmission repair and like and similar
services, provided that watercraft body repair, painting, wrecking,
recycling, docking or storing of watercraft for hire shall not be deemed
permissible accessory uses of an watercraft service station.
WATER DEPENDENT — Development that cannot physically function
without direct access to the body of water along which it is proposed.
Uses or portions of uses that can function on sites not adjacent to the
water are not considered water dependent, regardless of the economic
advantages that may be gained from a waterfront location. The test for
water dependency shall assess both the need of the proposed use for
access to the water and the capacity of the proposed water body to
satisfy the requirements and absorb the impacts of the proposed use.
A proposed use will not be considered water dependent if either the
use can function away from the water or if the water body proposed is
unsuitable for the use.
WATER ORIENTED — Development that serves the general public and
derives economic benefit from direct access to the water body along
which it is proposed, such as a hotel or restaurant, if it takes full
advantage of a waterfront location (e.g., an assembly plant could be
water oriented if overland transportation is possible but waterborne
receipt of raw materials and shipment of finished products is
economically advantageous).
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM — An installation or structure designed to
provide a potable water supply.
WETLANDS PERMIT — A legal instrument issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
13:9A-1 et seq., and N.J.A.C. 7:7A-1.1 et seq., permitting the applicant
to engage in an activity specified therein.
WETLANDS, TIDAL — Areas known as marshes, swamps or other
lowlands subject to tidal action, or any area now or formerly connected
to tidal waters, whose surface is at or below an elevation of one foot
above local extreme high water and on which vegetation unique to
tidal marshes, swamps or lowlands has become adapted, including, but
not limited to, all mapped New Jersey State Wetlands in accordance
with the Wetlands Act (N.J.S.A. 13:9A-1 et seq.), wetlands defined in
accordance with the New Jersey Coastal Development Policies (N.J.A.C.
7:7D-1.0 et seq.) or wetlands defined by the United States Army Corps
of Engineers.
WET SOILS — See "soils, wet."
WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT — A business engaged in the sale of
commodities in quantity, usually for resale or business use, chiefly to
retailers, other businesses, industries and institutions.
WINDOW SIGN — See "sign, window."
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:750
WOODED AREA — An area within a tract which is covered by trees,
woods or forests, including closely grouped or stands of 10 or more
mature or specimen trees of six inches caliper or greater, or individual
shade and specimen trees of 12 inches caliper or greater, or individual
ornamental trees of four inches caliper or greater.
YARD — The clear, unoccupied and unobstructed open space situated
between a building or group of buildings and the nearest front, side or
rear lot line, extending from grade to sky for the full width or depth of
the lot. Yards shall be identified as front yard, side yard or rear yard.
See "setback" for permitted encroachments.
YARD, FRONT — A yard on the same lot with the principal building,
extending the full width of the lot between the street line and that
portion of the building closest to the street line, or the front setback
line, projected to the side lot lines of the subject lot. The depth of the
front yard shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to either
a straight street line or the tangent lines of curved street lines. The
minimum required front yard shall be the same as the required front
yard setback. See "lot, corner" for designation of front yards for corner
lots.
YARD LINE — A line drawn parallel to the front, side or rear lot lines
and extending the distance equal to the depth of the required front,
side or rear yard, as the case may be.
YARD, REAR — A yard on the same lot with the principal building,
extending the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and that
portion of the building closest to the rear lot line, or the rear setback
line, projected to the side lot lines of the subject lot. The depth of the
rear yard shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to the rear
of the lot in the same manner as specified herein for the measurement
of lot depth. Any buffer requirements shall be in addition to required
rear yards. See "lot, corner" for designation of rear yards for corner
lots.
YARD REQUIREMENTS — The regulations of this chapter establishing
minimum front, side and rear yard and setback requirements for
various uses, structures and districts.
§ 300-10 WATER § 300-10
285:751
YARD, SIDE — A yard or yards on the same lot with the principal
building, extending the full depth of the lot between the side lot lines
and those portions of the building closest to the side lot lines, or the
side setback line(s) projected to the front and rear lot lines of the
subject lot. The widths of the side yards shall be measured horizontally
and at right angles to the side lot line. Any buffer requirements shall
be in addition to required side yards. See "lot, corner" for designation
of side yards for corner lots.
ZONING BOARD ENGINEER — See "Board Engineer."
ZONING BOARD (OF ADJUSTMENT) — The Zoning Board of
Adjustment of the City of Pleasantville, established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 and § 300-12 herein.
ZONING BOARD PLANNER — See "Board Planner."
ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARY LINE — The lines enclosing a zoning
district as shown on the adopted Zoning Map of the City of Pleasantville
(included at the end of this chapter).
ZONING DISTRICT (ZONE) — A section or sections of the City of
Pleasantville which are designated as a "zone" or "zoning district" on
the adopted Zoning Map of the City of Pleasantville (included at the
end of this chapter) and to which certain uniform regulations and
requirements of this chapter apply.
ZONING OFFICER — The official of the City of Pleasantville designated
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. See "Administrative Officer."
ZONE OF LIGHT OBSTRUCTION — A segment of a cone described
horizontally by an arc drawn from the center line of a window,
measured horizontally, extending to 70° from such center line on either
side, at a radius of 40 feet, and described vertically by the space
between a plane extending horizontally from the window sill and a
plane extending from the top of the window at an angle of 160° to the
face of the building at a distance of 40 feet, measured perpendicularly
from the face of the building. The intent of this definition is to support
regulations designed to limit the amount of light, typically but not
exclusively from signage, entering a dwelling and disturbing its
occupants.
ZONING PERMIT — See "development permit."
§ 300-10 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-10
285:752
ARTICLE IV
Administrative Bodies and Related Agencies
§ 300-11. Planning Board established; composition.
A. There is herewith established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, a
Planning Board for the City of Pleasantville. Such Planning Board shall
consist of nine regular members, which shall consist of and be divided
into the following four classes:
(1) Class I: the Mayor of the City of Pleasantville or, in the absence of
the Mayor, a designee who shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(2) Class II: one official of the City of Pleasantville, other than a
member of the City Council, who shall be appointed by the Mayor.
If the City adopts an Environmental Commission, the member of
the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the
Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to
be the Class II Planning Board member in the event that there be
among the Class IV or alternate members of the Planning Board
both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of
the Board of Education.
(3) Class III: one member of the governing body, who shall be
appointed by the members of the governing body.
(4) Class IV: six other citizens of the City of Pleasantville, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor. Class IV members shall hold no other City
office, position or employment, except that one member may be a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and one may be a
member of the Board of Education. If the City adopts an
Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as
required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II
Planning Board member, unless there be among the Class IV or
alternate members of the Planning Board both a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board Of
Education, in which case the member common to the Planning
Board and Environmental Commission shall be deemed a Class II
member of the Planning Board. For the purpose of this section,
membership on a municipal board or commission whose function is
advisory in nature, and the establishment of which is discretionary
and not required by statute, shall not be considered the holding of
municipal office.
B. Alternate members. There shall be appointed to the Planning Board not
more than two alternate members. Such alternates members shall meet
the qualifications of Class IV members and shall be designated by the
Mayor at time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2." Alternate members may participate in all matters but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member of any
§ 300-11 WATER § 300-11
285:753
class. Participation of alternate members shall not be deemed to
increase the size of the Planning Board established by ordinance of
the governing body pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23. A vote shall not
be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
C. Temporary members. If the Planning Board lacks a quorum because any
of its regular or alternate members is prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23
or 40:55D-23.1 from acting on a matter due to the member's personal
or financial interests therein, regular members of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as
temporary members of the Planning Board in order of seniority of
continuous service to the Zoning Board of Adjustment until there are in
attendance the minimum number of Planning Board members
necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without any
personal or financial interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a
choice has to be made between regular members of equal seniority, the
Chair of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make the choice.
D. All members of the Planning Board except for the Class II members set
forth below shall be, at the time of appointment and throughout their
term as a member of the Planning Board, residents of the City of
Pleasantville.
E. Educational requirements.
(1) No person shall be seated as a member or alternate member of the
Planning Board who has not agreed to take the basic course in land
use law and planning required to be offered by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23.3a.
(2) No person shall retain a seat as a member or alternate member of
the Planning Board who has not successfully completed such
course within 18 months of assuming Board membership.
(3) Exceptions to the foregoing are:
(a) Class I and Class III Board members;
(b) Any person who is licensed as a professional planner and
maintains such license in good standing as of the date upon
which that person would otherwise be required to demonstrate
compliance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3; and
(c) Any person who offers proof of having completed a more
extensive course in land use law and planning than that
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3 within 12 months of the date
upon which that person would otherwise be required to
demonstrate compliance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3 and which,
in the determination of the Commissioner of the New Jersey
§ 300-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-11
285:754
Department of Community Affairs, is equivalent to or more
extensive than that course offered pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23.3.
F. Terms of office.
(1) Class I: term shall correspond to the official tenure of the Mayor.
The Mayor's designee shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, but
in no case longer than the Mayor's official tenure in office.
(2) Class II: term shall be for one year or for the remainder of the Class
II member's term of office, whichever is shorter.
(3) Class III: term shall be for one year or for the remainder of the
Class III member's term of office, whichever is shorter.
(4) Class IV: The term of each Class IV member shall be four years.
Members of the Planning Board on the effective date of this chapter
shall continue in office until the completion of their terms as
provided by law immediately prior to the effective date of this
chapter. New appointments or reappointments to the Planning
Board shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. The term
of a Class IV member of the Planning Board who is also a member
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Board of Education shall
terminate whenever such Class IV member is no longer a member
of such other body, or at the completion of the Class IV term,
whichever occurs first.
(5) Alternate members. Terms shall be for two years, except that the
terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not
more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year;
provided, however, that in no instance shall the terms of the
alternate members first appointed exceed two years. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled by
the Mayor for the unexpired term only.
G. Vacancy. Permanent vacancies on the Planning Board shall be filled by
appointment, as provided above, for the unexpired term of the former
member whose place has become vacant.
H. Removal.
(1) Any member of the Planning Board, other than the Mayor, may be
removed by the City Council for cause, upon written charges being
formally adopted. If the member being removed for cause so
requests, a public hearing shall be granted. Cause for removal of a
member shall include any undisclosed or unlawful conflict of
interest; any violation of the codes, ordinances or rules applicable
to the member's performance of his/her duties; any unwillingness
or inability to carry out such duties in a prompt, conscientious and
competent manner; any conduct tending to cast doubt upon the
integrity or objectivity of the member in performing such duties; or
§ 300-11 WATER § 300-11
285:755
any other specific conduct of the member found by the City Council
to be detrimental to the proper functioning of the Board.
(2) The Planning Board may, if its adopted rules so permit, recommend
to the governing body that one or more of its members be removed,
provided that such recommendation include specific reasons for
such recommendation.
I. Compensation. Members of the Planning Board shall serve without
compensation but shall be entitled, to the extent that available funds
are appropriated by the City Council in its budget therefor, to
reimbursement for reasonable expenses necessarily incurred in the
performance of their duties.
J. Conflicts of interest. No member or alternate member of the Planning
Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in which such member
has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
Whenever any such member shall recuse himself/herself from acting on
a particular matter by reason of such conflict of interest, such member
shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter,
nor shall such member participate in any discussions or proceedings
related thereto. Nothing herein shall deny a Board member who has
recused himself/herself from a particular matter the right to speak for
or against, or otherwise comment on, such matter during the Board
hearing related thereto, provided that any such comment is made
during the public portion of the Board hearing on such matter and
further provided that such recused member identifies for the record
that such comments are personal and in no way reflect an official
position as a member of the Board or the position of the Board.
K. Officers; solicitor; professional experts; staff.
(1) Chair and Vice Chair.
(a) The Planning Board shall annually elect a Chair and a Vice
Chair from among its Class IV members. The Chair shall
preside at all meetings and hearings and fulfill the customary
functions of that office. In the absence of the Chair, the Vice
Chair shall act as Chair and shall have all the powers of the
Chair. The Vice Chair shall have such other powers and duties
as may from time to time be provided by the rules of the Board.
The presiding officer of the Board may administer oaths.
(b) An alternate member shall not serve as Chair or Vice Chair of
the Planning Board.
(2) Solicitor.
(a) The Planning Board shall employ or contract for the services of
legal counsel, to be known as the "Planning Board Solicitor,"
and shall fix the compensation of said Solicitor at such amount
as the Board may deem reasonable.
§ 300-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-11
285:756
(b) The Planning Board Solicitor shall be an attorney, other than
the Municipal Attorney (City Solicitor) or an attorney on his/
her staff, who is licensed to practice law in the State of New
Jersey.
(c) The Planning Board Solicitor shall act as legal advisor to the
Board, and he/she or his/her delegate shall attend all hearings
of the Planning Board unless excused by the Chair; shall attend
any meetings of the Board at which his/her presence is
requested; shall review and give an opinion concerning the
legal sufficiency of any provision, code, ordinance, rule or
regulation, or amendments thereto, relating to land use
development and regulation presently in force or proposed for
adoption by any official, department, bureau, board,
commission or agency of the City, and shall be available, on
reasonable request, for consultation with the Planning Board
concerning matters properly subject to its jurisdiction and
authority. The Planning Board Solicitor or his/her delegate
shall also provide advice and aid to the Zoning Officer in the
enforcement of this chapter and shall, where directed by the
Planning Board, initiate such legal actions as may be necessary
to the proper enforcement of this chapter.
(3) Professional experts.
(a) The Planning Board shall employ or contract for the services of
professional experts, including, but not limited to, a
professional engineer and professional planner to be known as
the "Planning Board Engineer" and "Planning Board Planner,"
respectively, and shall fix the compensation of such
professionals at such amount as the Board may deem
reasonable.
(b) The Planning Board Engineer shall be a professional engineer,
and the Planning Board Planner shall be a professional
planner. Both shall be licensed to practice their professions by
the State of New Jersey.
(c) The Planning Board Engineer and Planner shall act as
engineering and planning advisors to the Board, and they or
their delegates shall attend all hearings of the Planning Board
unless excused by the Chair; shall attend any meetings of the
Board at which their presence is requested; shall review and
provide opinions concerning the engineering and planning
sufficiency of any provision, code, ordinance, rule or
regulation, or amendments thereto, relating to land use
development and regulation presently in force or proposed for
adoption by any official, department, bureau, board,
commission or agency of the City; and shall be available, on
reasonable request, for consultation with the Planning Board
concerning matters properly subject to its jurisdiction and
§ 300-11 WATER § 300-11
285:757
authority. The Planning Board Engineer and Planner, or their
delegates, shall also provide advice and aid to the Zoning
Officer in the enforcement of this chapter.
(d) The Planning Board Engineer shall also perform such duties as
may be required in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(4) Staff. The Planning Board shall select a Secretary, who may or may
not be a member or alternate member of the Planning Board or a
municipal employee, and create and fill such other offices as
established by this chapter.
(5) Other. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for such
experts, consultants and other staff and services as it may deem
necessary and fix the compensation thereof at such amount as the
Board may deem reasonable.
L. Quorum; voting.
(1) No action shall be taken at any Planning Board meeting or hearing
without a quorum, consisting of five members, being present. The
concurring votes of a majority of the members voting, but not less
than three votes, shall be necessary to any action by the Planning
Board.
(2) A member absent from any portion of a meeting or hearing, or,
where a meeting or hearing is carried over to two or more sessions,
from one or more of the sessions, shall be eligible to vote upon the
matter heard, notwithstanding such absence, provided that such
Board member shall first certify on the record that he/she has read
a transcript or listened to a recording of the session or sessions or
part thereof from which he/she was absent.
M. Meetings; hearings; procedures.
(1) The Planning Board shall fix the time and place for holding its
regular meetings, provided that a meeting shall be scheduled not
less than once each month and shall be held as scheduled unless
canceled for lack of applications for development to process or
other business to conduct. The Planning Board may provide for
special meetings at the call of the Chair or at the request of any two
of its members, which shall be held after notice to its members and
the public in accordance with the provisions of the Open Public
Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.) and the rules of the Planning
Board. All regular meetings and all special meetings of the
Planning Board shall be open to the public; provided, however, that,
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9, the Board may meet in
executive session for the purpose of discussing and studying any
matters to come before it, and these sessions shall not be deemed a
regular or special meeting. All testimony at any meeting of the
Planning Board shall be giver under oath.
§ 300-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-11
285:758
(2) All hearings of the Planning Board shall be set, noticed and
conducted in accordance with the provisions of to §§ 300-26
through 300-30; provided, however, that the Planning Board may
waive the notice and public hearing in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-47 for an application for development if the Planning
Board, or Minor Subdivision Committee thereof, if appointed by the
Chair, finds that the application for development is a minor
subdivision as defined in § 300-10.
(3) The Planning Board shall adopt its own rules for the conduct of its
business, meetings and hearings not inconsistent with this chapter
and the statutes of the State of New Jersey. Such rules shall be filed
with the Board Secretary, and copies thereof shall be available to
any person upon request and the payment of a fee in accordance
with § 300-9. Any rule so adopted which relates solely to the
conduct of the Board's meetings or hearings and which is not
mandated by this chapter or the statutes of the State of New Jersey
may be waived by the Board upon good cause being shown.
N. Minutes; transcripts; records; decisions.
(1) Minutes of every regular or special meeting and of every hearing
shall be kept and shall include the names of the persons appearing
and addressing the Planning Board and of the persons appearing
by attorney, the action taken by the Planning Board, the findings, if
any, made by it and reasons therefor.
(2) A verbatim recording of the proceedings of every hearing, by either
stenographic, mechanical or electronic means, shall be kept.
(3) All minutes, verbatim recordings, applications, requests, exhibits
and papers filed in any proceeding before the Planning Board, and
the decision and report or reports of the Board, shall constitute the
record of any matter brought before the Board. The records of the
Board's activity shall be made available for public inspection during
normal business hours at the office of the Board Secretary. Any
interested party shall have the right to compel production of such
records for use and evidence in any legal proceedings concerning
the subject matter of such records. Such interested party shall be
charged a fee for reproduction of such records in accordance with
§ 300-9.
(4) Every decision of the Planning Board for an amendment of this
chapter, site plan/subdivision plat approval or a variance pursuant
to this chapter shall be by written resolution, which shall include
findings of fact, shall refer to the evidence in the record and to the
exhibits, plans or specifications upon which such decision is based,
shall specify the reason or reasons for such decision and shall
contain a conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact
which shall set forth the recommendation of the Board or shall
grant approval, grant conditional approval subject to expressly
§ 300-11 WATER § 300-11
285:759
stated modifications or deny approval. Every resolution shall
expressly set forth any limitations or conditions imposed on or
recommended with respect to any approval granted or
recommended or any development, work or use authorized or
recommended.
(5) In reaching its decision on any such application, the Planning
Board may rely on the personal knowledge of its members, on its
inspections of the property and on any reports available to it;
provided, however, that reliance on such matter shall not be
allowed unless the Board shall have made the particular
knowledge, inspection or report a matter of record at the public
hearing and afforded every party reasonable time to respond to it
or, in any case where no public hearing before the Planning Board
is required, shall have expressly noted such knowledge, inspection
or report in its recommendation to the body charged with
conducting a hearing or taking final action on the application.
(6) The Planning Board shall take no final or binding vote on any
decision pertaining to any application unless it shall first have
before it the written resolution herein required; provided, however,
that where special circumstances so warrant, the Planning Board
may take final action on any such application prior to the
preparation of such resolution, but in such event it shall, before
taking such action, first state its findings and conclusions as above
required at a meeting open to the public and shall, in addition, state
the special circumstances warranting such action.
(7) In any case where this chapter, or where N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
provides that the failure of the Planning Board to act within a fixed
period shall be deemed a grant or denial of a recommendation upon
an application, such failure shall, notwithstanding the absence of
required findings and conclusions, be considered to be a decision
or recommendation of the Board rendered on the day following the
expiration of such fixed period.
(8) Within 10 days following any decision on such application, the
Planning Board Secretary shall mail notice thereof to each person
entitled to notice pursuant to § 300-29. A brief notice of the
decision of the Board shall be placed in a newspaper having
general circulation.
(9) As to other matters brought before the Planning Board, the Board
shall prepare such reports and make such communications as it
shall deem appropriate to the subject matter.
O. Powers and duties. The Planning Board shall be empowered to exercise
all duties and responsibilities conferred to it by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., and this chapter, specifically, but
without limitation:
§ 300-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-11
285:760
(1) Prepare, adopt, reexamine and amend the municipal Master Plan
and its constituent elements in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28
and 40:55D-89.
(2) Develop and make recommendations to the City Council
concerning the Official Map or amendments thereto in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(3) Develop and make recommendations to the City Council
concerning the Zoning Map or amendments thereto in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62.
(4) If authorized by the governing body, develop and make
recommendations to City Council concerning a capital
improvement program and amendments thereto in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29.
(5) Review and make recommendations to the City Council concerning
this chapter and amendments thereto, including those related to
development regulations in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a
and other matters referred to the Planning Board by City Council in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
(6) Administer the provisions of this chapter in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(7) Review and approve or disapprove site plans and subdivision plats
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-47, 40:55D-48 and
40:55D-50, and, at its discretion, waive notice and public hearing
for all applications for development for minor subdivisions, as
defined in this chapter, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47.
Regardless of whether or not such minor subdivision approval is
issued by way of noticed public hearing or waiver of such noticed
public hearing, such approval shall be deemed to be the final
approval of the minor subdivision by the Board, provided that the
Board may condition such approval on terms ensuring the provision
of improvements as provided for in this chapter.
(8) Form from among its members, at its discretion, and in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47, a Minor Subdivision Review Committee,
whose powers and duties shall be limited to review and approval or
disapproval of minor subdivision plats as defined in this chapter.
Such Committee may, if so empowered by the Board, waive notice
and public hearing for all such applications, in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47. Regardless of whether or not such minor
subdivision approval is issued by way of noticed public hearing or
waiver of such noticed public hearing, such approval shall be
deemed to be the final approval of the Minor Subdivision
Committee, provided that the Committee may condition such
approval on terms ensuring the provision of improvements as
provided for in this chapter.
§ 300-11 WATER § 300-11
285:761
(9) Review requests for, grant or deny variances in conjunction with
the review of applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(10) Appoint legal counsel, professional experts and other staff.
(11) Assemble data on a continuing basis as a part of a continuous
planning process.
(12) Subject to the right of the applicant to receive a decision within the
time periods specified by this chapter, make referrals in addition to
those expressly required by this chapter to persons or agencies for
their recommendations.
(13) Aid and assist City Council and the departments and agencies of
the City in implementing general plans and in planning, developing
and completing specific projects.
(14) Review and report on any matter referred to it by City Council or
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(15) Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of City Council for the aid and assistance of
City Council or other agencies or officers.
(16) Upon reasonable, written request, make its special knowledge and
expertise available to any official, department, bureau, board,
commission or agency of the City, county, state or federal
governments to aid them in the performance of their respective
duties relating to the planning and development of the City and its
region, and to participate in the preparation and review of
programs or plans required by state or federal law or regulation.
(17) In furtherance of the above jurisdiction and authority, make such
investigations, maps and reports and recommendations in
connection therewith relating to the planning and development of
the City of Pleasantville as may be necessary, appropriate and
desirable; provided, however, that the expenditures of the Board
shall not exceed the amounts appropriated therefor.
(18) Issue subpoenas, administer oaths and take testimony in the
exercise of its duties (wherein the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et
seq., shall govern).
(19) Conduct, when authorized by the governing body, a preliminary
investigation and hearing and make a recommendation pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-6b as to whether an area is in need of
redevelopment.
(20) Make recommendations concerning a redevelopment plan
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7e or prepare a redevelopment plan
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7f.
§ 300-11 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-11
285:762
§ 300-12. Zoning Board of Adjustment established; composition.
(21) Make recommendations concerning the determination of an area in
need of rehabilitation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-14.
P. Appeals. Any interested person may appeal any final decision of the
Planning Board to the court of proper jurisdiction; to the Board of
Public Utility Commissioners in the cases specified in and pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-19; and, to the extent and in the
manner authorized by New Jersey law, to any court of competent
jurisdiction.
A. There is herewith established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69, a Zoning
Board of Adjustment for the City of Pleasantville ("Zoning Board" or
"Board of Adjustment"). Such Zoning Board shall consist of seven
regular members, which all shall be appointed by the governing body.
B. Alternate members. There shall be appointed to the Zoning Board by
the governing body not more than two alternate members, who shall be
designated by the Chair of the Board as "Alternate No. 1" and
"Alternate No. 2." Alternate members may participate in all matters but
may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. Participation of alternate members shall not be deemed to
increase the size of the Zoning Board established by ordinance of the
governing body pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member. Alternate members shall serve in rotation in the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to
vote.
C. Temporary members. If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum
because any of its regular or alternate members is prohibited by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 from acting on a matter due to the member's
personal or financial interests therein, Class IV members of the
Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as
temporary members of the Zoning Board in order of seniority of
continuous service to the Planning Board until there are in attendance
the minimum number of Zoning Board members necessary to constitute
a quorum to act upon the matter without any personal or financial
interest therein, whether direct or indirect. If a choice has to be made
between Class IV members of equal seniority, the Chair of the Planning
Board shall make the choice.
D. All members of the Zoning Board shall be, at the time of appointment
and throughout their term as a member of the Zoning Board, residents
of the City of Pleasantville. No member of the Zoning Board may hold
any elective office or position in the City.
E. Educational requirements.
§ 300-11 WATER § 300-12
285:763
(1) No person shall be seated as a member or alternate member of the
Board of Adjustment who has not agreed to take the basic course in
land use law and planning required to be offered by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23.3a.
(2) No person shall retain a seat as a member or alternate member of
the Board of Adjustment who has not successfully completed such
course within 18 months of assuming Board membership.
(3) Exceptions to the foregoing are:
(a) Any person who is licensed as a professional planner and
maintains such license in good standing as of the date upon
which that person would otherwise be required to demonstrate
compliance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3; and
(b) Any person who offers proof of having completed a more
extensive course in land use law and planning than that
required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3 within 12 months of the date
upon which that person would otherwise be required to
demonstrate compliance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.3 and which,
in the determination of the Commissioner of the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, is equivalent to or more
extensive than that course offered pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23.3.
F. Terms of office.
(1) The term of each member shall be four years. Members of the
Board of Adjustment on the effective date of this chapter shall
continue in office until the completion of their terms as provided by
law immediately prior to the effective date of this chapter. Any new
appointments or reappointments to the Board of Adjustment shall
be governed by the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Alternate members. The terms of the alternate members shall be
for two years, except that the terms of the alternate members shall
be such that the term of not more than one alternate member shall
expire in any one year; provided, however, that in no instance shall
the terms of the alternate members first appointed exceed two
years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term
shall be fixed by the appointing authority for the unexpired term
only.
G. Vacancy. Permanent vacancies on the Zoning Board shall be filled by
appointment, as provided above, for the unexpired term of the former
member whose place has become vacant.
H. Removal.
§ 300-12 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-12
285:764
(1) Any member of the Board of Adjustment may be removed by the
City Council for cause. If the member being removed for cause so
requests, a public hearing shall be granted. Cause for removal of a
member shall include any undisclosed or unlawful conflict of
interest; any violation of the codes, ordinances or rules applicable
to the member's performance of his/her duties; any unwillingness
or inability to carry out such duties in a prompt, conscientious and
competent manner; any conduct tending to cast doubt upon the
integrity or objectivity of the member in performing such duties; or
any other specific conduct of the member found by the City Council
to be detrimental to the proper functioning of the Board.
(2) The Zoning Board of Adjustment may, if its adopted rules so permit,
recommend to the governing body that one or more of its members
be removed, provided that such recommendation include specific
reasons for such recommendation.
I. Compensation. Members of the Board of Adjustment shall serve without
compensation but shall be entitled, to the extent that available funds
are appropriated by the City Council in its budget therefor, to
reimbursement for reasonable expenses necessarily incurred in the
performance of their duties.
J. Conflicts of interest. No member or alternate member of the Zoning
Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he/she has,
either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
Whenever any such member shall recuse himself/herself from acting on
a particular matter by reason of such conflict of interest, such member
shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter,
nor shall be/she participate in any discussions or proceedings related
thereto. Nothing herein shall deny a Board member who has recused
himself/herself from a particular matter the right to speak for or
against, or otherwise comment on, such matter during the Board
hearing related thereto, provided that any such comment is made
during the public portion of the Board hearing on such matter and
further provided that such recused member identifies for the record
that such comments are personal and in no way reflect an official
position as a member of the Board or the position of the Board.
K. Officers; solicitor; professional experts; staff.
(1) Chair and vice chair.
(a) The Board of Adjustment shall annually elect a Chair and a Vice
Chair from its members. The Chair shall preside at all meetings
and hearings and fulfill the customary functions of that office.
In the absence of the Chair, the Vice Chair shall act as Chair
and shall have all the powers of the Chair. The Vice Chair shall
have such other powers and duties as may from time to time be
provided by the rules of the Board. The presiding officer of the
Board may administer oaths.
§ 300-12 WATER § 300-12
285:765
(b) An alternate member shall not serve as Chair or Vice Chair of
the Zoning Board.
(2) Solicitor.
(a) The Board of Adjustment shall employ or contract for the
services of legal counsel, to be known as the "Zoning Board
Solicitor," and shall fix the compensation of said Solicitor at
such amount as the Board may deem reasonable.
(b) The Zoning Board Solicitor shall be an attorney, other than the
Municipal Attorney (City Solicitor) or an attorney on his/her
staff, who is licensed to practice law in the State of New Jersey.
(3) The Zoning Board Solicitor shall act as legal advisor to the Board,
and he/she or his/her delegate shall attend all hearings of the
Zoning Board unless excused by the Chair; shall attend any
meetings of the Board at which his/her presence is requested; shall
review and give an opinion concerning the legal sufficiency of any
provision, code, ordinance, rule or regulation or amendments
thereto relating to land use development and regulation presently
in force or proposed for adoption by any official, department,
bureau, board, commission or agency of the City; and shall be
available, on reasonable request, for consultation with the Board of
Adjustment concerning matters properly subject to its jurisdiction
and authority. The Zoning Board Solicitor or his/her delegate shall
also provide advice and aid to the Zoning Officer in the
enforcement of this chapter and shall, where directed by the Board
of Adjustment, initiate such legal actions as may be necessary to
the proper enforcement of this chapter.
(4) Professional experts. The Zoning Board shall employ or contract for
the services of professional experts, including, but not limited to, a
professional engineer and professional planner to be known as the
"Zoning Board Engineer" and "Zoning Board Planner," respectively,
and shall fix the compensation of such professionals at such amount
as the Board may deem reasonable.
(5) The Zoning Board Engineer shall be a professional engineer and
the Zoning Board Planner shall be a professional planner. Both
shall be licensed to practice their professions by the State of New
Jersey.
(6) The Zoning Board Engineer and Planner shall act as engineering
and planning advisors to the Board, and they or their delegates
shall attend all hearings of the Zoning Board unless excused by the
Chair; shall attend any meetings of the Board at which their
presence is requested; shall review and render opinions concerning
the engineering and planning sufficiency of any provision, code,
ordinance, rule or regulation or amendments thereto relating to
land use development and regulation presently in force or proposed
for adoption by any official, department, bureau, board,
§ 300-12 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-12
285:766
commission or agency of the City; and shall be available, on
reasonable request, for consultation with the Board of Adjustment
concerning matters properly subject to its jurisdiction and
authority. The Zoning Board Engineer and Planner, or their
delegates, shall also provide advice and aid to the Zoning Officer in
the enforcement of this chapter.
(7) The Zoning Board Engineer shall also perform such duties as may
be required in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(8) Staff. The Zoning Board shall select a Secretary who may or may
not be a member or alternate member of the Zoning Board or a
municipal employee, and create and fill such other offices as
established by this chapter.
(9) Other. The Zoning Board may also employ or contract for such
experts, consultants and other staff and services as it may deem
necessary and fix the compensation thereof at such amount as the
Board may deem reasonable.
L. Quorum; voting.
(1) No action shall be taken at any Board of Adjustment meeting or
hearing without a quorum, consisting of four members, being
present. Except as otherwise required in § 300-37D(2), the
concurring votes of a majority of the members voting, but not fewer
than three votes, shall be necessary to any action by the Board of
Adjustment.
(2) A member absent from any portion of a meeting or hearing, or,
where a meeting or hearing is carried over to two or more sessions,
from one or more of the sessions, shall be eligible to vote upon the
matter heard, notwithstanding such absence, provided that such
Board member shall first certify on the record that he/she has read
a transcript or listened to a recording of the session or sessions or
part thereof from which he/she was absent.
M. Meetings; hearings; procedures.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall fix the time and place for holding its
regular meetings, provided that a meeting shall be scheduled not
less than once each month and shall be held as scheduled unless
canceled for lack of applications for development to process or
other business to conduct. The Board of Adjustment may provide
for special meetings at the call of the Chair or at the request of any
two of its members, which shall be held after notice to its members
and the public in accordance with the provisions of the Open Public
Meetings Act (P.L. 1975, c. 231)188 and the rules of the Board of
Adjustment. All regular meetings and all special meetings of the
Board of Adjustment Board shall be open to the public; provided,
188. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 300-12 WATER § 300-12
285:767
however, that in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9, the Board
may meet in executive session for the purpose of discussing and
studying any matters to come before it, and these sessions shall not
be deemed a regular or special meeting.
(2) All testimony at any meeting of the Board of Adjustment shall be
given under oath.
(3) All hearings of the Board of Adjustment shall be set, noticed and
conducted in accordance with the provisions of § 300-29.
(4) The Board of Adjustment shall adopt its own rules for the conduct
of its business, meetings and hearings not inconsistent with this
chapter and the statutes of the State of New Jersey. Such rules shall
be filed with the Board Secretary, and copies thereof shall be
available to any person upon request and the payment of a fee in
accordance with § 300-9. Any rule so adopted which relates solely
to the conduct of the Board's meetings or hearings and which is not
mandated by this chapter or the statutes of the State of New Jersey
may be waived by the Board upon good cause being shown.
N. Minutes; transcripts; records; decisions.
(1) Minutes of every regular or special meeting and of every hearing
shall be kept and shall include the names of the persons appearing
and addressing the Board of Adjustment and of the persons
appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board of Adjustment,
the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor.
(2) A verbatim recording of the proceedings of every hearing, by either
stenographic, mechanical or electronic means, shall be kept.
(3) All minutes, verbatim recordings, applications, requests, exhibits
and papers filed in any proceeding before the Board of Adjustment,
and the decision and report or reports of the Board, shall constitute
the record of any matter brought before the Board. The records of
the Board's activity shall be made available for public inspection
during normal business hours at the office of the Board Secretary.
Any interested party shall have the right to compel production of
such records for use and evidence in any legal proceedings
concerning the subject matter of such records. Such interested
party shall be charged a fee for reproduction of such records in
accordance with § 300-9.
(4) Every decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be by written
resolution, which shall include findings of fact, shall refer to the
evidence in the record and to the exhibits, plans or specifications
upon which such decision is based, shall specify the reason or
reasons for such decision and shall contain a conclusion or
statement separate from the findings of fact which shall set forth
the specific relief granted, whether relief is granted subject to
expressly stated modifications or is denied. Every resolution shall
§ 300-12 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-12
285:768
expressly set forth any limitations or conditions imposed on any
approval granted or any development, work or use authorized.
(5) In reaching its decision on any such application, the Board of
Adjustment may rely on the personal knowledge of its members, on
its inspections of the property and on any reports available to it;
provided, however, that reliance on such matter shall not be
allowed unless the Board shall have made the particular
knowledge, inspection or report a matter of record at the public
hearing and afforded every party reasonable time to respond to it.
(6) The Board of Adjustment shall take no final or binding vote on any
decision pertaining to any application unless it shall first have
before it the written resolution herein required; provided, however,
that where special circumstances so warrant, the Board of
Adjustment may take final action on any such application prior to
the preparation of such resolution, but in such event it shall, before
taking such action, first state its findings and conclusions as above
required at a meeting open to the public and shall, in addition, state
the special circumstances warranting such action.
(7) In any case where this chapter, or where N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
provides that the failure of the Board of Adjustment to act within a
fixed period shall be deemed a grant or denial of or a
recommendation upon an application, such failure shall,
notwithstanding the absence of required findings and conclusions,
be considered to be a decision or recommendation of the Board
rendered on the day following the expiration of such fixed period.
(8) Within 10 days following any decision on such application, the
Zoning Board Secretary shall mail notice thereof to each person
entitled to notice pursuant to § 300-29. A brief notice of the
decision of the Board shall be placed in a newspaper having
general circulation.
(9) As to other matters brought before the Board of Adjustment, the
Board shall prepare such reports and make such communications
as it shall deem appropriate to the subject matter.
O. Powers and duties. The Board of Adjustment shall be empowered to
exercise all duties and responsibilities conferred to it by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70 and this chapter, specifically:
(1) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a, hear and decide appeals
from any action taken by an Administrative Officer pursuant to the
terms of this chapter where it is alleged that there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or refusal of such Officer based on or
made in the enforcement of this chapter. In exercising such power,
the Board of Adjustment shall have the power to reverse, affirm or
modify, in whole or in part, the order, requirement, decision or
determination subject of such appeal and, to such end, shall have
§ 300-12 WATER § 300-12
285:769
all the powers of such Administrative Officer with respect to the
subject matter of such appeal.
(2) Hear and decide requests for interpretations of the Zoning Map or
the provisions of this chapter in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70b.
(3) Hear and decide requests for interpretations of special questions
upon which the Board is authorized to pass by this chapter in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b.
(4) Review and approve or disapprove requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70c.
(5) Review and approve or disapprove requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(1), (2), (4), (5) and (6).
(6) Review and approve or disapprove site plans and subdivision plats
in connection with its review of an application for a use variance in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37, 40:55D-59189 and 40:55D-70d.
(7) Direct or order the issuance of a permit for a building or structure
in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control
basin or public area reserved on the Official Map in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34.
(8) Direct or order the issuance of a permit for a building or structure
not related to a street in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
(9) Appoint legal counsel, professional experts and other staff.
(10) Assemble data on a continuing basis as a part of a continuous
planning process, including the Annual Report required under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.1.
(11) Subject to the right of the applicant to receive a decision within the
time periods specified by this chapter, make referrals in addition to
those expressly required by this chapter to persons or agencies for
their recommendations.
(12) Aid and assist City Council and the departments and agencies of
the City in implementing general plans and in planning, developing
and completing specific projects.
(13) Review and report on any matter referred to it by City Council or
the Planning Board.
189. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55D-59 was repealed by L. 1983, c. 253, § 1, effective 7-7-1983.
§ 300-12 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-12
285:770
§ 300-13. Zoning Officer and Board Secretary positions established;
compensation; records.
(14) Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of City Council for the aid and assistance of
City Council or other agencies or officers.
(15) Upon reasonable, written request, make its special knowledge and
expertise available to any official, department, bureau, board,
commission or agency of the City, county, state or federal
governments to aid them in the performance of their respective
duties relating to the planning and development of the City and its
region, and to participate in the preparation and review of
programs or plans required by state or federal law or regulation.
(16) In furtherance of the above jurisdiction and authority, to make such
investigations, maps and reports and recommendations in
connection therewith relating to the planning and development of
the City of Pleasantville as may be necessary, appropriate and
desirable; provided, however, that the expenditures of the Board
shall not exceed the amounts appropriated therefor.
(17) Issue subpoenas, administer oaths and take testimony in the
exercise of its duties (wherein the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et
seq., shall govern).
P. Appeals. Any interested person may appeal any final decision of the
Board of Adjustment to the court of proper jurisdiction, to the Board of
Public Utility Commissioners in the cases specified in and pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-19, and, to the extent and in the manner authorized by
New Jersey law, to any court of competent jurisdiction.
A. Zoning officer.
(1) There is herewith established, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-18, a
Zoning Office for the City of Pleasantville, which Office shall be the
Administrative Office charged with the day-to-day administration of
this chapter.
(2) There is herewith established within the Zoning Office, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3 and 40:55D-18, a Zoning Officer for the City of
Pleasantville, who shall be the Administrative Officer charged with
the day-to-day administration of this chapter.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall be an employee of the City. While the
Zoning Officer may hold more than one title or position within the
City, such individual shall hold no elective office therein. The
Zoning Officer shall be compensated in the amount of funds
appropriated for such purpose by the City Council.
§ 300-12 WATER § 300-13
285:771
(4) Power and duties. The Zoning Officer shall be empowered to
exercise all duties and responsibilities conferred to it by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., including, but not limited to:
(a) The administration and enforcement of this chapter, and in
exercising such duties, shall have all the powers necessary to
such administration and enforcement.
(b) The supervision and management of the affairs and activities of
the Zoning Office and its employees, and may employ such
technical assistants, clerks, secretaries and such other persons
as shall be authorized by action of the City Council, and shall
pay for their services and any other necessary and proper
expenses, but only out of such appropriations as may from time
to time be made by the City Council for such purposes.
(c) Consistent with the express standards, purposes and intent of
this chapter, promulgate, adopt, issue and enforce such
procedural rules, regulations and forms as are, in his/her
opinion, necessary to the effective administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(d) Should the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
within nine months following the adoption of this chapter, fail
to adopt rules and regulations to govern the conduct of
business as required by § 300-11M(3) and § 300-12M(4),
respectively, the Zoning Officer shall, within one year following
the adoption of this chapter, promulgate and issue such rules.
Unless the respective Board shall, within 30 days following
such issuance, object by formal motion to such rules and adopt
rules for itself as herein required, such rules so issued shall be
deemed for all purposes to be the rules required by this
chapter to be adopted by the respective Board and shall, after
issuance, govern the conduct of the business of the respective
Boards. Rules so issued may be amended or modified by the
respective Board in the same manner as if adopted by such
Board. All rules, regulations and forms issued by the Zoning
Officer shall be kept on file in the Zoning Office, shall be filed
with the City Clerk and shall be public records of the City, open
to inspection by interested parties at reasonable times and
upon reasonable notice. Copies thereof shall be available for
sale in the Zoning Office at a fee in accordance with § 300-9.
(e) Provide a written or verbal report to City Council when
directed, but in no case less often than quarterly, summarizing
for the period since the last such report all building permits
and certificates of occupancy issued by him, all identifiable
complaints of violations filed with the Zoning Office, and
actions taken consequent thereto.
§ 300-13 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-13
285:772
B. Staff Secretaries to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
(1) There is herewith established within the Zoning Office, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-24 and 40:55D-69, Staff Secretaries for the
Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment, who shall be
the Administrative Staff Officers charged with the management of
the day-to-day functions of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment. While such position(s) shall ultimately be responsible
to the Board to which he/she is appointed, the daily activities of
such position(s) shall be supervised by the Zoning Officer.
(2) Such Secretaries shall be employees of the City. While they may
hold more than one title or position within the City, such individuals
shall hold no elective office therein. Nothing herein shall preclude
the Planning Board Secretary from serving as the Secretary to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Zoning Board Secretary from
serving as Secretary to the Planning Board. The Staff Secretaries
shall be compensated in the amount of funds appropriated for such
purpose by the City Council.
(3) Power and duties. The Staff Secretaries shall be empowered to
exercise all duties and responsibilities conferred by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-24 and 40:55D-69, including, but not limited to:
(a) Provide the agendas for and attend the meetings and hearings
of each respective Board;
(b) Inform each respective Board of all facts and information at
his/her disposal with respect to any matter brought before
such Board;
(c) Keep minutes of every meeting, including the names of persons
appearing and addressing the respective Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board,
the findings, if any, made by it and reasons therefor;
(d) Keep verbatim recordings of the proceedings of every hearing,
by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means;
(e) Give notice, 30 days prior to the expiration of the term of any
member of either such Board, of the date on which the term of
such member will expire to such member, to the City Council
and to the Mayor; and
(f) Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Zoning
Officer, this chapter and by the rules of such respective Boards.
C. Records. The Planning Board or Zoning Board Secretary, as the case
may be, shall maintain the following as public records of the City, open
to inspection by interested parties at reasonable times and upon
reasonable notice:
§ 300-13 WATER § 300-13
285:773
(1) Permanent and current records of this chapter, including all maps;
amendments; conditional use, subdivision plat and site plan
approvals and denials; interpretations; and decisions rendered by
the Zoning Office, the Planning Board, the Board of Adjustment and
the City Council, together with relevant background files and
materials.
(2) Duplicate copies of all zoning permits, numbered consecutively and
showing the fee charged therefor, issued or denied pursuant to this
chapter, together with such portions of the applications therefor as
the Zoning Officer may consider necessary to the proper
administration of this chapter.
(3) A current file of all certificates, permits or authorizations issued
pursuant to this chapter and all notices of violation, discontinuance
or removal issued by or entrusted to the Zoning Office for such time
as necessary to ensure continuous compliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(4) A current file of all interpretations issued by the Board of
Adjustment.
(5) A current file of all identifiable complaints of violations of this
chapter and the actions taken as a consequence of such complaint.
(6) Current maps locating all applications for amendment, site plan/
subdivision approvals, variances and appeals and indicating the
disposition thereof.
(7) Permanent and current records of all Planning Board and Board of
Adjustment meetings, hearings and proceedings, minutes and
transcripts taken therein and any correspondence of such Boards.
D. Applications: receipt; processing; referral to interested parties and
agencies.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall receive all applications required to be filed
pursuant to this chapter and such other applications as the
ordinances of the City may from time to time require to be filed in
such office. Such applications include, but are not necessarily
limited to, applications for:
(a) Zoning permit.
(b) Demolition permit.
(c) Mercantile license.
(d) Appeal or interpretation in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70a or b.
(e) Construction or building permit.
(f) Certificate of occupancy.
§ 300-13 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-13
285:774
(g) Site plan or subdivision approval.
(h) Variance relief in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25 and
40:55D-70c or d.
(2) Upon receipt of any such application, the Zoning Officer shall
review it for completeness, and if any deficiencies are found, shall
give notice of such deficiencies to the applicant, in writing, within
45 days following the original filing of such application. In
reviewing an application for completeness, the Zoning Officer may
request the assistance of the City Engineer, City Planner or other
such professional as may be necessary and appropriate. Any costs
incurred by the Zoning Officer for any such assistance shall be paid
from the escrow fee required of each such application.
(3) After determination that an application is complete, the Planning
Board or Zoning Board Secretary, as the case may be, shall see to
its expeditious processing, including actions to be taken by the
Zoning Officer if it is within his/her power to do so, or its prompt
referral to and retrieval from each official, department, bureau,
board, commission or agency of the City or other government with
any interest in or duty with respect to such application. To facilitate
such referrals/retrieval, the Planning Board or Zoning Board
Secretary, as the case may be, shall prepare, maintain and
continually keep current a list or lists of all officials, departments,
bureaus, boards, commissions and agencies which have, in writing,
requested an opportunity to review or comment on various
specified applications and proposals for various specified reasons
and pursuant to various specified duties and authorities.
(4) Notice of hearing. The Planning Board or Zoning Board Secretary,
as the case may be, shall give or cause to be given notice of
hearings and meetings on applications pursuant to law and this
chapter.
(5) Investigation. Whenever the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment shall so request, by general rule or specific direction,
the Zoning Officer shall conduct or cause to be conducted such
surveys, investigations, field studies, the taking of photographs,
and/or the making of charts and/or exhibits as shall be necessary or
convenient to the processing of any application filed with the City.
(6) Plan review and zoning permits. Pursuant to § 300-34, the Zoning
Officer shall review all applications for zoning permits and approve
or disapprove such applications and issue or refuse to issue such
permits based on compliance or noncompliance with the provisions
of this chapter.
(7) Acceptance of guaranties. The Planning Board or Zoning Board
Secretary, as the case may be, or his/her designee shall accept
performance and maintenance guaranties required to be paid
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 300-13 WATER § 300-13
285:775
§ 300-14. Other officials, departments, bureaus and agencies.
In addition to the jurisdiction, authority and duties conferred upon them by
other provisions of the codes and ordinances of the City of Pleasantville,
every official, department, bureau and agency of the City shall have the
(8) Notices. Pursuant to the provisions of § 300-11N(8) and
§ 300-12N(8), the Planning Board or Zoning Board Secretary, as the
case may be, shall give or cause to be given notices of actions taken
pursuant to this chapter.
E. Inspection and enforcement.
(1) In furtherance of the enforcement of this chapter, the Zoning
Officer shall undertake such regular and continuing programs of
inspection of work approved and underway and of existing
structures and uses as may be feasible and proper within the limits
of staff and funds; shall undertake such inspections as may be
necessary to the performance of the duties hereunder; and shall
receive from any person complaints alleging, with particularity, a
violation of this chapter and, when appropriate, shall cause such
investigations and inspections as may be warranted by such
complaints to be made. Upon finding the existence of any violation
of this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall proceed as provided for in
this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall cooperate with the City's Construction
Code Official, Fire Inspector, Housing Inspector or other relevant
personnel to coordinate enforcement and inspection activities
under this chapter with those conducted pursuant to the authority
vested in such personnel so as to achieve the greatest efficiency
and avoid unnecessary duplication of efforts.
(3) Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to prevent any
person entitled to relief in law or equity by reason of a violation of
the provisions of this chapter from bringing an appropriate action
to secure such relief.
F. Reports concerning valuation, assessment and taxation of land.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall promptly inform the Atlantic County Tax
Assessor of those parcels of land designated as an agricultural or
horticultural use pursuant to the provisions of the Farmland
Assessment Act of 1964 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.1 et seq.) which receive
preliminary subdivision/site plan approval pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall cooperate with the Tax Assessor to
establish a system to provide the City Tax Assessor with current
information concerning any action taken pursuant to this chapter
which might affect the valuation, assessment or taxation of any
parcel of real estate in the City.
§ 300-13 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-14
285:776
following jurisdiction, authority and duties with relation to the
administration and enforcement of this chapter:
A. Each official, department, bureau and agency shall have such duties
and responsibilities with respect to land use and development
regulations in the City as shall be conferred upon it by the various
provisions of the codes, ordinances and regulations applicable to such
official, department, bureau or agency. Where such duties and
responsibilities require such official, department, bureau or agency to
review plans or proposals for land use or development, such official,
department, bureau or agency shall inform the Zoning Officer, in
writing, of such requirement; of the particular provision of the code,
ordinance or regulation which creates such requirement; of the
particular type or category of plans or proposals which must be
reviewed; of the stage in the planning, zoning and development process
where such review would be most effective; and of the estimated time
that would be required for such review in the normal case.
B. Issuance of permits. No official, department, bureau or agency of the
City shall issue any permit, license or approval in violation of the terms
of this chapter or which could result in work or the use of buildings,
structures or land in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Every
official, department, bureau or agency of the City issuing permits,
licenses or approvals, the use of which may result in a violation of the
provisions of this chapter, shall refer the application therefor to the
Zoning Officer for a report on conformance with said provisions. The
Zoning Officer shall promptly return such application with a report
thereon, and if the report indicates that the use of such permit, license
or approval will result in a violation of the provisions of this chapter, the
license, permit or approval shall not be issued.
C. Cooperation and technical assistance. Upon reasonable request, each
official, department, bureau and agency of the City shall cooperate fully
with and offer technical aid, advice and expertise to the Planning Board,
Board of Adjustment and the Zoning Officer to the end that the goals,
policies and standards of the Master Plan and this chapter may be
expeditiously and effectively achieved.
§ 300-14 WATER § 300-14
285:777

ARTICLE V
Planning Documents and Procedures
§ 300-15. Master plan.
A. Preparation and adoption.
(1) Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28, the Planning Board shall have
authority to prepare and adopt a Master Plan for the City of
Pleasantville and, from time to time, prepare and adopt
amendments thereto and reexaminations thereof.
(2) The Master Plan shall be a compilation of policy statements, goals,
standards, maps and diagrams, recommended planning, regulatory,
fiscal and public works programs, together with all pertinent data
relative to the past, present and future trends of the City with
respect to its population, housing, economic, social and
environmental development patterns, its land, water and natural
resources and uses, its transportation facilities, public facilities and
utilities, and any other matters relevant to the present and future
patterns of life within the City, prepared and adopted by the
Planning Board, or any internally consistent and complete portion
of such compilation relating to any one or more of the aforesaid
subjects, together with such amendments thereto as may be
adopted from time to time.
(3) The Master Plan shall include as mandatory elements:
(a) A Statement of Objectives, Principles, Assumptions, Policies
and Standards upon which the constituent proposals for the
physical, economic and social development of the City are
based.
(b) A Land Use Plan Element taking into account the relationship
to the Statement detailed above, other Master Plan elements
and natural conditions, including but not necessarily limited to
topography, soil conditions, water supply, drainage, floodplain
areas, marshes and woodlands, showing the existing and
proposed location, extent and intensity of development of land
to be used in the future for varying types of residential,
commercial, industrial, recreational, educational and other
public and private purposes, uses or combination of purposes
or uses, stating the relationship of such purposes or uses to the
existing and any proposed zone plan and zoning ordinance for
the City, including a statement of the standards of population
density and development intensity recommended for the City,
showing the existing and proposed location of any airports and
the boundaries of any airport safety zones delineated pursuant
to the Air Safety and Zoning Act of 1983 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et
seq.).
§ 300-15 WATER § 300-15
285:779
(c) A Housing Plan Element pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-310,
including, but not limited to, residential standards and
proposals for the construction and improvement of housing.
(d) A specific policy statement indicating the relationship of the
proposed development of the City, as developed in the Master
Plan to:
[1] The master plans of contiguous municipalities;
[2] The Atlantic County Master Plan;
[3] The State Development and Redevelopment Plan; and
[4] The Atlantic County Solid Waste Management Plan
required pursuant to the Solid Waste Management Act
(N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq.).
(4) The Master Plan may include as optional elements:
(a) A Circulation Plan Element showing the location and types of
facilities for all modes of transportation required for the
efficient movement of people and goods into, about and
through the municipality, taking into account the functional
highway classification system of the Federal Highway
Administration and the types, locations, conditions and
availability of existing and proposed transportation facilities,
including air, water, road and rail;
(b) A Utility Service Plan Element analyzing the need for and
showing the future general location of water supply and
distribution facilities, drainage and flood control facilities,
sewerage and waste treatment, solid waste disposal and
provision for other related utilities, and including any
stormwater management plan required pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93 et seq.;
(c) A Community Facilities Plan Element showing the existing and
proposed location and type of educational or cultural facilities,
historic sites, libraries, hospitals, firehouses, police stations
and other related facilities, including their relation to the
surrounding areas;
(d) A Recreation Plan Element showing a comprehensive system of
areas and public sites for recreation;
(e) A Conservation Plan Element providing for the preservation,
conservation and utilization of natural resources, including, to
the extent appropriate, open space, water supply, energy,
forests, soils, marshes, wetlands, harbors, rivers and other
waters, fisheries, endangered or threatened species, wildlife
and other natural resources, and which systemically analyzes
the impact of each other component and element of the Master
§ 300-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-15
285:780
Plan on the present and future preservation, conservation and
utilization of those resources;
(f) An Economic Plan Element considering all aspects of economic
development and sustained economic vitality, including a
comparison of the types of employment expected to be
provided by the economic development to be promoted with
the characteristics of the labor pool resident in the City and
nearby areas and an analysis of the stability and diversity of
the economic development to be promoted;
(g) (To the extent applicable) A Historic Preservation Plan Element
indicating the location and significance of historic sites and
historic districts in the City, identifying the standards used to
assess worthiness for historic site or district identification, and
analyzing the impact of each component and element of the
Master Plan on the preservation of historic sites and districts;
(h) A Recycling Plan Element which incorporates the State
Recycling Plan goals, including provisions for the collection,
disposition and recycling of recyclable materials designated in
the City's recycling ordinance, and for the collection,
disposition and recycling of recyclable materials within any
development proposal for the construction of 50 or more units
of single-family residential housing or 25 or more units of
multifamily residential housing and any commercial or
industrial development proposal for the utilization of 1,000
square feet or more of land;
(i) (To the extent applicable) A Farmland Preservation Plan
Element, including an inventory of farm properties in the City,
a map of significant areas of agricultural land, a statement of
municipal ordinances supporting and promoting agriculture as
a business, a plan for preserving as much farmland as possible
in the short term by leveraging monies made available by
N.J.S.A. 13:8C-1 et seq., through a variety of mechanisms
(including, but not limited to, utilizing option agreements,
installment purchases and encouraging donations of
permanent development easements);
(j) (To the extent applicable) A Development Transfer Plan
Element which sets forth the public purposes, the locations of
sending and receiving zones and the technical details of a
development transfer program based on the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-141;
(k) An Educational Facilities Plan Element incorporating the
purposes and goals of the long-range facilities plan required to
be submitted to the Commissioner of Education by school
districts pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:7G-4;
§ 300-15 WATER § 300-15
285:781
(l) A Green Buildings and Environmental Sustainability Plan
Element providing for, encouraging and promoting the efficient
use of natural resources and the installation and usage of
renewable energy systems by considering the impact of
buildings on the local, regional and global environment,
allowing ecosystems to function naturally, conserving and
reusing water, on-site treatment of stormwater, and optimizing
climatic conditions through site orientation and design;
(m) Appendixes or separate reports containing the technical
foundation for the Master Plan and its constituent elements;
(n) A proposed Official Map;
(o) A proposed capital improvement program developed in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29; and
(p) Such other elements as the Planning Board may find useful or
appropriate.
(5) The Master Plan and its plan elements may be divided into
subplans and subplan elements projected according to periods of
time or staging sequences.
(6) General purpose and effect. Upon adoption, the Master Plan shall
be considered an official statement of the policies of the City of
Pleasantville with respect to the existing conditions and character
and evolving (re)development of the various areas of the City; the
proper objectives, standards and directions for future
maintenance, growth and (re)development; the means to be
employed to encourage future (re)development in the City in a
manner that will protect such existing conditions and character;
and the actions and programs to be undertaken by the City with
respect to such issues.
(7) Binding effect.
(a) Upon adoption of the Master Plan, no development regulation,
Official Map or capital improvement program relating to the
physical maintenance or development of the City or any land
within it shall be enacted, established, amended or varied, and
no public building, public improvement, public site or right-ofway
or other public structure or land shall be authorized,
established, developed, redeveloped or modified in location or
extent, whether by a public agency or a developer pursuant to
this chapter, other than in accordance with the policies, goals,
objectives, principles and standards of the plan or relevant
element thereof.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the governing body may adopt
a development regulation or an amendment or revision
thereto, an Official Map or an amendment or revision thereto,
§ 300-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-15
285:782
or a capital improvement program or an amendment or
revision thereto, which, in whole or in part, is inconsistent
with or not designed to effectuate the Master Plan, but only
upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized
membership of the City Council, with the reasons for so acting
recorded as part of the minutes of such action.
(8) Review for compliance. Upon adoption of the Master Plan, the
City's development regulations, Capital Improvement Program, if
any, Official Map and public projects shall be reviewed for
compliance with said Master Plan pursuant to the provisions of
§ 300-11O. and recommendations thereto necessary to bring such
documents into compliance with the Master Plan shall be promptly
considered.
(9) For the purposes of § 300-15A(6), (7) and (8), the operative Master
Plan for the City of Pleasantville as of the effective date of this
chapter is the 2008 Comprehensive Master Plan Update, City of
Pleasantville, Atlantic County, New Jersey, prepared by Remington,
Vernick & Walberg Engineers, dated September 8, 2008, and
adopted by the Pleasantville Planning Board on November 13,
2008.
B. Master Plan procedures.
(1) Plan development.
(a) The Planning Board shall, with such assistance from City staff
and professionals as it may deem necessary and appropriate,
exercise the powers and duties delegated to it by this chapter
in the continuing development and revisions of the Master
Plan.
(b) The process of plan development and revision is necessarily an
informal one, not readily adaptable to rigid procedures.
However, the Planning Board, staff and professionals shall, in
this undertaking, make all reasonable efforts to obtain the
views, comments and criticisms of interested departments,
bureaus, agencies, organizations, groups, firms and residents
of the City.
(2) Public hearing. The Planning Beard shall, prior to the adoption or
amendment of the Master Plan, set, advertise and conduct at least
one public hearing thereon in accordance with the requirements
for the Master Plan in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10, 40:55D-11 and
40:55D-13.
(3) Adoption. Upon development of and public hearing on the Master
Plan pursuant to Subsection B(1) and (2) hereinabove, the Planning
Board may adopt, amend or reject the Master Plan or any
constituent part thereof.
§ 300-15 WATER § 300-15
285:783
(4) Amendment.
(a) The Master Plan or any part thereof may be amended at any
time in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. Such
amendment may be initiated by City Council, the Planning
Board or by any owner of property affected by the provisions of
the Master Plan sought to be amended.
(b) Amendments initiated by City Council or the Planning Board
shall be processed as provided in Subsection B(1), (2) and (3)
above, except that any amendment referred to the Planning
Board by the City Council shall be set for hearing with all
reasonable dispatch, and the Planning Board shall act on such
proposed amendment not later than 30 days following the
conclusion of such hearing.
(c) Requests for amendments initiated by an owner of affected
property shall commence with an application addressed to the
Planning Board and filed with the Zoning Officer.
Nonrefundable application and hearing fees, in accordance
with § 300-9, shall accompany each such application. The
application shall be in such form and contain such information
as may from time to time be established by the Planning Board,
but shall in no event contain less than the following
information:
[1] The name and address of the owner-applicant;
[2] The address of the affected property;
[3] Text and maps showing the proposed change or changes in
the Master Plan;
[4] A statement of the reason and necessity for the proposed
change(s);
[5] A statement of any other applications relating to the
affected property which have been or are intended to be
filed pursuant to this chapter, or any other law, ordinance
or regulation of the City, county, state or federal
government;
[6] A statement of the present use of the affected property and
any proposed change in such use; and
[7] Such other and further information as the Zoning Officer
or Planning Board may deem to be necessary or
appropriate to a full and proper consideration and
disposition of the particular application.
(d) Upon receipt of a complete application by the Zoning Officer, a
hearing thereon shall be set, noticed and conducted by the
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of this
§ 300-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-15
285:784
chapter. Within 30 days following the conclusion of such
hearing, the Board shall either refuse the application or shall
adopt the proposed amendment, with or without modifications.
The Zoning Officer shall give notice of such decision pursuant
to this chapter.
(5) Reexamination.
(a) The governing body shall, at least once every six years, provide
for a general reexamination of the Master Plan, this chapter
and all other development regulations adopted by the City.
Such reexamination shall be conducted by the Planning Board,
with such assistance as it may deem necessary and
appropriate.
(b) The Planning Board shall prepare a written report, setting
forth the findings of such reexamination, and shall transmit a
copy thereof to the City Council, the Atlantic County Planning
Board and the Municipal Clerks of each municipality adjoining
the City limits of the City of Pleasantville. Said report shall
address:
[1] The major problems and objectives relating to land
development confronting the City at the time of the
adoption or last revision or reexamination of the Master
Plan;
[2] The extent to which such problems and objectives have
been reduced or have increased subsequent to such date;
[3] The extent to which there have been significant changes in
the assumptions, policies and objectives forming the basis
for such Master Plan or regulations as last revised, with
particular regard to the density and distribution of
population and land uses, housing conditions, circulation,
conservation of natural resources and change in state,
county and City policies and objectives;
[4] The specific changes recommended for such Master Plan
or regulations, if any, including underlying objectives,
policies and standards, or whether a new Master Plan or
new regulations should be prepared; and
[5] The recommendations of the Planning Board concerning
the incorporation of Redevelopment Plans adopted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq., into the Land Use
Plan Element of the Master Plan, and recommended
changes, if any, in the local development regulations
necessary to effectuate any such Redevelopment Plans.
(6) Filing. Upon adoption of the Master Plan, or any part thereof or any
amendment or reexamination thereto, the Zoning Officer shall
§ 300-15 WATER § 300-15
285:785
cause certified copies thereof to be placed on file in the Zoning
Office and with the City Clerk, and shall cause a certificate
evidencing the adoption of such plan or part or amendment thereof
to be filed with the County Clerk of Atlantic County.
(7) Review for compliance and document amendments. Following the
adoption of a Master Plan or any amendment thereto or
reexamination thereof:
(a) A review of such document shall be conducted by all City
officials, departments, bureaus, boards, commissions or
agencies whose activities, rules or regulations might be
impacted by such Master Plan, or amendments or
reexaminations thereof, and shall promptly consider such
amendments thereto necessary to bring such activities, rules
or regulations into compliance with the Master Plan.
(b) The Zoning Officer or designee shall review such Master Plan,
or amendments or reexaminations thereof, to determine what,
if any, impacts the contents of such document might have on
the provisions of this chapter, and shall address any issues
related to the continuing conformity of this chapter with the
Master Plan in a report to be prepared for the governing body.
(c) Upon receipt of such report, the governing body shall, at its
discretion, adopt such ordinances as it deems necessary and
appropriate to effectuate the Master Plan, or amendments or
reexaminations thereof.
(8) Review of capital projects for compliance with the Master Plan.
(a) Upon adoption of the Master Plan, the City Council and every
Housing Authority, Parking Authority, Highway Authority,
Special District or other authority, Redevelopment Agency,
Board of Education or other similar public agency, whether
state, county or municipal, shall, before taking any action
necessitating the expenditure of any public funds incidental to
the location, character or extent of any capital improvement
project within the City of Pleasantville, refer the action
involving such specific project to the Planning Beard for review
and recommendation in conjunction with the Master Plan.
(b) Within 45 days following any such submission, or such shorter
period as the submitting agency may require due to the
necessity of acting on the subject matter within time limits
imposed by this chapter for such action or such longer period
as may be agreed to by the submitting agency, the Planning
Board shall review such action for conformity with the Master
Plan and, if necessary, shall confer with the submitting agency
with regard to suggested alterations in the proposed project,
and shall transmit its recommendation(s) for approval,
disapproval or modification of the proposed project and action
§ 300-15 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-15
285:786
§ 300-16. Official Map.
to the submitting agency, stating, in detail, the reasons for
such recommendation(s).
(c) No such agency shall take any action with respect to a matter
submitted pursuant to this subsection prior to the receipt of
the Planning Board's recommendation(s) or the expiration of
the aforesaid time period without such recommendation(s)
having been issued by the Board.
(d) With respect to submissions by any agency, department or
official of the City, if the Planning Board has issued its approval
or has failed to act with respect to a submission within the
aforesaid time periods, the submitting agency may then, but
not before, proceed to take action on the proposed project. If
the Planning Board has recommended disapproval, then the
submitting agency shall take no action to approve the proposed
project and shall undertake no work with respect to the
proposed project unless such action, work or project shall have
first been approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of the
full authorized membership of the City Council on a motion
expressly setting forth the reasons for such action.
(e) No City official, agency or department shall issue any permit,
approval or authorization necessary in conjunction with any
capital project subject to this subsection, nor issue or authorize
any funds or expenditures for such project, unless the agency
responsible for such project shall have first complied with the
provisions of this subsection.
A. Preparation; adoption.
(1) In conjunction with the preparation of the Master Plan, the
Planning Board shall prepare and the City Council may, by
ordinance, adopt or amend an Official Map of the City of
Pleasantville pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in
this chapter.
(2) The Official Map may consist of one or more maps or map pages
depicting the streets, public drainageways, flood control basins and
public areas planned, proposed and existing in the City, and shall
be final and conclusive with respect to the location and size of such
streets, drainage and flood control systems and public areas shown
thereon, whether the same shall be improved or unimproved,
existing, planned or proposed.
(3) The Official Map shall implement and shall be consistent with the
Master Plan, except to the extent that deviations from the Master
Plan are authorized pursuant to this chapter.
B. Effect.
§ 300-15 WATER § 300-16
285:787
(1) Reservation of public ways and areas. Upon adoption of the Official
Map, or any amendments thereto, the City may, upon receiving an
application for development, reserve for future public use the
aforesaid streets, ways, basins and areas in the manner provided in
this chapter.
(2) Permits in mapped areas. Upon adoption of the Official Map, or any
amendment thereto, no permit for any building or structure in the
bed of any street, drainageway, flood control basin or public area
shown thereon shall be issued by any official, board or agency of
the City unless an Official Map variance has been authorized and
the issuance of such permit has been directed pursuant to this
chapter.
(3) Permits for structures not abutting a street. Upon adoption of the
Official Map, or any amendment thereto, no permit for the erection
of any building or structure shall be issued unless:
(a) A street shown on the Official Map, or any amendment thereto,
and improved in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter, provides access to such building or structure;
(b) A street so improved and providing such access is either an
existing public street, a street shown on a plat approved by the
Planning Board or a street shown on a plat duly filed with the
Atlantic County recorder's office prior to the adoption of any
ordinance requiring the approval of such plat by the City of
Pleasantville; or
(c) A variance from such requirements has been granted and the
issuance of such permit has been directed pursuant to
§ 300-37E.
(4) Public improvements. Public improvements shown on the Official
Map, whether provided by a public agency or by a developer
pursuant to this chapter, shall be laid out, designed, sized and
installed as shown on the Official Map.
C. Binding effect. The Official Map, upon being proposed by the Planning
Board as part of the Master Plan, shall have the same binding effect as
the Master Plan. In addition, following its adoption by the City Council,
the Official Map shall have the effect specified in this section.
D. Official Map procedures.
(1) Map development. The Planning Board, with the assistance of the
Zoning Officer, shall exercise the powers and duties delegated to it
by this chapter in the preparation of a proposed Official Map, and
amendments thereto, in conjunction with the adoption of a Master
Plan.
§ 300-16 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-16
285:788
(2) Hearing on the proposed Official Map. The Planning Board shall,
prior to making its recommendations on a proposed Official Map to
the City Council, set, notice and conduct at least one public hearing
on the proposed Official Map. Such hearing may be conducted
simultaneously with the hearing required on the Master Plan
pursuant to § 300-15B(2), but separate notices of such hearings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-15.
(3) Adoption. Upon development of the proposed Official Map and
holding a public hearing on the proposed Official Map pursuant to
Subsection D(1) and (2) above, the Planning Board shall
recommend such Official Map to City Council for adoption as the
Official Map of the City. City Council may, after setting, noticing
and conducting a hearing pursuant to this chapter, adopt such
Official Map, with or without modifications, by the adoption of any
ordinance so providing; provided, however, that no modification of
the Official Map as recommended by the Planning Board shall be
adopted except by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full
authorized membership of City Council, with the reasons for said
modifications recorded in the minutes of the Council. Where City
Council adopts an Official Map as recommended by the Planning
Board, but which is inconsistent with the Master Plan, said
adoption shall be by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full
authorized membership of City Council, with the reasons for said
inconsistencies recorded in the minutes of the Council. The Zoning
Officer shall give notice of such decision pursuant to this chapter.
(4) Amendment.
(a) The Official Map, or any part thereof, may be amended at
anytime in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
Such amendment may be initiated by City Council, the
Planning Board or by any owner of property affected by the
provisions of the Official Map sought to be amended.
(b) Prior to the layout, widening, changing the course of or closing
of any street or widening or changing the boundaries of a flood
control basin in a public area, an amendment to the Official
Map must be obtained in conformity with the requested
change.
(c) After adoption by the Planning Board of the Master Plan, or
amendments thereto, the Planning Board shall initiate an
amendment to the Official Map pursuant to this section, which
amendment shall reflect any such changes in the Master Plan.
(d) After adoption by City Council of a Capital Improvement
Program or any amendments thereto, the Planning Board shall
initiate an amendment to the Official Map pursuant to this
§ 300-16 WATER § 300-16
285:789
section, which amendment shall reflect any such changes in
the Capital Improvement Program.
(e) Amendments initiated by City Council or the Planning Board
shall be processed as provided in § 300-16D, except that any
amendment referred to the Planning Board by City Council
shall be set for hearing with all reasonable dispatch, and the
Planning Board shall act on such proposed amendment not
later than 30 days following the conclusion of such hearing.
(f) Amendments initiated by an owner of affected property shall
commence with an application addressed to the Planning
Board and filed with the Zoning Officer. Nonrefundable
application and hearing fees, in accordance with § 300-9, shall
accompany each such application. The application shall be in
such form and contain such information as may from time to
time be established by the Planning Board, but shall in no
event contain less than the following information:
[1] The name and address of the owner-applicant;
[2] The address of the affected property;
[3] Text and maps showing the proposed change or changes in
the Official Map;
[4] A statement of the reason and necessity for the proposed
change(s);
[5] A statement of any other applications relating to the
affected property which have been or are intended to be
filed pursuant to this chapter, or any other law, ordinance
or regulation of the City, county, state or federal
government;
[6] A statement of the present use of the affected property and
any proposed change in such use; and
[7] Such other and further information as the Zoning Officer
or Planning Board may deem to be necessary or
appropriate to a full and proper consideration and
disposition of the particular application.
(g) Upon receipt of a complete application by the Zoning Officer, a
hearing thereon shall be set, noticed and conducted by the
Planning Board in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Within 30 days following the conclusion of such
hearing, the Board shall either refuse the application or shall
adopt the proposed amendment, with or without modifications.
The Zoning Officer shall give notice of such decision pursuant
to this chapter.
§ 300-16 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-16
285:790
(5) Map filing. The ordinance by which City Council adopts the Official
Map, or any amendment thereto, shall provide that the Zoning
Officer shall cause certified copies thereof to be placed on file in
the Zoning Office and with the City Clerk, and shall cause a
certificate evidencing the adoption of such plan or part or
amendment thereof to be filed with the County Clerk of Atlantic
County.
§ 300-16 WATER § 300-16
285:791

ARTICLE VI
Zoning Districts, Zoning Map and Boundary Lines
§ 300-17. Zoning districts.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, there is herein established the following
zoning districts for the City of Pleasantville.
(1) Residential zoning districts.
R-50 Single-Family Residential (50 feet frontage and 5,000
s.f.)
R-60 Single-Family Residential (60 feet frontage and 6,000
s.f.)
R-75 Single-Family Residential (75 feet frontage and 7,500
s.f.)
R-D Residential Duplex
MF Multifamily Residential
(2) Commercial zoning districts.
CBD Central Business District
NC Neighborhood Commercial
GC General Commercial
RC Regional Commercial
RSC Regional Shopping Center
LI Light Industrial
(3) Specialty zoning districts.
BMU Bayside Mixed-Use
CEM Cemetery
CONSERVConservation
WR Waterfront Residential
(4) Overlay zoning districts.
Bayside Mixed-Use Overlay Zone
City Center Support Overlay
Franklin Boulevard Professional Office Overlay
Main Street Neighborhood Commercial Overlay
New Road Professional Office Overlay
B. In addition to zoning districts, this chapter recognizes the following
redevelopment plans associated with specific redevelopment areas and
rehabilitation areas designated under the New Jersey Local
§ 300-17 WATER § 300-17
285:793
§ 300-18. Zoning District Map and district boundary lines
established; interpretation.
Redevelopment and Housing Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-6, 40A:12A-7 and
40A:12A-14) .
Block 189 Rehabilitation Area
California Avenue Rehabilitation Area
CARA Cambria Avenue Redevelopment Area
CCRA Center City Redevelopment Area
LBRA Lakes Bay Waterfront Redevelopment Area
NARA Narcissus Avenue Rehabilitation Area
WTRA Woodland Terrace Rehabilitation Area
A. Zoning Map established and incorporated.
(1) There is hereby established and made part of this chapter maps
entitled § 300-75, Base Zoning, and § 300-76, Overlay Zoning,
prepared by Remington, Vernick & Walberg Engineers (collectively
referred to herein as "Zoning Map").
(2) The Zoning Map and all notations, references and other
information depicted thereon shall have the same force and effect
as if fully set forth or described in this chapter.
(3) The Zoning Map shall be properly attested and kept on file in the
office of the Zoning Officer.
B. Zoning district boundary lines.
(1) The boundaries of each zoning district established by this chapter
are depicted on the Zoning Map.
(2) The boundaries of each City-designated redevelopment area, or
rehabilitation area, for which a redevelopment plan has been
adopted were established via the individual ordinances adopting
each respective redevelopment plan and are similarly depicted on
the Zoning Map.
(3) Interpretation. In the event that any uncertainty exists with respect
to the intended boundaries of the various zoning districts as shown
on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply. Unless
otherwise indicated on the Zoning Map:
(a) Zoning district boundary lines shall be construed to coincide
with the center lines of a man-made street, alley, parkway,
railroad or other right-of-way or such lines as may be extended
therefrom.
§ 300-17 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-18
285:794
(b) Where a zoning district boundary line depicted on the Zoning
Map appears to coincide with the line of a man-made street,
alley, parkway, railroad or other right-of-way, the center line of
such man-made street, alley, parkway, railroad or other rightof-
way shall be construed to be the boundary of such zoning
district.
(c) Where a zoning district boundary line depicted on the Zoning
Map appears to coincide with a natural shoreline or waterline
of a bay, lake, pond or other such feature, such lines shall be
construed to be the boundary of such zoning district.
(d) Where a zoning district boundary line depicted on the Zoning
Map appears to coincide with a platted lot line, such platted
line shall be construed to be the boundary of such zoning
district.
(e) Any zoning district boundary line not conforming with the
foregoing Subsection B(3)(a) through (d) shall be determined
by the use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map.
(f) Where a single lot held in single ownership on the effective
date of this chapter is divided by one or more zoning district
boundary line(s), the entire lot shall be construed to be within
the less restrictive of the zoning districts dividing such lot,
unless any portion of the lot's frontage lies within a commercial
zoning district, wherein the entire lot shall be construed to be
within the commercial zoning district. Individual lots in
common ownership but considered merged by the Tax
Assessor shall not be considered "a single lot held in single
ownership" for the purposes of this section.
(g) Zoning Map dimensions are in feet and are measured
horizontally.
(h) Zoning district boundary lines extend vertically in both
directions and apply to all air, surface and subsurface rights
attendant to a particular lot.
(i) Overlay zoning district boundary lines for the Main Street
Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District shall be considered
to be the lesser of one lot or 250 feet from the street line in
depth.
(j) In cases of uncertainty, disagreement or dispute as to the true
location of any zoning district boundary line, conclusive
determination of such location shall lie with the Zoning Board
of Adjustment.
§ 300-18 WATER § 300-18
285:795

ARTICLE VII
Zoning District Regulations
§ 300-19. General district regulations.
Following the effective date of this chapter, the following regulations shall
apply to development in all zoning districts, specialty zoning districts and
overlay zoning districts in the City of Pleasantville:
A. The regulations, standards, controls and designations established by
this chapter apply to every structure, lot and use within each zoning
district in the City. Such regulations were crafted with reasonable
consideration to, among other things, the character of the various
zoning districts within the City and their peculiar suitability to
particular uses and building controls, and with a view of conserving the
value of property and encouraging the most appropriate uses of lands
for the various sections of the City.
B. No building or structure shall be erected, placed, moved, altered,
converted, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, extended, reduced
repaired maintained, occupied or used, in whole or in part, nor shall any
lands be designed, used or physically altered for any purpose or in any
manner except in conformity with regulations established by this
chapter for the zoning district in which such building or land is located.
C. Required. No activity pursuant to § 300-19B shall be undertaken unless
a zoning permit evidencing the compliance of such use, building or
structure with the provisions of this chapter shall have first been issued
pursuant to § 300-34. Exceptions to this provision are exempt
development and any use, building or structure requiring subdivision or
site plan approval and/or variance relief by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
D. No yard or open space required in connection with any building or use
shall be considered as providing any required yard or open space for
any other building or use on the same or other lot.
E. No lot shall be formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building
unless such building, all yards and open spaces connected therewith
and the remaining lot comply with all requirements of this chapter for
the zoning district in which such lot is located. No permit shall be
issued for the erection of a building on any new lot thus created unless
such building and lot comply with the provisions of this chapter.
F. Uses not expressly permitted by this chapter are prohibited.
G. Unless otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, no more than
one principal building and one principal use shall be permitted on a lot.
H. No lot, building, structure or use, whether principal or accessory, shall
cause any noise, dust, heat, smoke, fumes, odor, glare, flash, vibration,
shock wave, electronic impulses, radiation, effluent, or any other
§ 300-19 WATER § 300-19
285:797
externality of whatever type or source, which shall result in a nuisance,
as herein defined, of sufficient intensity to impact the quiet enjoyment
and/or routine activities of neighboring or nearby lots, buildings,
structures or uses.
I. No flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored above
ground, except for fuel tanks or drums expressly designed and rated for
such purpose, and which are directly connected with energy-producing
devices or heating appliances located and operated on the same lot as
such tanks or drums.
J. No outdoor storage facility shall be permitted unless enclosed by an
approved safety fence and supported by an adequate concrete
foundation. Such facility shall be screened from view by appropriate
landscaping.
K. No outdoor storage of waste, trash, garbage, refuse, recycling, or other
like and similar solid waste or discarded materials shall be permitted
unless enclosed in a container with an operable lid or other closing
mechanism designed for such purpose, which shall be located within a
facility described in § 300-19J.
L. No materials or waste shall be deposited upon a lot in such form or
manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or
forces.
M. No use or activity associated with a use shall encroach onto a public
right-of-way or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation thereon.
N. Unless otherwise specifically permitted by this chapter, no
merchandise, products, appliances, equipment or similar materials or
objects shall be stored or displayed outside except in conformance with
§ 300-19I through M. Additionally, no such item shall be so stored or
displayed unless:
(1) It is intended to be used or sold on the subject premises.
(2) With the exception of sales merchandise to be displayed during
daylight hours only, all such stored or displayed items are fully
screened from view.
(3) Provisions in Subsection N(1) and (2) do not apply to inventoried
vehicles for sale or rent or to vehicles parked overnight that are
necessary and required for the operation of the facility upon which
said vehicles are located.
O. Access for emergency responders. In order to provide for proper
emergency access to buildings and structures for fire, police and other
emergency responders, all development within the City of Pleasantville
shall provide:
§ 300-19 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-19
285:798
(1) An open and clear driveway or access lane for a minimum of 12 feet
of horizontal and vertical clearance to within 25 feet of any
principal building.
(2) Such access lane shall be maintained clear of any obstructions or
vegetative growth, other than those provided via an approved
landscaping plan.
(3) The Fire Official may require and designate public or private fire
lanes as necessary for the efficient and effective operation of fire
apparatus.
(4) No building or structure shall be situated closer than 15 feet from
an adjacent building or structure, whether on the same lot or
adjacent lots.
P. Flag lots. Flag lots are prohibited.
Q. Temporary uses. In order to provide the City with a degree of flexibility
in the approval process, and to relieve users of the requirement to make
application for land uses approvals for certain limited uses of lands and
buildings, temporary uses are permitted as, and only as, expressly
provided herein.
(1) No temporary use shall be established or maintained unless a
zoning permit evidencing the compliance of such use with the
provisions of this section and other applicable provisions of this
chapter shall have first been issued pursuant to § 300-34.
(2) In addition to all of the use limitations applicable in the zoning
district in which it is located, no temporary use shall be permitted
unless it complies with the following restrictions:
(a) No temporary use shall be operated during any hours or on any
days of the week except such as are designated by the Zoning
Officer in the zoning permit required by Subsection Q(1)
herein on the basis of the nature of the temporary use and the
character of the surrounding area and uses.
(b) No sign in connection with a temporary use shall be permitted
except in accordance with the provisions of §§ 300-57 through
300-64.
(3) Particular temporary uses permitted. Subject to the use limitations
set forth in this section as to the specific regulations and time limits
for temporary uses, and subject to all other applicable regulations
of the district in which the temporary use is to be located, the
following temporary uses of land, and no others, are permitted in
the zoning districts, and only the zoning districts, herein specified:
(a) Mobile homes. Mobile homes shall be permitted in any district
as a temporary residence during the reconstruction of a
dwelling unit damaged or destroyed by any means not within
§ 300-19 WATER § 300-19
285:799
the control of the owner. Such use shall be limited to the period
of such reconstruction and, in any event, no longer than 12
months following such damage or destruction. No such use
shall be undertaken unless such mobile home shall have first
been properly connected to all required public utilities.
(b) Craft shows, exhibits and sales. Indoor and outdoor art and
craft shows, exhibits and sales on private property or, subject
to the approval of the agency having jurisdiction, on any public
property in any commercial zoning district and, subject to
proper approval of the relevant authorities, in any public park
in a residential zoning district shall be permitted. Such use
shall be limited to a period not to exceed five days.
(c) Christmas tree/holiday ornament sales. The sale of Christmas
trees or other holiday ornaments shall be permitted in any
commercial zoning district and in any residential zoning
district on property owned by any not-for-profit group or
organization when conducted by such group or organization,
and when approved by the Zoning Officer on the basis of the
adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions and traffic
access, and the absence of undue adverse impact on other
properties in such residential district. Such use shall be limited
to a period not to exceed 60 days and need not comply with the
yard and setback requirements of this chapter, except that no
tree or ornament shall be displayed so as to obstruct the sight
triangles required by § 300-47B.
(d) Construction staging, contractors' office trailers and related
construction uses and structures. Contractors' offices and
equipment sheds containing no sleeping or cooking
accommodations, construction staging and all other uses and
structures related to the construction of a project shall be
permitted in any district when accessory to a construction
project. Such uses and structures shall be limited to a period
not to exceed the duration of such project.
(e) Real estate office trailers. Real estate office trailers containing
no sleeping or cooking accommodations (unless located in a
model dwelling unit) and model dwelling units in any zoning
district when accessory to a new development or renovation to
an existing development. Such use shall be limited to the
earlier of the period of the active selling or leasing of units in
such development or 45 days after the issuance of a temporary
certificate of occupancy for the last such unit to be sold or
leased. Upon the occurrence of either event, such real estate
offices shall be removed. In no event shall the temporary use
be continued once the last temporary certificate of occupancy
or certificate of occupancy for the development has been
issued.
§ 300-19 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-19
285:800
§ 300-20. Conformity required; nonconforming uses and structures.
The following provisions shall apply to all buildings and uses existing on
the effective date of this chapter, wherein such buildings and uses do not
conform to the requirements set forth in this chapter, to all buildings and
uses that became nonconforming by reason of any subsequent amendment
to this chapter or the Zoning Map which is a part hereof, and to all
conforming uses.
(f) Carnivals, circuses or tent revivals. A carnival, circus or tent
revival shall be permitted in any commercial zoning district or
in any residential zoning district on property owned by any notfor-
profit group or organization or place of worship, when
approved by the Zoning Officer on the basis of the adequacy of
the parcel size, parking provisions and traffic access and the
absence of undue adverse impact on surrounding properties in
the residential district. Such use shall be limited to a period not
to exceed 21 days and need not comply with the front yard
requirements of this chapter, except that no use, structures or
equipment shall be so located as to obstruct the sight triangles
required by § 300-47B. Such use need not comply with the
maximum height requirements of this chapter.
(g) Freestanding outdoor produce sales, flea markets and other
similar uses. These uses shall be permitted in the Regional
Commercial Zoning District on property owned by a not-forprofit
group. The use shall be limited to a maximum of five days
of operation at any one period, not to exceed a frequency of
four times a year. The rescheduling of rain-out days will be
approved by the Zoning Officer, but under no circumstances
shall the days be added to another scheduled five-day event.
No improvements shall be required on the property on which
these uses are located, but, at a minimum, the site area shall
be clean and well maintained at all times.
(4) Bulk regulations. Except as expressly provided otherwise in
Subsection Q(3), every temporary use shall comply with the bulk
regulations applicable in the zoning district in which such
temporary use is located.
(5) Parking and loading. Before approving any temporary use, the
Zoning Officer shall make an assessment of the total number of offstreet
parking and loading spaces which will be reasonably
required for such use, on the basis of the particular use, its
intensity and the availability of other parking and loading facilities
in the area, and shall approve such temporary use only if such offstreet
parking and loading is provided.
A. Except as provided in § 300-20A(5), following the effective date of this
chapter, any use, building or structure lawfully existing at the time of
enactment of this chapter, but not in conformity with the provisions of
§ 300-19 WATER § 300-20
285:801
this chapter for the zoning district in which such use, building or
structure is located, may be continued indefinitely, subject to the
following limitations:
(1) Expansion or alteration. No nonconforming use, building or
structure shall be enlarged, extended, increased, altered or
relocated to a different portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied
by such use, building or structure on the effective date of this
chapter, or of any applicable amendment thereto, nor shall any
external evidence of such nonconforming use, building or structure
be increased by any means whatsoever, except whereby through
such action the use, building or structure is made conforming.
(2) Change from nonconforming to nonconforming. No nonconforming
use, building or structure shall be changed to another
nonconforming use, building or structure without appropriate
variance relief from the Board of Adjustment.
(3) Restoration of nonconforming buildings.
(a) Any nonconforming building or structure which shall be
damaged by reason of event of windstorm, flood, fire, explosion
or other natural or man-made disaster, of any kind, may be
restored to its pre-event condition within 12 months of such
damage. No action resulting in an increase in any structural
nonconformity shall be made without approval of the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
(b) If the restoration of such building is not completed within said
twelve-month period, such building shall be deemed to have
been abandoned, unless a use shall have been carried on
without interruption in an undamaged portion of such building.
In case of such abandonment, such building or structure may
not be rebuilt, restored or repaired except in conformity with
this chapter.
(c) In the event that such damage to the nonconforming building
or structure exceeds 50% of its replacement value as
calculated by the City's Construction Code Official as of the
date of the damage, such building or structure shall be deemed
to be completely destroyed, and such building or structure may
not be rebuilt, restored or repaired except in conformity with
this chapter.
(4) Restoration of conforming building with nonconforming use.
(a) An otherwise conforming building or structure hosting a
nonconforming use wherein such building or structure shall be
damaged by reason of event of windstorm, flood, fire, explosion
or other natural or man-made disaster, of any kind, may be
restored to its pre-event condition and the nonconforming use
reinstated within 12 months of such damage. No action
§ 300-20 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-20
285:802
resulting in an increase in any nonconformity shall be made
without approval of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be.
(b) If the restoration of such building or structure is not completed
such that the nonconforming use is resumed within said
twelve-month period, the physical operation of the
nonconforming use shall be deemed to have ceased, unless
such nonconforming use shall have been carried on without
interruption in an undamaged portion of such building.
(5) Continuation of use upon destruction of structure. Where a
nonconforming use is undertaken in a nonconforming structure,
the destruction of the nonconforming structure shall serve to
eliminate the lawful preexistence of the nonconforming use. For the
purpose of this subsection, "destruction" is defined in accordance
with Subsection A(3)(c) hereinabove.
(6) Reestablishment. No nonconforming use shall be reestablished
after the physical operation thereof has ceased and discontinued,
for any reason, for a period of not less than 12 months, and upon a
finding of intentional abandonment by the Zoning Officer. Intent to
resume active operation of a nonconforming use after cessation
thereof, without actual physical resumption of activities, shall not
confer the right to do so.
(7) Reversion prohibited. No nonconforming use, building or structure
which has been changed into a conforming use, building or
structure may be returned to the prior nonconforming use, building
or structure or converted to another nonconforming use, building
or structure.
(8) Safety. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent normal
maintenance and repair of any building, or the carrying out, upon
issuance of a building permit, of major structural alterations or
demolitions necessary in the interest of public safety. In granting
such a permit, the Construction Code Official shall state the precise
reason(s) to the Board of Adjustment why such alterations were
deemed necessary.
(9) Approved construction. Nothing in this section shall require any
change in plans, construction or designated use of a building or
structure for which a building permit has been issued prior to the
effective date of this chapter.
B. Nonconforming lots of record.
(1) In any zoning district where single-family detached dwellings are
permitted, a single-family detached dwelling, along with such
accessory buildings or structures which may be normal and
customary thereto, may be erected on any single lot which was of
record at the effective date of this chapter, notwithstanding
§ 300-20 WATER § 300-20
285:803
§ 300-21. Deconversion of illegal nonconforming residential uses,
buildings or structures.
limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter. Such a
nonconforming lot of record must be in separate ownership and
not of contiguous frontage with other lots in the same ownership.
Such provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the
requirements for lot size or lot width, or both, applicable in the
zoning district in which such lot is located; provided, however,
that such nonconforming lot of record shall conform with all other
district requirements, and further provided that any
nonconforming lot of record sold after the effective date of this
chapter shall be subject to all zoning district regulations applicable
as provided in this chapter.
(2) Where two or more individual lots, combinations of lots, or portions
of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record
at the effective date of this chapter, and where all of the individual
lots, combinations of lots, or portions of lots do not meet the
requirements established for lot size and lot width for the zoning
district in which such lots, combination of lots or portions of lots
are located, the lands involved shall be considered to be a single,
undivided parcel for purposes of this chapter, and no portion of
such parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes
compliance with the lot size and lot width requirements of the
zoning district in which such parcel is located; nor shall any
division of any parcel be made which creates a lot whose lot size or
lot width does not conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which such lot or parcel is located.
A. Purpose.
(1) Conversion of existing buildings to increase the number of dwelling
units contained in them presents problems not encountered when
new buildings are designed and constructed for the same number
of units. Such conversions can adversely affect a neighborhood
originally designed for low-density development through
overcrowding and its concomitant problems of inadequate
recreational space, inadequate parking and overtaxed municipal
services. These, in turn, may contribute to the physical decline and
deterioration of the area.
(2) The intent of this section is to establish standards to prevent the
overcrowding of dwelling units and overly dense development of
neighborhoods and to ensure satisfactory amenities in
neighborhoods as conversions take place.
B. The following provisions identify the practices and procedures for the
identification and deconversion of illegal nonconforming residential
uses, buildings and structures.
§ 300-20 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-21
285:804
(1) No residential building shall be sold, transferred, altered,
renovated or reconstructed, and no dwelling unit conversion shall
be undertaken, without the part responsible therefor first obtaining
a zoning permit certifying that such residential building is in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter as relates to the
zoning district in which such building is located.
(2) Any City employee vested with the responsibility of making
inspections, whether they be building inspections, construction
inspections, mercantile inspections, land use inspections or any
other type of inspection, is required to report, in writing, any
activity or situation which in his/her judgment may be in violation
of this section. The Zoning Officer shall notify all employees subject
to this section.
(3) Any designated representative of the City who makes an inspection
in order to issue any certificate, license or permit shall determine
the appropriate zoning district in which the subject property is
located, and shall refuse to issue, or cause to be issued, any such
certificate, license or permit if the property, structure or use(s)
thereon do(es) not conform with the requirements of the zoning
district in which such property is located. Any such nonconformity
shall be referred to the Zoning Officer or his/her designee,
whereupon one of the following determinations shall be made:
(a) Where City records support lawful preexistence of the
nonconformity, the Zoning Officer shall issue a letter to the
property owner, via certified mail, advising him/her of the
nonconforming condition of the property and the necessity of
obtaining a certificate of nonconformity from the Zoning
Officer, if such nonconformity was discovered within one year
of any change in this chapter resulting in such nonconformity,
or from the Zoning Board of Adjustment in all other cases.
(b) Where City records do not support the lawful preexistence of
the nonconformity, the Zoning Officer shall issue a letter to the
property owner, via certified mail, advising him/her of the
nonconforming condition of the property and that one of the
following steps are necessary:
[1] The property owner is required to file for a certificate of
nonconformity with the Zoning Board of Adjustment;
[2] The property owner is required to file for a zoning variance
with the Zoning Board of Adjustment; or
[3] The property owner is required to deconvert the
nonconforming dwelling unit(s).
(c) Any individual and/or entity who receives written notice from
the Zoning Officer in accordance with this subsection and does
not file an appropriate application with the Zoning Officer or
§ 300-21 WATER § 300-21
285:805
§ 300-22. Residential zoning districts.
Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to such subsection
within 30 days of receipt of such letter must commence the
deconversion of the nonconforming dwelling unit(s) as follows
[and the letter issued by the Zoning Officer under Subsection
B(3)(b) advising the property owner of the nonconforming
property, structure or use(s) shall specifically state]:
[1] The kitchen (sink, cooking appliances, dishwasher and
cabinets) in any illegal dwelling unit shall be completely
removed and the unit returned to its original room
configuration, all dead bolts on all interior entry doors
must be removed, holes repaired and doors painted or
finished. All separate doorbells, mailboxes, doorknockers
and separate utility meters must be removed;
[2] The deconversion shall be completed within 90 days of the
date of such letter. In the event that more than three units
are to be deconverted, the Zoning Officer may, at his/her
discretion, extend the time period for deconversion for an
additional 60 days; and
[3] At the termination of such ninety-day period, the Zoning
Officer or designee shall inspect the property.
[4] If more than three units are to be deconverted, the Zoning
Officer may extend the period of time to complete such
deconversion for a period not to exceed an additional 60
days.
(d) If the steps of deconversion are not followed precisely, then a
summons shall be issued along with a certified letter advising
the property owner that a penalty of $2,000 per violation will
be sought by the City in Municipal Court in the event that the
owner is found guilty.
(e) Upon successful completion of the deconversion, the Zoning
Officer shall note that fact in a ledger to be maintained by his/
her office and shall schedule a follow-up inspection one year
from the date that the conversion was completed. The Zoning
Officer shall also issue a letter to all utilities advising said
utilities of the legal use of the building; the actions taken by
the City to deconvert the building to its proper use; and the
requirement that any action to return the building to an illegal
use be reported to the Zoning Officer.
A. Purpose. The purpose and intent of the City's residential zoning
districts is to permit residential development of varied sizes and
densities within the City of Pleasantville in order to provide for a range
of housing types throughout the community, thereby providing a
§ 300-21 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-22
285:806
realistic opportunity for residency, including homeownership, to the full
spectrum of socioeconomic groups in as fair and equitable a manner as
is practicable, subject to the applicable provisions of § 300-51, Design
standards.
B. Single-Family Residential – 50 ("SFR-50" or "R-50") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The SFR-50 Zoning District was crafted to provide for
relatively higher-density single-family residential development on
five-thousand-square-foot lots with 50 feet of street frontage/lot
width.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses.
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Traditional public, private and parochial schools, serving
grades Pre-K through 12, under the authority of the New
Jersey Department of Education and subject to the
requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law.
(c) Places of worship.
(d) Parks, playgrounds and public active or passive open space
owned or operated by the City of Pleasantville.
(e) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
(f) Family day-care homes.
(g) Public utility (central) substations.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Typical residential amenities as defined in § 300-10, subject to
the provisions of § 300-51.
(b) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
permitted residential use.
(c) Public utility cabinets.
(4) Permitted conditional structures and uses. Professional offices,
conditioned upon such use being a part of a residential-looking
structure which may or may not contain residential living quarters,
and further conditioned upon such bulk standards as may be
appropriate to the use and type of structure proposed for the R-50
Zoning District, and all parking being on site and restricted to the
side or rear yard area of the lot.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
§ 300-22 WATER § 300-22
285:807
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet2
A single-family dwelling unit and its
customary accessory buildings may be
constructed on a single lot of record in
existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter, provided that such lot is not less
than 10% of the required minimum lot area
(i.e., 4,500 square feet), and is not
contiguous to other vacant lot(s) in
common ownership. In the case of corner
lots, the minimum lot area may be reduced
from the required minimum by 10% plus
any lands dedicated in order to create a
curve at the intersections of the street
lines.
Minimum lot width 50 feet
A single-family dwelling unit and its
customary accessory buildings may be
constructed on a single lot of record in
existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter, provided that such lot is not less
than 10% of the required minimum lot width
(i.e., 45 feet), and is not contiguous to other
vacant lot(s) in common ownership. In the
case of corner lots, the minimum lot area
may be reduced from the required minimum
by 10% plus any lands dedicated in order
to create a curve at the intersections of the
street lines.
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Front yard 20 feet
Side yard 6 feet minimum, 20 feet
total
Minimum setbacks Rear yard 30 feet
Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks, no
principal structure may be located closer
than 15 feet to a principal structure located
on the same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
Principal
structure
30%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 60%
§ 300-22 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-22
285:808
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
2 Translating to a density of 8.7 dwelling units per acre.
(6) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.
Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between a
lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 5 feet
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 5 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 story or 15 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
(7) Off-street parking: as detailed in § 300-55.
C. Single-Family Residential – 60 ("SFR-60" or "R-60") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The SFR-60 Zoning District was crafted to provide for
relatively moderate-density single-family residential development
on six-thousand-square-foot lots with 60 feet of street frontage/lot
width.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses:
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Traditional public, private and parochial schools, serving
grades Pre-K through 12, under the authority of the New
Jersey Department of Education and subject to the
requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law.
(c) Places of worship.
(d) Parks, playgrounds and public active or passive open space
owned or operated by the City of Pleasantville.
(e) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
§ 300-22 WATER § 300-22
285:809
(f) Family day-care homes.
(g) Public utility (central) substations.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Typical residential amenities, as defined in § 300-10, subject to
the provisions of § 300-51.
(b) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
permitted residential use.
(c) Public utility cabinets.
(4) Permitted conditional structures and uses. Professional offices,
conditioned upon such use being a part of a residential-looking
structure which may or may not contain residential living quarters,
and further conditioned upon such bulk standards as may be
appropriate to the use and type of structure proposed for the R-60
Zoning District, and all parking being on site and restricted to the
side or rear yard area of the lot.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
§ 300-22 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-22
285:810
Minimum lot area 6,000 square feet2
A single-family dwelling unit and its
customary accessory buildings may be
constructed on a single lot of record in
existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter, provided that such lot is not less
than 10% of the required minimum lot area
(i.e., 5,400 square feet), and is not
contiguous to other vacant lot(s) in
common ownership. In the case of corner
lots, the minimum lot area may be reduced
from the required minimum by 10% plus
any lands dedicated in order to create a
curve at the intersections of the street
lines.
Minimum lot width 60 feet
A single-family dwelling unit and its
customary accessory buildings may be
constructed on a single lot of record in
existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter, provided that the width of such lot
is not less than 10% of the required
minimum lot width (i.e., 54 feet), and is not
contiguous to other vacant lot(s) in
common ownership. In the case of corner
lots, the minimum lot width may be
reduced from the required minimum by
10% plus any lands dedicated in order to
create a curve at the intersections of the
street lines.
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Front yard 20 feet
Side yard 6 feet minimum, 15 feet
total
Minimum setbacks Rear yard 30 feet
Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks,
no principal structure may be located
closer than 15 feet to a principal structure
located on the same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
Principal
structure
30%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 60%
§ 300-22 WATER § 300-22
285:811
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
2 Translating to a density of 7.26 dwelling units per acre.
(6) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.
Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 5 feet
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 5 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 story or 15 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
(7) Off-street parking: as detailed in § 300-55.
D. Single-Family Residential – 75 ("SFR-75" or "R-75") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The SFR-75 Zoning District was crafted to provide for
relatively lower-density single-family residential development on
seven-thousand-five-hundred-square-foot lots with 75 feet of street
frontage/lot width.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses.
(a) Single-family detached dwellings.
(b) Traditional public, private and parochial schools, serving
grades Pre-K through 12, under the authority of the New
Jersey Department of Education and subject to the
requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law.
(c) Places of worship.
(d) Parks, playgrounds and public active or passive open space
owned or operated by the City of Pleasantville.
(e) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
§ 300-22 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-22
285:812
(f) Family day-care homes.
(g) Public utility (central) substations.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Typical residential amenities, as defined in § 300-10, subject to
the provisions of § 300-51.
(b) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
permitted residential use.
(c) Public utility cabinets.
(4) Permitted conditional structures and uses. Professional offices,
conditioned upon such use being a part of a residential-looking
structure which may or may not contain residential living quarters,
and further conditioned upon such bulk standards as may be
appropriate to the use and type of structure proposed for the R-75
Zoning District, and all parking being on site and restricted to the
side or rear yard area of the lot.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
§ 300-22 WATER § 300-22
285:813
Minimum lot area 7,500 square feet3
A single-family dwelling unit and its
customary accessory buildings may be
constructed on a single lot of record in
existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter, provided that such lot is not less
than 10% of the required minimum lot area
(i.e., 6,750 square feet), and is not
contiguous to other vacant lot(s) in
common ownership. In the case of corner
lots, the minimum lot area may be reduced
from the required minimum by 10% plus
any lands dedicated in order to create a
curve at the intersections of the street
lines.
Minimum lot width 75 feet
A single-family dwelling unit and its
customary accessory buildings may be
constructed on a single lot of record in
existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter, provided that the width of such lot
is not less than 10% of the required
minimum lot width (i.e., 67.5 feet), and is
not contiguous to other vacant lot(s) in
common ownership. In the case of corner
lots, the minimum lot width may be
reduced from the required minimum by
10% plus any lands dedicated in order to
create a curve at the intersections of the
street lines.
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Front yard 20 feet
Side yard 6 feet minimum, 15 feet
total
Minimum setbacks Rear yard 30 feet
Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks,
no principal structure may be located
closer than 15 feet to a principal structure
located on the same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
Principal
structure
30%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 60%
§ 300-22 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-22
285:814
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
2 Translating to a density of 5.8 dwelling units per acre.
(6) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.
Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 5 feet
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 5 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 story or 15 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
(7) Off-street parking: as detailed in § 300-55.
E. Residential Duplex ("R-D") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The RD Zoning District was crafted to provide a setting
for a relatively new residential building type in the City and thereby
assist in achieving the purpose and intent of the City's residential
zoning districts as detailed in § 300-22A.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses.
(a) Single-family semidetached (duplex) dwelling units, as defined
in § 300-10.
(b) Two-family stacked (multistory) dwelling units, as defined in
§ 300-10.
(c) Places of worship.
(d) Parks, playgrounds and public active or passive open space
owned or operated by the City of Pleasantville.
(e) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
§ 300-22 WATER § 300-22
285:815
(f) Family day-care homes.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Typical residential amenities, as defined in § 300-10, subject to
the provisions of § 300-51.
(b) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
permitted residential use.
(c) Public utility cabinets.
(4) Permitted conditional structures and uses. Professional offices,
conditioned upon such use being a part of a residential-looking
structure which may or may not contain residential living quarters,
and further conditioned upon such bulk standards as may be
appropriate to the use and type of structure proposed for the R-D
Zoning District, and all parking being on site and restricted to the
side or rear yard area of the lot.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
Minimum lot area 4,000 square feet2
Minimum lot width 40 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Front yard 25 feet
Side yard 0 foot interior, 15 feet
exterior (end unit)
Minimum setbacks Rear yard 25 feet
Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks,
no principal structure may be located
closer than 15 feet to a principal structure
located on the same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
Principal
structure
30%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 60%
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
2 Translating to a density of 10.89 dwelling units per acre.
(6) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.
§ 300-22 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-22
285:816
Minimum setbacks Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 5 feet
Rear yard 5 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 story or 15 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
(7) Off-street parking: as detailed in § 300-55.
F. Multifamily Residential ("MF") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The MF Zoning District was crafted to permit residential
development of varied sizes, types and densities within the City of
Pleasantville and thereby assist in achieving the purpose and intent
of the City's residential zoning districts as detailed in § 300-22A.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses.
(a) Apartments and multifamily buildings, as defined in § 300-10.
(b) Townhouses, as defined in § 300-10.
(c) Garden apartments, as defined in § 300-10.
(d) Three- to four-family semidetached ("tri" or "quad") dwelling
units, as defined in § 300-10.
(e) Traditional public, private and parochial schools, serving
grades Pre-K through 12, under the authority of the New
Jersey Department of Education and subject to the
requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law.
(f) Places of worship.
(g) Parks, playgrounds and public active or passive open space
owned or operated by the City of Pleasantville.
(h) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
(i) Family day-care homes.
§ 300-22 WATER § 300-22
285:817
(j) Public utility (central) substations.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Typical residential amenities, as defined in § 300-10, subject to
the provisions of § 300-51.
(b) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
permitted residential use.
(c) Public utility cabinets.
(d) Signs.
(e) Stormwater management and related structures, subject to the
provisions of Chapter 251 of the City Code.
(4) Permitted conditional structures and uses. Professional offices,
conditioned upon such use being a part of a residential-looking
structure which may or may not contain residential living quarters,
and further conditioned upon such bulk standards as may be
appropriate to the use and type of structure proposed for the MF
Zoning District, and all parking being on site and restricted to the
side or rear yard area of the lot.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
Minimum tract area for multi family district: 43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Individual lots within a tract may be
designed to facilitate the buildings and
units proposed in accordance with the
various definitions of residential structural
types detailed within this chapter.
Minimum tract width
Minimum tract depth
No minimum is established.
Minimum setbacks 25 feet from all lot lines.
However, no structure may be located
closer to a lot line than a distance equal to
1/3 of the height of the building.
Minimum distance
between buildings
Where two
exterior facing
walls of
principal
structures
contain window
or door
openings to
habitable
rooms:
The greater of 40 feet or
1/2 of the combined
height of the facing walls,
but in no case more than
100 feet
§ 300-22 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-22
285:818
Where two
exterior facing
walls of
principal
structures
contain no
windows [other
than (typically
small) kitchen
or bathroom
windows] or
doors:
16 feet regardless of wall
height
Special exceptions may be granted where
comparable standards of light, air,
ventilation, safety and privacy may be
obtained.
Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks or
distance between buildings, no principal
structure may be located closer than 15
feet to a principal structure located on the
same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
70 feet
Principal
structure
30%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 60%
Density No traditional dwelling unit per acre (du/
ac) density figure is mandated. Density is
regulated by minimum tract size and the
various definitions of residential structural
types detailed within this chapter.
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(6) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.
§ 300-22 WATER § 300-22
285:819
§ 300-23. Commercial zoning districts.
Minimum setbacks Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 5 feet
Rear yard 5 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 story or 15 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
(7) Off-street parking: as detailed in § 300-55.
(8) Access to all residential units and public areas shall be in
accordance with the International Building Code and the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
(9) Design standards. All structures in the MF Zoning District shall
comply with the design standards set forth in § 300-51.
A. The purpose and intent of the City's commercial zoning districts is to
provide locations for a variety of commercial, service and light
industrial facilities, at varied and appropriate intensities, in order to
supply goods and services to address the needs of and otherwise
support the residents of the City of Pleasantville, as well as the
residents, businesses and visitors to the Greater Pleasantville Area,
including, but not limited to, the Atlantic City casino industry, the
regional tourism industry and the general economic base of Atlantic
County, while protecting the City's residential neighborhoods.
B. Central Business ("CBD") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The Central Business (Zoning) District was crafted to
provide for an appropriate mix of retail- and service-oriented
commercial, office and other uses, with supportive residential
above, designed to strengthen and enhance the City's economic
base, generate significant employment opportunities (including
opportunities for City residents) and stimulate new tax ratables in a
transit-oriented, mixed-use community with a traditional urban
fabric within the City's historic downtown commercial core.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses.
§ 300-22 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:820
(a) Downtown-oriented commercial and service activities, as
defined in § 300-10.
(b) Professional and administrative offices.
(c) Eating and drinking establishments, including restaurants and
taverns, but excluding drive-in restaurants, fast-food
restaurants and bars.
(d) Specialized entertainment venues such as performing arts
centers, theaters, movie theaters, and other like and similar
attractions.
(e) Within the context of permitted principal uses in Subsection
B(2)(c) and (d), nightlife establishments that serve alcoholic
beverages shall be permitted, provided that cooked-to-order
food is prepared and served on the premises. [Note: By way of
interpretation, restaurant facilities with entertainment (dinner
theaters) shall be permitted while facilities which do not serve
food (nightclubs) shall not be permitted.]
(f) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
(g) Public or private recreation facilities and/or training facilities
offering life skills or career educational courses.
(h) Commercial parking facilities owned and/or operated by the
City of Pleasantville Parking Utility (created via Ordinance No.
34-2002).
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Employee lounge and cafeteria functions and other back-ofthe-
house facilities normal and customary to an otherwise
permitted use.
(b) Off-street parking lots/parking facilities.
(c) Off-street loading facilities.
(d) Telecommunications/satellite dish antennas and related
systems.
(e) Solar energy systems.
(f) Automated teller/cash-dispensing machines (ATMs), provided
that, if accessed from the exterior of a building, such machines
shall be installed within the wall of the building; it being the
intent not to permit freestanding exterior ATM kiosks. ATM
kiosks wholly located and accessed from the interior of a
building are permitted.
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:821
(g) Storage sheds, tool sheds or other maintenance-related
structures.
(h) Fences and walls.
(i) Signs.
(j) Public utility cabinets.
(k) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
conditional residential use.
(l) Typical residential amenities, as defined in § 300-10, when
accessory to a conditional residential use.
(m) Electric vehicle supply equipment, subject to conditions set
forth in § 300-51. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
(4) Permitted conditional structures and uses.
(a) Multiple principal uses within a single building shall be
allowed, provided that each such use is a permitted principal
use within the Central Business District, and further provided
that each such use is located within a separately identifiable
and fully securable space (it being the City's intention to
prohibit an entity from subleasing a small portion of a larger,
single floor area). Within this context, multiple corporate
entities may operate out of a single space, provided that such
entities are subsidiaries or related companies.
(b) Commercial centers, as defined in § 300-10.
(c) Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments, including
age-restricted housing for qualifying individuals other than
nursing homes or related facilities, conditioned upon the
design standards detailed in § 300-51.
(d) Child-care centers.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 50 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Front yard 0 feet
Side yard 0 feet interior, 12 feet
Minimum setbacks exterior (end unit)
Rear yard 20 feet
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:822
Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks,
no principal structure may be located
closer than 15 feet to a principal structure
located on the same or an adjacent lot
Maximum building
height
The lower of 4 stories or 48 feet
Principal
structure
65%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(6) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.1
Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 5 feet
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 5 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 1/2 stories or 20 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(7) Bulk requirements for conditional uses:
(a) Commercial centers, as defined in § 300-10. In addition to the
bulk requirements for principal structures in the CBD Zoning
District detailed under § 300-23B(5) the maximum total floor
area for a commercial center in the CBD shall be not more than
49,999 square feet.
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:823
(b) Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments, including
age-restricted housing for qualifying individuals other than
nursing homes or related facilities, conditioned upon the
design standards detailed in § 300-51.
(c) The bulk requirements for principal structures in the CBD
Zoning District detailed under § 300-23B(5) shall apply to the
structural types conditionally permitted.
(d) Density. No traditional dwelling unit per acre (du/ac) density
figure is mandated. Density shall be regulated by minimum lot
size and the various definitions of residential structural types
conditionally permitted.
(e) Child-care centers. The bulk requirements for principal
structures in the CBD Zoning District detailed under
§ 300-23B(5) shall apply.
(8) Off-street parking and loading. In addition to any requirements
specified in § 300-51, off-street parking and loading shall be as
detailed in §§ 300-55 and 300-56.
(9) Design standards. All structures in the CBD Zoning District shall
comply with the design standards set forth in § 300-51.
C. General Commercial ("GC") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The General Commercial Zoning District was crafted to
provide for an appropriate mix of retail-oriented commercial, office
and other uses, with supportive residential above, designed to
support the needs of the residents and businesses of the City.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses.
(a) General commercial and service activities, as defined in
§ 300-10.
(b) Neighborhood-oriented commercial and service activities, as
defined in § 300-10.
(c) Professional and administrative offices.
(d) Medical/dental complexes, as defined in § 300-10.
(e) Eating and drinking establishments, including restaurants,
drive-in restaurants and fast-food restaurants with window
service for takeout fare; bars; and taverns.
(f) Appliance repair;
(g) Self-service laundry facilities (laundromats), including
washing, drying, folding and other operations conducted by
employees of the facility.
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:824
(h) Fraternal, social, educational, charitable or eleemosynary
facilities.
(i) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
(j) Public or private training facilities offering life skills or career
educational courses.
(k) Commercial parking facilities owned and/or operated by the
City of Pleasantville Parking Utility (created via Ordinance No.
34-2002).
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Employee lounge and cafeteria functions and other back-ofthe-
house facilities normal and customary to an otherwise
permitted use.
(b) Off-street parking lots/parking facilities.
(c) Off-street loading facilities.
(d) Storage sheds, tool sheds or other maintenance-related
structures.
(e) Fences and walls.
(f) Signs.
(g) Telecommunications/satellite dish antennas and related
systems.
(h) Solar energy systems.
(i) Automated teller/cash-dispensing machines (ATMs), provided
that, if accessed from the exterior of a building, such machines
shall be installed within the wall of the building, it being the
intent not to permit freestanding exterior ATM kiosks. ATM
kiosks wholly located and accessed from the interior of a
building are permitted.
(j) Public utility cabinets.
(k) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
conditional residential use.
(l) Typical residential amenities, as defined in § 300-10, when
accessory to a conditional residential use.
(m) Typical amenities when accessory to a conditional hotel and
motel use as detailed in § 300-10.
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:825
(n) Electric vehicle supply equipment, subject to conditions set
forth in § 300-51. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
(4) Permitted conditional structures and uses.
(a) Commercial centers, as defined in § 300-10.
(b) Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments, including
age-restricted housing for qualifying individuals other than
nursing homes or related facilities, conditioned upon
conformance with § 300-51.
(c) Child-care centers.
(d) Automobile fueling stations, with or without automotive and/or
marine engine, body or interior repair, which may or may not
include convenience stores on premises.
(e) Automated or manual car washes.
(f) Automobile or watercraft sales through franchise dealers, with
servicing limited to inventoried vehicles and fuel dispensing if
integral to the operation of the facility and not open to the
public.
(g) Hotels and motels.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
Minimum lot area 100,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot depth
100 feet
Front yard 20 feet
Side yard 10 feet
Rear yard 20 feet
Minimum setbacks Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks, no
principal structure may be located closer
than 15 feet to a principal structure located
on the same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
(6) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.1
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:826
Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 5 feet
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 5 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 1/2 stories or 20 feet.
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(7) Bulk requirements for conditional uses.
(a) Commercial centers, as defined in § 300-10.
Minimum lot area 43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width 200 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Front yard 20 feet
Side yard 10 feet (each)
Rear yard 20 feet
Minimum setbacks Notwithstanding any minimum
setbacks, no principal structure may
be located closer than 15 feet to a
principal structure located on the
same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 3 stories or 48 feet.
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
Maximum total floor
area
49,999.99 square feet
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:827
(b) Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments, including
age-restricted housing for qualifying individuals other than
nursing homes or related facilities, conditioned upon
conformance with § 300-51.
[1] The bulk requirements for principal structures in the
General Commercial Zoning District detailed under
§ 300-23C(5) shall apply to the structural types
conditionally permitted.
[2] Density: no traditional dwelling unit per acre (du/ac)
density figure is mandated. Density shall be regulated by
minimum lot size and the various definitions of residential
structural types conditionally permitted.
(c) Child-care centers. The bulk requirements for principal
structures in the General Commercial Zoning District detailed
under § 300-23C(5) shall apply.
(d) Automobile fueling stations, with or without automotive and/or
marine engine, body or interior repair, which may or may not
include convenience stores on premises.
(e) Automated or manual car washes.
Minimum lot area 15,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot depth
Front yard 20 feet
Side yard 10 feet (each)
Rear yard 20 feet
Underground
storage tanks
25 feet from any lot
line
Fuel pump 20 feet from any lot
line
Minimum setbacks
Notwithstanding any minimum
setbacks, no principal structure may
be located closer than 15 feet to a
principal structure located on the
same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 1/2 stories or 25 feet
(accessory buildings: 10 feet)
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
(f) Automobile or watercraft sales through franchise dealers.
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:828
Minimum lot area 43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width N/A
Minimum lot depth
Minimum setbacks 50 feet from any lot line, with no
vehicle placed closer than 20 feet to
the front lot line or 20 feet from any
side or rear lot line if adjacent to a
residential use
Maximum building
height
The lower of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
(accessory buildings: 20 feet and 1 1/2
stories)
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
(g) Hotels and motels.
Minimum lot area 43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot depth
200 feet
Front yard 40 feet
Side yard 25 feet (each)
Rear yard 25 feet
Minimum setbacks Notwithstanding any minimum
setbacks, no principal structure may be
located closer than 15 feet to a
principal structure located on the same
or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 5 stories or 60 feet
(accessory buildings: 20 feet and 1 1/2
stories)
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
Off-street parking
and loading
In addition to any requirements
specified in § 300-51, off-street parking
and loading shall be as detailed in
§§ 300-55 and 300-56.
(8) Design standards. All structures in the GC Zoning District shall
comply with the design standards set forth in § 300-51.
D. Neighborhood Commercial ("NC") Zoning District.
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:829
(1) Purpose. The Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District was
crafted to provide for an appropriate mix of low-impact,
residentially oriented retail and service activities necessary to
address the routine needs of the residents of the City, without
(generally, negatively) impacting the surrounding community.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses.
(a) Neighborhood-oriented commercial and service activities, as
defined in § 300-10.
(b) Professional and administrative offices.
(c) Eating and drinking establishments, including restaurants with
window service for takeout fare, but excluding drive-in
restaurants and fast-food restaurants.
(d) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Employee lounge and cafeteria functions and other back-ofthe-
house facilities normal and customary to an otherwise
permitted use.
(b) Off-street parking lots/parking facilities.
(c) Off-street loading facilities.
(d) Storage sheds, tool sheds or other maintenance-related
structures.
(e) Fences and walls.
(f) Signs;
(g) Telecommunications/satellite dish antennas and related
systems.
(h) Solar energy systems.
(i) Automated teller/cash-dispensing machines (ATMs), provided
that, if accessed from the exterior of a building, such machines
shall be installed within the wall of the building; it being the
intent not to permit freestanding exterior ATM kiosks. ATM
kiosks wholly located and accessed from the interior of a
building are permitted.
(j) Public utility cabinets.
(k) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
conditional residential use.
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:830
(l) Typical residential amenities, as defined in § 300-10, when
accessory to a conditional residential use.
(m) Electric vehicle supply equipment, subject to conditions set
forth in § 300-51. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
(4) Permitted conditional structures and uses.
(a) Small (carry-in) appliance repair.
(b) Self-service laundry facilities (laundromats) wherein all
washing, drying, folding and other operations are conducted
solely by the patrons of the facility.
(c) Medical/dental complexes, as defined in § 300-10, limited to
buildings conforming with SFR-75 bulk regulations.
(d) Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments, including
age-restricted housing for qualifying individuals other than
nursing homes or related facilities; conditioned upon
conformance with § 300-51.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 50 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Front yard 20 feet
Side yard 10 feet (each)
Rear yard 20 feet
Minimum setbacks Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks,
no principal structure may be located
closer than 15 feet to a principal structure
located on the same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
Off-street parking
and loading
In addition to any requirements specified
in § 300-51, off-street parking and loading
shall be as detailed in §§ 300-55 and
300-56.
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:831
(6) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.1
Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 5 feet
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 5 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 story or 15 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(7) Bulk requirements for conditional uses.
(a) Small (carry-in) appliance repair.
[1] Maximum gross floor area of 1,875 square feet.
[2] Such uses shall conform to the bulk requirements for
principal uses in the SFR-75 Zoning District.
(b) Self-service laundry facilities (laundromats).
[1] Structure shall be sufficient to accommodate a maximum
of 20 washers and 20 dryers.
[2] Such uses shall conform to the bulk requirements for
principal uses in the SFR-50 Zoning District.
(c) Medical/dental complexes, as defined in § 300-10, shall
conform with the bulk requirements for principal uses in the
SFR-75 Zoning District.
(d) Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments, including
age-restricted housing for qualifying individuals other than
nursing homes or related facilities, conditioned upon
conformance with § 300-51.
[1] The bulk requirements for principal structures in the
Neighborhood Commercial Zoning District detailed under
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:832
§ 300-23D(5) shall apply to the structural types
conditionally permitted.
[2] Density. No traditional dwelling unit per acre (du/ac)
density figure is mandated. Density shall be regulated by
minimum lot size and the various definitions of residential
structural types conditionally permitted.
(8) Off-street parking and loading. In addition to any requirements
specified in § 300-51, off-street parking and loading shall be as
detailed in §§ 300-55 and 300-56.
(9) Design standards. All structures in the NC Zoning District shall
comply with the design standards set forth in § 300-51.
E. Regional Commercial ("RC") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The Regional Commercial Zoning District was crafted to
provide for an appropriate mix of retail-oriented commercial, office
and other uses, with supportive residential above, designed to
support the needs of the residents and businesses of the City of
Pleasantville as well as those of eastern Atlantic County.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses.
(a) General commercial and service activities, as defined in
§ 300-10.
(b) Regionally oriented commercial and service activities, as
defined in § 300-10.
(c) Permitted principal uses in Subsection E(2)(a) and (b) may be
located on individual lots or within commercial centers, as
defined in § 300-10.
(d) Professional and administrative offices.
(e) Medical/dental complexes, as defined in § 300-10.
(f) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
(g) Eating and drinking establishments, including restaurants,
drive-in restaurants and fast-food restaurants with window
service for takeout fare; bars; and taverns.
(h) Commercial parking facilities owned and/or operated by the
City of Pleasantville Parking Utility (created via Ordinance No.
34-2002).
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:833
(a) Employee lounge and cafeteria functions and other back-ofthe-
house facilities normal and customary to an otherwise
permitted use.
(b) Off-street parking lots/parking facilities.
(c) Off-street loading facilities.
(d) Storage sheds, tool sheds or other maintenance-related
structures.
(e) Fences and walls.
(f) Signs.
(g) Telecommunications/satellite dish antennas and related
systems.
(h) Solar energy systems.
(i) Automated teller/cash-dispensing machines (ATMs), provided
that, if accessed from the exterior of a building, such machines
shall be installed within the wall of the building, it being the
intent not to permit freestanding exterior ATM kiosks. ATM
kiosks wholly located and accessed from the interior of a
building are permitted.
(j) Public utility cabinets;
(k) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
conditional residential use.
(l) Typical residential amenities, as defined in § 300-10, when
accessory to a Conditional residential use.
(m) Typical amenities when accessory to a conditional hotel and
motel use detailed in § 300-10 herein.
(n) Electric vehicle supply equipment, subject to conditions set
forth in § 300-51. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
(4) Permitted conditional structures and uses.
(a) Designed shopping centers, as defined in § 300-10.
(b) Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments, including
age-restricted housing for qualifying individuals other than
nursing homes or related facilities, conditioned upon
conformance with § 300-51.
(c) Child-care centers;
(d) Automobile fueling stations, with or without automotive and/or
marine engine, body or interior repair, provided that a
convenience store is located on premises.
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:834
(e) Automated or manual car washes.
(f) Automobile or watercraft sales through franchise dealers, with
servicing limited to inventoried vehicles and fuel dispensing if
integral to the operation of the facility and not open to the
public.
(g) Hotels and motels.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
Minimum lot area 43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width 200 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Front yard 20 feet
Side yard 20 feet (each)
Rear yard 40 feet
Minimum setbacks Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks,
no principal structure may be located
closer than 15 feet to a principal structure
located on the same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 3 1/2 stories or 48 feet
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
Off-street parking
and loading
In addition to any requirements specified
in § 300-51, off-street parking and loading
shall be as detailed in §§ 300-55 and
300-56.
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(6) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.1
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:835
Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 10 feet
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 10 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 1/2 stories or 20 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(7) Bulk requirements for conditional uses and structures.1
(a) Designed shopping centers, as defined in § 300-10.
Minimum lot area 2.5 acres
Minimum lot width 200 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Front yard 20 feet
Side yard 20 feet (each)
Rear yard 40 feet
Minimum setbacks Notwithstanding any minimum
setbacks, no principal structure may be
located closer than 15 feet to a
principal structure located on the same
or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 5 stories or 60 feet
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
Minimum total floor
area
50,000 square feet
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:836
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(b) Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments, including
age-restricted housing for qualifying individuals other than
nursing homes or related facilities, conditioned upon
conformance with § 300-51.
[1] The bulk requirements for principal structures in the
Regional Commercial Zoning District detailed under
§ 300-23E(5) shall apply to the structural types
conditionally permitted.
[2] Density. No traditional dwelling unit per acre (du/ac)
density figure is mandated. Density shall be regulated by
minimum lot size and the various definitions of residential
structural types conditionally permitted.
(c) Child-care centers. The bulk requirements for principal
structures in the Regional Commercial Zoning District detailed
under § 300-23E(5) shall apply.
(d) Automobile fueling stations, with or without automotive and/or
marine engine, body or interior repair, which may or may not
include convenience stores on premises.
(e) Automated or manual car washes.
Minimum lot area 15,000 square feet
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot depth
100 feet
Front yard 20 feet
Side yard 10 feet (each)
Rear yard 20 feet
Underground
storage tanks
25 feet from any lot
line
Fuel pump 20 feet from any lot
line
Minimum setbacks
Notwithstanding any minimum
setbacks, no principal structure may
be located closer than 15 feet to a
principal structure located on the
same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 1/2 stories or 25 feet
(accessory buildings: 10 feet)
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:837
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
(f) Automobile or watercraft sales through franchise dealers.
Minimum lot area 43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot depth
N/A
Minimum setbacks 50 feet from any lot line, with no
vehicle placed closer than 20 feet to
the front lot line or 20 feet from any
side or rear lot line if adjacent to a
residential use
Maximum building
height
The lower of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet
(accessory buildings: 20 feet and 1 1/2
stories)
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
(g) Hotels and motels.
Minimum lot area 43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot depth
200 feet
Front yard 40 feet
Minimum setbacks Side yards 25 feet (each)
Rear yard 25 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 5 stories or 60 feet
(accessory buildings: 20 feet and 1 1/2
stories)
Principal
structure
Maximum coverage 60%
Impervious 80%
(8) Off-street parking and loading. In addition to any requirements
specified in § 300-51, off-street parking and loading shall be as
detailed in §§ 300-55 and 300-56.
(9) Design standards. All structures in the RC Zoning District shall
comply with the design standards set forth in § 300-51.
F. Regional Shopping Center ("RSC") Zoning District.
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:838
(1) Purpose. The Regional Shopping Center Zoning District was
crafted to promote large-scale development oriented to the
shopping, resort, tourist and transportation needs of the region.
(2) Redevelopment process.
(a) On May 17, 2004, via Resolution No. 124-2004, the City
included the Regional Shopping Center Zoning District among
lands declared to be in need of redevelopment under the Local
Redevelopment and Housing Law, designating it the Gateway
Redevelopment Area.
(b) The purpose in designating the Gateway Redevelopment Area
is to utilize the tools and powers available under the
Redevelopment Law, as well as the Redevelopment Area's
location vis-a-vis the bucolic meadows, Atlantic City skyline
and proximity to the Atlantic City Expressway in order to
stimulate meaningful and valuable development as a
replacement to the patchwork of underutilized and
underproductive uses existing in this section of the City.
(c) As of the adoption of this chapter, no Redevelopment Plan for
this Redevelopment Area had been adopted. Until such time as
a Redevelopment Plan is adopted, RSC Zoning remains in
effect.
(3) Permitted principal structures and uses.
(a) General commercial and service activities, as defined in
§ 300-10.
(b) Regionally oriented commercial and service activities, as
defined in § 300-10.
(c) Personal service establishments.
(d) Food production uses.
(e) Florists.
(f) Kennels.
(g) Public utility (central) substations.
(h) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
(4) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Employee lounge and cafeteria functions and other back-ofthe-
house facilities normal and customary to an otherwise
permitted use.
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:839
(b) Off-street parking lots/parking facilities.
(c) Off-street loading facilities.
(d) Storage sheds, tool sheds or other maintenance-related
structures.
(e) Fences and walls.
(f) Signs.
(g) Telecommunications/satellite dish antennas and related
systems.
(h) Solar energy systems.
(i) Automated teller/cash-dispensing machines (ATMs), provided
that, if accessed from the exterior of a building, such machines
shall be installed within the wall of the building; it being the
intent not to permit freestanding exterior ATM kiosks. ATM
kiosks wholly located and accessed from the interior of a
building are permitted.
(j) Public utility cabinets.
(k) Typical amenities when accessory to a hotel or motel.
(l) Typical amenities when accessory to a recreational vehicle
park.
(m) Electric vehicle supply equipment, subject to conditions set
forth in § 300-51. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
(5) Permitted conditional structures and uses.
(a) Designed shopping centers, as defined in § 300-10.
(b) Commercial tour bus parking facilities regulated by the South
Jersey Transportation Authority.
(c) Commercial private automobile parking facilities.
(d) Recreational vehicle park.
(e) Eating and drinking establishments, including restaurants,
drive-in restaurants and fast-food restaurants with window
service for takeout fare; bars; and taverns.
(f) Educational uses, as defined in § 300-10.
(g) Professional and administrative offices.
(h) Medical/dental complexes, as defined in § 300-10.
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:840
(i) Specialized outdoor cultural and/or entertainment venues such
as performing arts centers, theaters, movie theaters, and other
like and similar attractions.
(j) Hotels and motels, including those with conference facilities.
(6) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
Minimum lot area 1.5 acres
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot depth
No minimum established
In addition to the minimum 25-foot
landscaped buffer zone detailed in
§ 300-69F(3):
Front yard 40 feet
Parking is prohibited
within the first 25 feet of
the front yard.
Side yards 20 feet (each)
Rear yard 40 feet
Minimum setbacks
Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks,
no principal structure may be located
closer than 15 feet to a principal structure
located on the same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The greater of 20 stories or 2.5 times the
distance from the nearest residential
structure
Principal
structure
38%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(7) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.1
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:841
In addition to the minimum 25-foot
landscaped buffer zone detailed in
§ 300-69F(3):
Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 10 feet
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 10 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 1/2 stories or 20 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(8) Bulk requirements for conditional uses.1
(a) Designed shopping centers, as defined in § 300-10.
Minimum lot area 1.5 acres
Minimum lot width No minimum established
Minimum lot depth No minimum established
In addition to the minimum 25-foot
landscaped buffer zone detailed in
§ 300-69F(3):
Front yard 40 feet
Parking is prohibited
within the first 25
feet of the front yard.
Side yards 20 feet (each)
Rear yard 40 feet
Minimum setbacks
Notwithstanding any minimum
setbacks, no principal structure may be
located closer than 15 feet to a
principal structure located on the same
or an adjacent lot.
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:842
Maximum building
height
The lower of 5 stories or 60 feet
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
Minimum total floor
area
50,000 square feet
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(b) Commercial tour bus parking facilities; commercial private
automobile parking facilities; recreational vehicle park.
5 acres under the following standards:
Commercial
tour buses
50 per acre
Recreational
vehicles
Minimum lot area 40 per acre
Commercial
private
automobiles
145 per acre
Minimum lot width No minimum established
Minimum lot depth No minimum established
In addition to the minimum 25-foot
landscaped buffer zone detailed in
§ 300-69F(3):
Front yard Parking is prohibited
within the first 25
feet of the front yard
Side yards 20 feet (each)
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 40 feet
Maximum building
height
Notwithstanding the definition of
"building height" or convention for of
measuring building height established
in this chapter, and with the exception
of telecommunications antennas, no
portion of any structure under this use
shall exceed 35 feet from mean sea
level.
Maximum coverage Principal
structure
5%
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:843
Impervious 80%
(c) Eating and drinking establishments, including restaurants,
drive-in restaurants and fast-food restaurants with window
service for takeout fare; bars; and taverns.
Minimum lot area 43,560 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot depth
No minimum established
In addition to the minimum 25-foot
landscaped buffer zone detailed in
§ 300-69F(3):
Front yard 40 feet
Parking is prohibited
within the first 25
feet of the front yard
Side yards 20 feet (each)
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 40 feet
Maximum building
height
The greater of 20 stories or 2.5 times
the distance from the nearest
residential structure
Principal
structure
38%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
(d) Educational uses; professional, administrative and consulting
services offices; medical/dental complexes.
Minimum lot area 2.5 acres
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot depth
No minimum established
In addition to the minimum 25-foot
landscaped buffer zone detailed in
§ 300-69F(3):
Front yard 40 feet
Parking is prohibited
within the first 25
feet of the front yard
Side yards 20 feet (each)
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 40 feet
Maximum building
height
The greater of 20 stories or 2.5 times
the distance from the nearest
residential structure
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:844
Principal
structure
35%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
Floor area ratio 2.5
(e) Specialized outdoor cultural and/or entertainment venues such
as performing arts centers, theaters, movie theaters, and other
like and similar attractions.
Minimum lot area 1.5 acres
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot depth
No minimum established.
In addition to the minimum 25-foot
landscaped buffer zone detailed in
§ 300-69F(3):
Front yard 40 feet
Parking is prohibited
within the first 25
feet of the front yard
Side yards 20 feet (each)
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 40 feet
Maximum building
height
The greater of 20 stories or 2.5 times
the distance from the nearest
residential structure
Principal
structure
5%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
Floor area ratio 0.10
(f) Hotels and motels, including those with conference facilities.
Minimum lot area 43,460 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot depth
No minimum established
In addition to the minimum 25-foot
landscaped buffer zone detailed in
§ 300-69F(3):
Front yard 40 feet
Parking is prohibited
within the first 25
feet of the front yard
Minimum setbacks
Side yards 20 feet (each)
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:845
Rear yard 40 feet
Maximum building
height
The greater of 20 stories or 2.5 times
the distance from the nearest
residential structure
Principal
structure
With structured
parking: 50%
Without structured
parking: 40%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
Floor area ratio 3.5, exclusive of structured parking.
(9) Off-street parking and loading. In addition to any requirements
specified in § 300-51, off-street parking and loading shall be as
detailed in §§ 300-55 and 300-56.
(10) Design standards. All structures in the RSC Zoning District shall
comply with the design standards set forth in § 300-51.
G. Light Industrial ("L-I") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The Light Industrial Zoning District was crafted to
provide for and encourage light industrial concentrations (limited
to those uses specifically enumerated) in locations which will
adequately accommodate such development, while not negatively
impacting the public health, safety and general welfare of adjacent
residential neighborhoods or the natural environment in close
proximity to such (light industrial) uses.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses.
(a) Light Industrial operations, as defined in § 300-10 ("industrial,
light"), within a completely enclosed building.
(b) Fully enclosed warehouse or storage establishments.
(c) Research and design laboratories.
(d) Administrative offices, open-air yard storage and other
municipally sponsored facilities, uses and activities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services or the support of the
general welfare of the community by the City of Pleasantville.
(e) Public utility (central) substations.
(f) Self-operated rental (mini) storage facilities, including rental of
moving vehicles and equipment (trucks, vans, lifts, etc.).
(g) Automobile repair establishments, including auto-body repair
and car washes.
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:846
(h) Contractor's warehouse and offices, including material or
design showrooms.
(i) Wholesale distribution centers, including contractor's
wholesale supply facilities and wholesale produce or other
food-related wholesale operation.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Employee lounge and cafeteria functions and other back-ofthe-
house facilities normal and customary to an otherwise
permitted use.
(b) Outdoor or garaged storage of vehicles, limited to those
incidental to an approved permitted use.
(c) Enclosed storage and maintenance areas incidental to the
permitted principal permitted use.
(d) Over-the-counter retail sales to the public, provided that such
retail sales are incidental to an approved permitted use,
subject to the bulk regulations of § 300-23G(5).
(e) Subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, exterior storage of
merchandise, products, equipment or similar material
incidental to a principal permitted use, provided that such
storage is screened from view from any public right-of-way or
adjacent residential property by a fence or wall, as well as by
an appropriate combination of plant material in order to soften
the appearance of said fence or wall. The adequacy and
acceptability of the landscaping plan shall be determined by
the approving Board.
(f) Off-street parking lots/parking facilities.
(g) Off-street loading facilities.
(h) Fences and walls.
(i) Signs.
(j) Telecommunications/satellite dish antennas and related
systems.
(k) Solar energy systems.
(l) Automated teller/cash-dispensing machines (ATMs), provided
that, if accessed from the exterior of a building, such machines
shall be installed within the wall of the building; it being the
intent not to permit freestanding exterior ATM kiosks. ATM
kiosks wholly located and accessed from the interior of a
building are permitted.
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-23
285:847
(m) Public utility cabinets.
(n) Electric vehicle supply equipment, subject to conditions set
forth in § 300-51. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
(4) Permitted conditional structures and uses.
(a) Multiple principal uses within a single building shall be
allowed, provided that each such use is a permitted principal
use within the Light Industrial Zoning District, and further
provided that each such use is located within a separately
identifiable and fully securable space (it being the City's
intention to prohibit an entity from subleasing a small portion
of a larger, single floor area). Within this context, multiple
corporate entities may operate out of a single space, provided
that such entities are subsidiaries or related companies.
(b) Administrative office uses when accessory to a permitted
principal or conditional use. While accessory in nature, such
offices shall be subject to the bulk requirements for conditional
uses and not the 500 square feet maximum for accessory
structures.
(c) Open-air lots or enclosed storage facilities for inventoried
vehicles intended for on- or off-site sale or rental.
(d) Open-air lots, limited to the temporary storage of towed
vehicles by, or under a contract with, the City of Pleasantville.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
Minimum lot area for open-air lots 43,460 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width
Minimum lot depth
100 feet
In addition to the minimum 25-foot
landscaped buffer zone detailed in
§ 300-69F(3):
Front yard 45 feet
Side yards 30 feet (each)
Rear yard 45 feet
Minimum setbacks
Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks,
no principal structure may be located
closer than 15 feet to a principal structure
located on the same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 3 1/2 stories or 48 feet
Maximum coverage Principal
structure
60%
§ 300-23 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-23
285:848
§ 300-24. Specialty zoning districts.
Impervious 80%
Floor area ratio 3.5, exclusive of structured parking.
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(6) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.1
Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 20 feet
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 20 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 1/2 stories or 20 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(7) Bulk requirements for conditional uses. (Note: See definitions of
"lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage, primary," "lot frontage,
secondary" and "lot line, front" for measurements related to corner
lots.) Administrative office uses when accessory to a permitted
principal or conditional use, limited to 25% of the total floor space
of the host building.
(8) Off-street parking and loading. In addition to any requirements
specified in § 300-51, off-street parking and loading shall be as
detailed in §§ 300-55 and 300-56.
(9) Design standards. All structures in the LI Zoning District shall
comply with the design standards set forth in § 300-51.
§ 300-23 WATER § 300-24
285:849
A. The purpose and intent of the City's Specialty Zoning Districts is to
provide locations for a variety of mixed or other specialized uses which,
due to the nature, combination or intensity of activities anticipated
therein or their location vis-a-vis sensitive environmental or other
resources, do not readily lend themselves to traditional City zoning
classifications.
B. Bayside Mixed-Use ("BMU") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The Bayside Mixed-Use Zoning District was crafted to
provide for an appropriate mix of development intensity and land
uses which, when placed in juxtaposition to the bucolic meadow
and Atlantic City Skyline views on the eastern edge of the City,
favorable proximity to the mixed-use City Center Redevelopment
Area and Central Business District, and access to the Atlantic City
Expressway, create a very attractive setting for higher density
market rate and luxury vertical development in order to take
advantage of such amenities and maximize Pleasantville's location,
not as just the gateway to Atlantic City, but as a separate viable
location in which people want to live, work and play.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses.
(a) Conditioned upon conformance with the provisions of § 300-51,
all of the following principal uses shall be permitted as multiple
uses within a single building.
(b) With the exception of administrative offices and related
facilities for governmental use, public utility (central)
substations and passive public open space, no nonresidential
structure or use shall be permitted absent a permitted
residential use.
(c) All residential uses shall be located above the ground floor.
With the exception of eating and drinking establishments,
retail uses shall be limited to the ground floor. Nonretail
commercial uses may be located above the ground floor where
appropriate.
[1] Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments,
including age-restricted housing for qualifying individuals
other than nursing homes or related facilities,
[2] Downtown- and regionally oriented commercial and
service activities, as defined in § 300-10.
[3] Eating and drinking establishments, including restaurants
and taverns, but excluding drive-in restaurants, fast-food
restaurants and bars.
§ 300-24 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-24
285:850
[4] Specialized entertainment venues such as performing arts
centers, theaters, movie theaters, and other like and
similar attractions.
[5] Within the context of permitted principal uses In
Subsection B(2)(c)[3] and [4], nightlife establishments that
serve alcoholic beverages shall be permitted, provided
that cooked-to-order food is prepared and served on the
premises. [Note: By way of interpretation, restaurant
facilities with entertainment (dinner theaters) shall be
permitted while facilities which do not serve food
(nightclubs) shall not be permitted.]
[6] Retail liquor stores, provided that they obtain an
appropriate license from the New Jersey Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control and maintain same in good
standing.
[7] Professional and administrative offices.
[8] Libraries; museums (cultural or popular); art galleries;
studios for artists, musicians, photographers and other
artisans; and like and similar activities.
[9] Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal,
county, state or federal governmental services.
[10] Public utility (central) substations.
[11] Passive public open space.
[12] Medical complexes, as defined in § 300-10.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Employee lounge and cafeteria functions and other back-ofthe-
house facilities normal and customary to an otherwise
permitted use.
(b) Off-street parking lots/parking facilities.
(c) Off-street loading facilities.
(d) Storage sheds, tool sheds or other maintenance-related
structures.
(e) Fences and walls;
(f) Telecommunications/satellite dish antennas and related
systems.
(g) Solar energy systems;
§ 300-24 WATER § 300-24
285:851
(h) Automated teller/cash-dispensing machines (ATMs), provided
that, if accessed from the exterior of a building, such machines
shall be installed within the wall of the building, it being the
intent not to permit freestanding exterior ATM kiosks. ATM
kiosks wholly located and accessed from the interior of a
building are permitted.
(i) Signs.
(j) Public utility cabinets.
(k) Typical residential amenities, as defined in § 300-10.
(l) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
permitted residential use.
(m) Electric vehicle supply equipment, subject to conditions set
forth in § 300-51. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
(4) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
Minimum lot area 43,460 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width 200 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
In addition to the minimum 25-foot
landscaped buffer zone detailed in
§ 300-69F(3):
Front yard 0 feet, provided the
abutting sidewalk is 15
feet in width. Otherwise,
such width as to create a
15-foot-wide public
sidewalk between the
curb and the front
facade.
Side yards Same as front yard
Rear yard 10 feet
Milan Avenue 10 feet
Engersoll
Avenue
25 feet
Minimum setbacks
The western
BMU Zone
Boundary Line
north of
Engersoll
Avenue
30 feet
§ 300-24 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-24
285:852
Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks,
no principal structure may be located
closer than 15 feet to a principal structure
located on the same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
Subject to the building envelope
regulations under § 300-51I; the lower of
12 stories or 150 feet
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
Residential density No traditional dwelling unit per acre (du/
ac) density figure is mandated. Density
shall be regulated by minimum lot size and
the various definitions of residential
structural types conditionally permitted.
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(5) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.1
Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 5 feet
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 5 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 1/2 stories or 20 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
§ 300-24 WATER § 300-24
285:853
(6) Off-street parking and loading. In addition to any requirements
specified in § 300-51, off-street parking and loading shall be as
detailed in §§ 300-55 and 300-56.
(7) Design standards. All structures in the BMU Zoning District shall
comply with the design standards set forth in § 300-51.
C. Cemetery ("CEM") Zoning District.
(1) Permitted principal structures and uses: aboveground or belowground
interment.
(2) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Maintenance buildings.
(b) Roads and pathways.
(c) Directional signs.
(3) Area and bulk requirements.
Minimum lot area 43,460 square feet (1 acre)
Minimum lot width 200 feet
Minimum lot depth N/A
Underground
burial sites:
10 feet from property line
Minimum setbacks
Aboveground
structures:
15 feet from property line
Maximum building
height
15 feet
(4) Miscellaneous requirements.
(a) Normal interment activities do not require approval.
(b) Any structure 1,000 square feet or larger (outside dimensions)
requires minor site plan approval.
(c) Cemetery grounds and landscaping shall be maintained at all
times.
(d) Stormwater management and related structures, subject to the
provisions of Chapter 251 of the City Code.
D. Conservation ("CONSERV") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. Recognizing that Pleasantville is located in New Jersey's
Coastal Zone and that certain portions of the City, specifically those
on its northeast and southeast edges, are extremely
environmentally sensitive, the Conservation Zoning District was
§ 300-24 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-24
285:854
crafted to protect this natural environment, where appropriate, and
foster resource-friendly development where possible.
(2) The regulations established for the Conservation Zoning District
are those of the City of Pleasantville. While such regulations were
designed to conform with CAFRA and the Coastal Zone
Management Rules, they do not substitute for CAFRA, the CZM, or
any other law, code, rule or regulation established by any state or
federal agency. All development within the Conservation Zoning
District shall comply with such laws, codes, rules and regulations
as applicable.
(3) All structures and uses in the Conservation Zoning District shall be
considered conditional structures and uses and shall be subject to
review and approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 and
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70-3.
(4) Permitted principal and accessory structures and uses.
(a) Public Parks, playgrounds and other open space, whether
active or passive.
(b) Public conservation areas.
(c) Such educational, recreational or eco-tourism structures and
activities as may be permitted by relevant governmental
agencies having jurisdiction over this section of the City,
including observation decks/overlooks, scenic/nature trails,
environmental interpretation stations and like and similar
uses.
(d) Public utility cabinets.
(e) Such environmental protection measures as may be required
by relevant governmental agencies having jurisdiction over
this section of the City.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal and accessory structures (Note:
See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage, primary,"
"lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for measurements
related to corner lots.) No requirements established. This chapter
defers specific requirements for the physical development in the
Conservation Zoning District to the various governmental agencies
having jurisdiction over this section of the City.
E. Waterfront Residential ("WR") Zoning District.
(1) Purpose. The Waterfront Residential Zoning District was crafted to
provide a setting for a number of relatively new residential building
types in the City and thereby assist in achieving the purpose and
intent of the City's residential zoning districts, as detailed in
§ 300-24 WATER § 300-24
285:855
§ 300-22, while encouraging the redevelopment of the Lakes Bay
waterfront section of the City.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses.
(a) Single-family detached dwelling units.
(b) Single-family semidetached (duplex) dwelling units, as defined
in § 300-10.
(c) Two-family stacked (multistory) dwelling units, as defined in
§ 300-10.
(d) Three- to four-family semidetached ('tri" or "quad") dwelling
units, as defined in § 300-10.
(e) Townhouses, as defined in § 300-10.
(f) Garden apartments, as defined in § 300-10.
(g) Apartments and multifamily dwellings, including agerestricted
housing for qualifying individuals other than nursing
homes or related facilities, conditioned upon conformance with
the requirements of § 300-51.
(h) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
(i) Places of worship.
(j) Parks, playgrounds and public active or passive open space
owned or operated by the City of Pleasantville.
(k) Public utility (central) substations.
(l) Professional offices as part of a residential-looking structure
which may or may not contain residential living quarters,
conditioned upon such bulk standards as may be appropriate
to the use and type of structure proposed for the zoning district
in which the property is located, and further conditioned upon
all parking being on site with controlled ingress and egress
points and restricted to the side or rear yard area of the lot.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Typical residential amenities, as defined in § 300-10.
(b) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
permitted residential use.
(c) Public utility cabinets.
(d) Stormwater management and related structures, subject to the
provisions of Chapter 251 of the City Code.
§ 300-24 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-24
285:856
§ 300-25. Overlay zoning districts.
(e) Electric vehicle supply equipment, subject to conditions set
forth in § 300-51. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
(4) The following structures and uses shall conform to the bulk
requirements and design standards for the SFR-75 Zoning District
(§§ 300-22D and 300-51):
(a) Single-family detached dwelling units.
(b) Places of worship;
(c) Parks, playgrounds and public active or passive open space
owned or operated by the City of Pleasantville.
(d) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
(5) The following structures and uses shall conform to the bulk
requirements and design standards for the R-D Zoning District
(§§ 300-22E. and 300-51):
(a) Single-family semidetached (duplex) dwelling units, as defined
in § 300-10: shall conform to the bulk requirements for the R-D
Zoning District.
(b) Two-family stacked (multistory) dwelling units, as defined in
§ 300-10.
(6) The following structures and uses shall conform to the bulk
requirements and design standards for the MF Zoning District
(§§ 300-22F and 300-51):
(a) Townhouses, as defined in § 300-10.
(b) Three- to four-family semidetached ("tri" or "quad") dwelling
units, as defined in § 300-10.
(c) Garden apartments, as defined in § 300-10.
(d) Apartments and multifamily dwellings, including agerestricted
housing for qualifying individuals other than nursing
homes or related facilities.
(7) Off-street parking and loading: as detailed in §§ 300-55 and 300-56.
(8) Signs: as detailed in § 300-57 through § 300-64.
(9) Design standards. In addition to the regulations referenced in
§ 300-24E(4), (5) and (6), all structures in the WR Zoning District
shall comply with the requirements § 300-51.
§ 300-24 WATER § 300-25
285:857
A. The purpose and intent of the City's overlay zones is to provide
locations in specific sections of the City for a variety of specialized land
uses which may be appropriate for and benefit from being sited in such
locations but which do not necessitate the removal or displacement of
the existing land uses in such locations, and therefore do not require
change in the base (i.e., underlying) zoning of such locations. The
benefit of such overlay zoning is to permit certain land uses in an area
without rendering the existing land uses nonconforming.
B. Bayside Mixed-Use Overlay ("BMU Overlay") Zone.
(1) Purpose. The Bayside Mixed-Use Overlay Zone was crafted to take
advantage of the locational amenities described under § 300-24B
without imposing nonconforming status on the existing land uses in
such locations.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses. Conditioned upon
conformance with the requirements of § 300-51, all of the following
principal uses shall be permitted as multiple uses within a single
building. With the exception of administrative offices and related
facilities for governmental use, public utility (central) substations
and passive public open space, no nonresidential structure or use
shall be permitted absent a permitted residential use.
(a) Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments, including
age-restricted housing for qualifying individuals other than
nursing homes or related facilities.
(b) Eating and drinking establishments, including restaurants and
taverns, but excluding drive-in restaurants, fast-food
restaurants and bars.
(c) Professional and administrative offices.
(d) Libraries; museums (cultural or popular); art galleries; studios
for artists, musicians, photographers and other artisans; and
like and similar activities.
(e) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
(f) Public utility (central) substations.
(g) Passive public open space.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses. Those accessory
structures and uses permitted in the BMU Zoning District
(§ 300-24B.).
(4) Bulk requirements for principal and accessory structures. (Note:
See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage, primary,"
§ 300-25 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-25
285:858
"lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for measurements
related to corner lots.)
(a) Storage sheds, tool sheds or other maintenance-related
structures.
(b) Fences and walls.
(c) Signs.
(d) Public utility cabinets.
(e) Home occupations, as defined in § 300-10, when accessory to a
conditional residential use.
(f) Typical residential amenities, as defined in § 300-10, when
accessory to a conditional residential use.
(5) Bulk requirements for principal structures.1
Minimum lot area 9,600 square feet
Minimum lot width 60 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Front yard 0 feet
Side yard 0 feet interior, 12 feet
exterior (end unit)
Minimum setbacks Rear yard 20 feet
Notwithstanding any minimum setbacks, no
principal structure may be located closer
than 15 feet to a principal structure located
on the same or an adjacent lot.
Maximum building
height
The lower of 4 stories or 48 feet
Principal
structure
60%
Maximum coverage
Impervious 80%
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(6) Bulk requirements for accessory structures.1
§ 300-25 WATER § 300-25
285:859
Front yard No accessory structure
shall be located between
a lot's front lot line and a
line drawn parallel to the
rear line of the principal
building or structure on
such lot and extending to
the side lot lines of such
lot.
Side yard 5 feet
Minimum setbacks
Rear yard 5 feet
Maximum building
height
The lower of 1 1/2 stories or 20 feet
Maximum coverage All accessory
structures
500 square feet
NOTES:
1 See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot frontage,
primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.
(7) Off-street parking and loading. For nonresidential uses, the offstreet
parking and loading for the CBD Zoning District
[§ 300-23B(8)] shall govern. For residential uses, off-street parking
and loading shall be as detailed in §§ 300-55 and 300-56.
(8) Design standards. All structures in the CC Support Overlay Zone
shall comply with the design standards set forth in § 300-51. The
bulk requirements for principal and accessory structures in the
BMU Zoning District [§ 300-24B(4) and (5)] shall govern.
(9) Off-street parking and loading. For nonresidential uses, the offstreet
parking and loading for the BMU Zoning District
[§ 300-24B(6)] shall govern. For residential uses, off-street parking
and loading shall be as detailed in §§ 300-55 and 300-56.
(10) Design standards. All structures in the BMU Overlay Zone shall
comply with the design standards set forth in § 300-51.
C. City Center Support ("CC Support") Overlay Zone.
(1) Purpose. The City Center Support Overlay Zone was crafted to
increase the number of housing units in the City's downtown area
in order to support the commercial uses within City Center
Redevelopment Area, thereby making the redevelopment projects
therein attractive to potential retailers, and to provide an
appropriate buffer between the more intense redevelopment area
and the less intense single-family development surrounding
§ 300-25 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-25
285:860
redevelopment area, without imposing nonconforming status on
the existing land uses in such locations.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses. Conditioned upon
conformance with the requirements of § 300-51, all of the following
principal uses shall be permitted as multiple uses within a single
building. Nonresidential uses shall be limited to the ground floor,
with residential space required above. No such use shall be
permitted absent the residential use.
(a) Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments, garden
apartments and townhouses, including age-restricted housing
for qualifying individuals other than nursing homes or related
facilities.
(b) Downtown-oriented commercial and service activities, as
defined in § 300-10.
(c) Administrative offices and related facilities as may be
necessary and convenient to the provision of municipal, county,
state or federal governmental services.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses.
(a) Employee lounge and cafeteria functions and other back-ofthe-
house facilities normal and customary to an otherwise
permitted use.
(b) Off-street parking lots/parking facilities.
(c) Off-street loading facilities.
(d) Telecommunications/satellite dish antennas and related
systems.
(e) Solar energy systems.
(f) Automated teller/cash-dispensing machines (ATMs), provided
that, if accessed from the exterior of a building, such machines
shall be installed within the wall of the building, it being the
intent not to permit freestanding exterior ATM kiosks. ATM
kiosks wholly located and accessed from the interior of a
building are permitted.
(g) Electric vehicle supply equipment, subject to conditions set
forth in § 300-51. [Added 3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
D. Neighborhood Commercial Overlay ("NC Overlay") Zone.
(1) Purpose. The Neighborhood Commercial Overlay Zone was crafted
to maximize the commercial opportunities on Main Street (one of
Atlantic County's primary north/south corridors) in order to
increase the goods and services available to the residents of the
City without imposing nonconforming status on existing land uses.
§ 300-25 WATER § 300-25
285:861
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses. The principal structures
and uses for the NC Zoning District [§ 300-23D(2)] shall be
permitted in the NC Overlay Zone.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses. The accessory structures
and uses for the NC Zoning District [§ 300-23 D(3)] shall be
permitted in the NC Overlay Zone.
(4) Bulk requirements for principal and accessory structures and uses.
The bulk requirements for principal and accessory structures and
uses for the base zoning under the subject site shall govern.
(5) Off-street parking and loading. The off-street parking and loading
for the NC Zoning District [§ 300-23 D(8)] shall govern.
(6) Design standards. All structures in the NC Overlay Zone shall
comply with the design standards set forth in § 300-51.
E. Professional Office Overlay ("PO Overlay") Zone.
(1) Purpose. The Professional Office Overlay Zone was crafted to retain
the ability of professionals to practice in very specific and
otherwise residential sections of the City under limited
circumstances.
(2) Permitted principal structures and uses. Professional office uses, as
defined in § 300-10.
(3) Permitted accessory structures and uses. The accessory structures
and uses for the base zoning under the subject site shall govern.
(4) Bulk requirements for principal and accessory structures and uses.
The bulk requirements for principal and accessory structures and
uses for the base zoning under the subject site shall govern.
(5) Off-street parking and loading: as detailed in §§ 300-55 and 300-56.
(6) Design standards. In addition to the design standards for the base
zoning under the subject site (§ 300-51), all buildings or structures
developed or used under the Professional Office Overlay shall be
constructed or, if existing, rehabilitated to appear as a residential
building, and shall be in general architectural conformance with
residential buildings in the surrounding neighborhood.
§ 300-25 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-25
285:862
ARTICLE VIII
Land Use Approvals
§ 300-26. Application submission process.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish a unified set of
procedures and standards governing applications for land use
review and approval.
(2) Consistent with the structure of the New Jersey Municipal Land
Use Law, this section makes no distinction between site plan and
subdivision approvals, but does distinguish between major site
plans and subdivisions and minor site plans and subdivisions, as
same are defined in this chapter.
(3) The regulations established herein are designed to insure that
development in the City of Pleasantville is consistent with the
Pleasantville Master Plan, and Capital Improvement Program,
Official Map and this chapter, and that adequate consideration will
be given to critical on-tract and off-tract engineering, planning and
design elements in order to insure the least possible adverse effect
upon, and the greatest possible benefit to, the public health, safety
and welfare as a result of public and private development. Toward
such end, it is the purpose of this section to assure that all
development requiring land use approval is located, planned,
designed, constructed and serviced to:
(a) Provide for adequate light, air and privacy;
(b) Secure safety from fire, flood and other danger;
(c) Be served by or provide adequate public improvements, public
sites and rights-of-way and essential public and quasi-public
services and facilities;
(d) Provide the most beneficial relationship between land use,
structural form and traffic circulation, having particular regard
to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways and
the adequate provision for pedestrian and vehicular movement
and adequacy of parking and loading;
(e) Prevent the pollution of air, water and land;
(f) Assure the adequacy of drainage facilities;
(g) Safeguard the water table;
(h) Provide for open space through the most efficient design and
layout of the land;
§ 300-26 WATER § 300-26
285:863
(i) Insure the proper use and management of the natural
resources in the City in order to preserve the integrity and
stability of such features and to ensure appropriate
development while minimizing negative impacts to such
features;
(j) Provide for the orderly layout and design of new subdivisions
and resubdivisions; and
(k) In the case of subdivisions, provide for the proper conveyance
of land by insuring accurate legal descriptions and the proper
placement of survey monumentation.
B. Procedures.
(1) All applications for land use approval, including pre-application
conferences and applications for site plan approval, subdivision
approval and variance relief, shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer, who shall review the application against the appropriate
City checklist (§ 300-77) for the purpose of determining if such
application is complete or incomplete as required under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10.3.
(2) Site plans which include design of drainage, pavement, curbing,
walkways, embankments, horizontal and vertical geometrics,
utilities and other pertinent structures shall be prepared, signed
and sealed by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer.
(a) A New Jersey registered architect may prepare a site plan if
limited to general locations.
(b) Topographical and boundary survey information, including all
subdivisions, shall be provided by or attributed to a New Jersey
licensed professional land surveyor.
(3) Upon receipt, the Zoning Officer, or his/her designee, shall process
the application and shall assign each application an application
number. Once an application has been assigned a number, such
number shall appear on all papers, maps, plats or plans and other
documents submitted for processing in conjunction with the
application.
(4) No application will be processed which does not include the
appropriate application fees and escrow deposits.
(a) It shall be the applicant's responsibility to insure that
application fees and escrow deposits are sufficient to address
all approvals required, consistent with the fee schedule found
at § 300-9. The City reserves the right to require additional
application fees and escrow deposits should the completeness
review or technical review of the application find that
additional approvals are required.
§ 300-26 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-26
285:864
§ 300-27. Completeness of application.
(b) Once such additional approvals have been identified, the City
and/or its professionals shall immediately cease review of the
subject application and issue a letter to the Board Secretary
informing the Secretary of the situation. The Board Secretary
shall immediately inform the applicant of the necessity for
additional funds. The review of the application shall not
resume until the appropriate funds have been submitted.
(5) Exempt development/administrative review.
(a) An administrative review by the Zoning Officer shall replace
review and approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, when the application qualifies
as an exempt development as defined in § 300-10.
(b) The Zoning Officer reserves the right to consult with the City's
planning, engineering, landscaping and other professionals, as
necessary, during the course of such administrative review,
with the costs therefor being paid by the applicant.
A. An application for land use approval shall be complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, when so
certified by the Zoning Officer. In performing the duties under this
subsection, the Zoning Officer may solicit such assistance as may be
required from the City Planner or the City Engineer.
B. In the event that the Zoning Officer does not certify the application to
be complete within 45 days of the date of its submission, the application
shall be deemed complete as of the 46th day following its submission
for purposes of commencing the applicable time period, unless:
(1) The application lacks information indicated on the application
forms and applicable checklist(s) (§ 300-77) provided to the
applicant; and
(2) The Zoning Officer or designee has notified the applicant, in
writing, of the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of
submission of the application.
C. An applicant may request a waiver of one or more checklist
requirements, and said request shall be granted by the Zoning Officer
within the aforementioned 45 days.
(1) It is specifically noted that the grant of any such waiver request
shall be for determination of completeness only. The grant of any
such waiver request by the Zoning Officer notwithstanding, the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, may require submission of any waived item if deemed by the
§ 300-26 WATER § 300-27
285:865
Board, in its sole discretion, to be necessary for the appropriate
and thorough review of the subject application.
(2) Accordingly, applicants are advised when requesting waivers that
such Board requirement may result in a delay in the hearing
process.
D. If (subject to the grant of any such waiver request) an application is
found to contain all of the information required by the appropriate
checklist(s):
(1) The Zoning Officer shall certify that said application is complete
and shall process the application in the case of an application for a
zoning permit, or direct the application to the Planning Board
Secretary or Zoning Board Secretary, as the case may be, to be
scheduled for hearing.
(2) The Board Secretary shall notify the applicant, in writing, that said
application has been deemed complete and that the applicant is
required to submit the full number of application packages as is
required by the applicable application checklist.
(3) Once the applicant has submitted the full number of application
packages required by the applicable application checklist, the
Board Secretary shall schedule the application at a regularly
scheduled Board meeting under the time frames established by the
Municipal Land Use Law. (Note: Including, but not limited to,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, 40:55D-47, 40:55D-48 and 40:55D-50.)
(4) Once scheduled, the Board Secretary shall notify the applicant, in
writing, that said application has been deemed scheduled for
hearing. Such notice shall state the date, time and place of the
scheduled hearing.
(5) The Board secretary shall promptly distribute copies of the
application package as follows:
(a) One package to each member of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as applicable;
(b) One package each to the applicable Board Planner, Board
Engineer and Board Solicitor;
(c) One package to the Construction Official;
(d) One package to the City Clerk; and
(e) At the direction of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as applicable, additional copies to other City,
county or state agencies.
E. Notification of incomplete application.
§ 300-27 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-27
285:866
(1) If an application is found to lack some of the information required
by the application forms and/or the appropriate checklist(s), the
Zoning Officer shall either:
(a) Cause the applicant to be notified, in writing, that said
application is incomplete, specifying the deficiencies in the
application; or
(b) If the Zoning Officer reasonably concludes that the missing
items of information are not necessary for the Board to make
an informed decision on the application, the Zoning Officer
may waive the requirement that said items be supplied as a
prerequisite for completeness, and certify that the application
is complete, notwithstanding the missing items. Such
certification shall be for completeness only, and does not limit
the Board's right to demand such information if it, in its
discretion, determines that such information is required to
make an informed decision on the matter.
(2) An applicant who has been notified that the application is
incomplete may request that one or more checklist requirements
be waived, in which event the Zoning Officer shall grant or deny the
request within 45 days.
F. An applicant who has been notified that the application is incomplete
based on the Zoning Officer's denial of a request for checklist item
waiver, may appeal such decision of the Zoning Officer to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment (Note: Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a,
40:55D-72, 40:55D-73 and 40:55D-74.) within 20 days of the action
under dispute. The Zoning Board shall have 120 days from the filing of
such an appeal to render a decision. Applications for appeal of a
decision of the Zoning Officer shall be made in accordance with the
Checklist F included in § 300-77, and shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee and escrow fee in accordance with
§ 300-9.
G. On the date that an application is certified as complete, or on the 46th
day following the submission of an application in the event that the
Zoning Officer fails to make a determination of completeness, or upon
the decision by the Zoning Board of Adjustment of an appeal of the
Zoning Officer's determination that an application is incomplete, as the
case may be, the time period(s) within which the appropriate Board
must act upon the application [pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law
(Note: Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a, 40:55D-72, 40:55D-73 and
40:55D-74.)] shall commence. In any case, the applicant is obliged to
prove that he/she is entitled to approval of the application.
Notwithstanding any actions taken or decisions made attendant to the
completeness process, the Board may require, as part of its review of an
application, correction of any information found to be in error,
submission of additional information not specified in this chapter or its
accompanying checklist(s) and/or revisions in the application
§ 300-27 WATER § 300-27
285:867
§ 300-28. Review and report by Board professionals.
Not less than 10 days prior to the scheduled Board hearing on an
application, the Engineer and Planner for the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, and any other City official or
consultant to which the application has been referred, shall file a written
report thereon with the appropriate Board Secretary, setting forth their
findings and determinations of conformance with this chapter, as well as
any applicable federal, state, county or municipal law, ordinance,
regulation, plan or program; and setting forth any recommendations for
modifications to the plans and/or recommended conditions of approval,
if any, necessary to bring such plans into conformance with this chapter
and/or any applicable federal, state, county or municipal law, ordinance,
regulation, plan or program; or to eliminate or minimize any adverse effect
of the proposed development on those aspects of the public health, safety
and general welfare of the community for which such official or professional
has special responsibility. In addition to the Board Secretary, each official or
professional shall transmit his/her report to the applicant either directly or
through the applicant's professionals.
§ 300-29. Notice requirements.
documents as are reasonably necessary to make an informed decision
as to whether the requirements for approval of the application have
been met, provided that the application shall not be deemed incomplete
for lack of any such additional information or revisions.
H. No application for land use approval or other authorizations pursuant to
this chapter shall receive final approvals wherein taxes or assessments
for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which
the application is made. The Zoning Officer, Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, is authorized to require
payment of these sums as a condition of any approvals granted.
A. Notices, general.
(1) Notice of every public hearing set pursuant to this chapter shall be
issued in the form and manner and to the persons specified in
§ 300-29B through E. Every notice shall include the date, time and
place of such hearing; the nature of the matters to be considered by
street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as
shown on the current tax duplicate in the City Tax Assessor's office;
and the location and times at which any maps and documents for
which approval is sought are available.
(2) All notices shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date for
hearing (with the date of the hearing not counting toward the tenday
period). In every case where published notice is required, it
shall be given by publication in the City's official newspaper of
record.
§ 300-27 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-29
285:868
(3) In every case where personal notice is required, it shall be given
either by serving a copy of the notice on the person in question or
by mailing a copy of the notice by certified mail to the person in
question.
(4) Where notice to a property owner is required, notice shall be given
to the owner as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Municipal
Tax Assessor's office or to his agent in charge of the property at his
address as shown on the current tax duplicate.
(5) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner.
(6) Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
(7) Notice by mail shall be deemed to be complete upon mailing. The
failure to give personal notice to any property owner not shown on
the latest current tax duplicate shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.
B. Notice for all public meetings. Notice of the public meetings of the
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be issued by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board Secretary, as the case may be, via
publication.
C. Notice concerning master plan. In addition to the published notice
required by § 300-29B, the Planning Board Secretary shall give
personal notice of every hearing on the adoption, revision or
amendment of the Pleasantville Master Plan, in the form and manner
specified in § 300-29A, as follows:
(1) The Clerk of all adjoining municipalities; and
(2) The County Planning Board (accompanied by a copy of the
proposed Master Plan or any proposed revision or amendment
thereto).
D. Notice concerning development regulations and the official map. In
addition to the published notice required by § 300-29B, personal notice
of the adoption, revision or amendment of any development regulation
or the Official Map shall be given, in the manner and form specified in
§ 300-29A, as follows:
(1) The Clerk of an adjoining municipality in the case of a hearing
involving property located within 200 feet of an adjoining
municipality.
(2) The County Planning Board (accompanied by a copy of the
proposed development regulation, Capital Improvement Program,
§ 300-29 WATER § 300-29
285:869
if any, or Official Map or any proposed revision or amendment
thereto).
E. Notice for applications.
(1) Once an application has been deemed complete and a hearing date
scheduled, applicants to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment are required to issue notice of the subject application
via publication and by certified mail or hand delivery to:
(a) All owners of property located within 200 feet, in all directions,
of the subject property, as shown on the City's current tax
duplicate(s). Notice shall be made regardless of whether or not
the property to be noticed is located within or without the City
of Pleasantville.
(b) The Clerk of an adjoining municipality in the case of a hearing
on an application for development involving property located
within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality. Such notice shall
be in addition to any notice required under Subsection E(1)(a)
hereinabove.
(c) The County Planning Board in the case of an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing county road or
a proposed county road shown on the Official County Map or
County Master Plan, or when adjoining other county land or
situated within 200 feet a municipal boundary.
(d) The New Jersey Commissioner of Transportation in the case of
an application for development of property adjacent to a state
highway.
(e) The Office of Smart Growth (or successor agency) within the
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, of a hearing on
an application for development of property which exceeds 150
acres or 500 dwelling units. The notice shall include a copy of
any maps or documents required to be on file with the
municipal clerk pursuant to § 300-30E.
(2) Notice must be published in the City's official newspaper of record
at least 10 days prior to the scheduled meeting date (with the date
of the meeting not counting toward the ten-day period).
(3) A certified list of such property owners for mailed or handdelivered
notice may be purchased from the City's Tax Assessor
and is required to be included in the application Package as part of
the completeness review. Such certified list of property owners
must be less than three months old to be considered current.
(4) All such notice must be accomplished at least 10 days prior to the
scheduled hearing date (with the date of the hearing not counting
toward the ten-day period).
§ 300-29 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-29
285:870
§ 300-30. Public hearings.
(5) An affidavit indicating proof of publication and notification must be
submitted to the Board Secretary not less than seven days prior to
the Board meeting on the matter. For certified mailings, such
affidavit shall be accompanied by the (white) return receipt
requested slips from the postal service. For hand-delivered notices,
such affidavit shall be accompanied by a copy of the notice which
has been signed and dated by the noticed property owner. For
published notice, a copy of the legal advertisement, with
publication name and date, shall be provided. Such affidavit shall
be signed by the applicant, whose signature shall be attested by a
notary public.
(6) Failure to notice properly or to provide evidence of proper notice
will prevent the respective Board from hearing the application as
scheduled, thereby requiring a rescheduling of the application and
the requirement that the applicant reissue proper notice.
A. The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be, shall select a reasonable time and place for the public hearings on
all matters properly brought before such bodies for which a public
hearing is required by this chapter.
B. Upon an application being deemed complete, a public hearing
scheduled and proper public notice made, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall hold a public hearing on
each matter within the time limits established under this chapter and
the Municipal Land Use Law. The responsible board shall render its
decision by either approving the application outright, approving the
application subject to conditions or denying the application.
C. Failure of the Board to act within the time limits established or such
longer period of time as may be agreed to by the applicant shall be
deemed an approval of the application.
D. Conduct of hearings.
(1) Any person may appear, testify, submit documentary evidence and
present argument at a public hearing, either in person or by a duly
authorized agent or attorney.
(2) Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable at hearings held
pursuant to this chapter, but the responsible board shall exclude
irrelevant, immaterial and unduly repetitious evidence or
arguments.
(3) Rights of persons entitled notice.
(a) Subject to the sound discretion of the responsible board, the
applicant or his representative, and any officer, department,
bureau, board or commission of the City and any property
§ 300-29 WATER § 300-30
285:871
owner or governmental agency entitled to mailed or personal
notice under § 300-29, may be permitted:
[1] To present witnesses, evidence and arguments on their
own behalf and, subject to the discretion of the presiding
officer and to reasonable limitations as to time and number
of witnesses, to cross-examine and impeach witnesses and
evidence offered in opposition to their position;
[2] To examine and reproduce any documents produced at the
hearing; and
[3] Subject to the right of the applicant to a decision within
any applicable time period, to be granted, upon request,
one continuance for the purpose of presenting evidence to
rebut evidence introduced by any other person. The date,
time and place of the continued hearing shall be
announced at the public hearing at which the vote of
continuance is passed. The responsible board, at its
discretion, may require that the party requesting a
continuance issue further notice pursuant to § 300-29 or
may, at its discretion, waive such further notice.
(b) In granting, withholding or limiting such rights, the discretion
of the responsible board shall be governed by the goal of
securing, in a timely fashion, all information, opinion and
argument relevant and material to its deliberations. Such
rights shall not, however, be granted where undue and
unwarranted delay would result or where to do so would tend
to produce no new evidence or arguments to aid the
responsible board in reaching its decision.
(4) Subject to the right of the applicant to a decision within any
applicable time limit, the responsible board may at any time, on its
own motion or at the request of any person, adjourn the hearing for
a reasonable time and to a fixed date, time and place for the
purpose of giving further notice, taking further evidence, gathering
further information or for such other reason as the Board may find
to be sufficient. The date, time and place of the adjourned hearing
shall be announced at the public hearing at which the vote of
adjournment is passed, and no further notice shall be required.
(5) All testimony and evidence shall be given under oath or affirmation.
The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have the power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties. The provisions of the County
and Municipal Investigations Law (N.J.S.A. 2A-67A-1 et seq.) shall
apply to all hearings held pursuant to this chapter.
§ 300-30 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-30
285:872
(6) Each board shall provide for the verbatim recording of every
hearing required to be held pursuant to this chapter. Such
recording shall be by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic
means. The Board Secretary shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate
recording in lieu thereof, to any interested person upon written
request and the payment of a fee in accordance with § 300-9.
(7) All other matters pertaining to the conduct of hearings shall be
governed by the provisions of this chapter pertaining thereto and
the rules promulgated by the Board conducting the hearing.
E. Prehearing availability of application and other documents.
(1) At any time following the issue of notice as required under
§ 300-29, and upon reasonable request, any person may examine
the application or other filing and all other documents on file with
the Zoning Officer pertaining to the subject matter of such notice.
(2) Any maps or documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
required to be held pursuant to this chapter shall be on file and
available for public inspection at least 10 days prior to the date of
the hearing. Such maps and documents shall be available for
inspection during normal business hours at the office of the Zoning
Officer.
(3) Any person shall be entitled to copies of such application or other
filing and such documents upon reasonable written request and
payment of a fee in accordance with § 300-9.
(4) The applicant may produce other documents, records or testimony
at the hearing to substantiate, clarify or supplement the previously
filed maps and documents.
F. The responsible board shall memorialize its action via a decision and
resolution at the next scheduled meeting of the Board. Such decision
and resolution shall be a conclusive, binding and final determination of
the Board's action.
G. A copy of each decision and resolution made following a hearing on an
application for development or for an amendment or on an appeal to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment, or certification of failure to act thereon,
shall be mailed by the Board Secretary within 10 days following the
date of the decision to the applicant or, if represented by an attorney,
then to such attorney, without separate charge. In addition, the Board
Secretary shall mail a copy of any such decision to any person who
shall, in writing, request a copy of such decision and pay a fee in
accordance with § 300-9.
H. A copy of each such decision and resolution, or certification of failure to
act thereon, shall be placed on file in the offices of the Board Secretary
and the City Clerk. The Board Secretary shall make a copy of each such
decision and resolution available to any interested party upon request
§ 300-30 WATER § 300-30
285:873
§ 300-31. Development barred by legal action.
and the payment of a fee in accordance with § 300-9. All such decisions
and resolutions shall be available for public inspection at the office of
the Zoning Officer during normal business hours.
I. Within 10 days following the date of the decision, the applicant shall
also cause a brief notice of the decision and resolution, or certification
of failure to act thereon, to be published in the official newspaper of the
City of Pleasantville. The time for filing an appeal from any decision and
resolution shall begin to run on the day such notice is first published.
J. Development regulations, Master Plan and Official Map.
(1) Within 30 days following the date of adoption, revision or
amendment of any development regulation or of the Pleasantville
Master Plan, or Official Map, the Board Secretary shall give notice
thereof to the County Planning Board. Every such notice shall be
accompanied by a copy of the development regulation, Master Plan
or Official Map, or any amendment or revision as adopted.
(2) Within 30 days following the adoption or amendment of the
Pleasantville Official Map, such map, as adopted, revised or
amended, shall be filed with the Pleasantville City Clerk.
(3) Copies of every development regulation and any revision or
amendment thereto shall be filed in the office of the Pleasantville
City Clerk and in the office of the Board Secretary. Such copies
shall be maintained in each such office and shall be available to any
interested party upon reasonable request and a payment of a fee in
accordance with § 300-9.
(4) No development regulation required to be filed with the County
Planning Board and no Official Map required to be filed with the
County Recording Officer pursuant to Subsection J(1) and J(2) shall
take effect until so filed.
A. Whenever an application for development has been granted pursuant to
this chapter and the developer is willing and able to proceed with the
development but is barred from proceeding by a legal action instituted
by any state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the
public health and welfare, or by a directive or order issued by any state
agency, political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to
protect the public health or welfare, the running of the period of
approval under this chapter shall be suspended for the period of time
said legal action is pending or such directive or order is in effect.
B. A developer may submit a development application pursuant to this
chapter which is directly or indirectly barred by a legal action instituted
by a state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the
public health and welfare, or by a directive or order issued by any state
agency, political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to
§ 300-30 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-31
285:874
§ 300-32. Development dependent on other agency approval.
Whenever a developer submits an application for development pursuant to
this chapter which requires the approval of an agency outside the provisions
of this chapter, the responsible board shall process the application as
if no further approval was required, and any approval granted shall be
conditioned upon the approval of such outside agency.
§ 300-33. Successive applications.
§ 300-34. Applications for zoning permits.
protect the public health and welfare. The Board to which the
application is submitted shall process the application as if no such
bar existed, and any approval granted shall be conditioned upon the
removal of such legal barrier to development.
A. Whenever any application, appeal or other request filed pursuant to this
chapter has been finally denied on its merits, a second application,
appeal or other request seeking essentially the same relief, whether or
not in the same form or on the same theory, shall not be brought unless,
in the opinion of the Board before which it is brought, substantial new
evidence is available or a mistake of law or fact significantly affected
the prior denial.
B. Any such second application shall include a detailed statement of
grounds justifying consideration of such application.
C. Such application may be denied summarily and without hearing upon a
finding that no grounds appear which warrant a new hearing. In any
case where such application is set for hearing, the applicant shall be
required to establish grounds warranting reconsideration of the merits
of the application prior to being allowed to offer any evidence on the
merits. Unless such grounds are established, the application may be
summarily dismissed for such failure.
A. Authority.
(1) The Zoning Officer or his duly authorized delegate shall have
authority to issue zoning permits in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
(2) Any zoning permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this
chapter shall be considered void ab initio (i.e., from the beginning).
B. Purpose. A zoning permit is intended to serve the following general
purposes:
(1) To provide a procedure for reviewing plans for compliance with this
chapter.
(2) As a means for evidencing such compliance.
§ 300-31 WATER § 300-34
285:875
(3) As an adjunct to, and thus must be filed prior to or with, all other
applications filed pursuant to this chapter with respect to a specific
use or development proposal. When so filed, a zoning permit serves
as a vehicle for routine plan review by the Zoning Officer prior to
consideration of special requests by other officers, boards and
commissions, thus avoiding needless special reviews of defective
plans.
C. Submission and processing of applications.
(1) Unless a zoning permit shall have first been obtained from the
Zoning Officer:
(a) The construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or
moving of any structure shall not begin.
(b) No land vacant on the effective date of this chapter shall be
used or occupied for any purpose.
(c) The improvement of land preliminary to any use of such land
shall not begin.
(d) Building or other permits pertaining to the construction,
reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or moving of any
structure, or the use of any land or structure, shall not be
issued by any official, officer, employee, department, bureau,
board, commission or agency of the City.
(e) No use or occupancy of any land or structure shall be changed
to any other use or occupancy, whether or not construction,
reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or moving is involved.
(f) No home occupation shall be established.
(g) No group family household shall be established.
(2) In any case where a zoning permit is not required under this
chapter, the Zoning Officer shall, on written request, issue a
binding certification of such fact.
(3) An application for a zoning permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Zoning Officer, shall be in such form and contain such information
and documentation as is required by Checklist A and Checklist B,
included in § 300-77, and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee and escrow deposit in accordance with § 300-9.
(4) The Zoning Officer shall act on an application for a zoning permit
within 10 days following determination of a completed application
therefor, and shall promptly inform the applicant whether the
application has been granted, denied, or will require review and
approval beyond the jurisdiction of the Zoning Officer pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-34 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-34
285:876
(5) In any case where an application is granted, the Zoning Officer
shall issue a zoning permit, which shall, either directly or by
incorporation of explicitly identified plans and documents, describe
the proposed construction, reconstruction, remodeling, alteration,
moving or subdivision to which the permit applies, and shall certify
the compliance of such construction, reconstruction, remodeling,
alteration, moving or subdivision with all or stated provisions of
this chapter.
(6) Every zoning permit issued shall state on its face, in bold, capital
letters:
THIS ZONING PERMIT IS SUBJECT TO CHANGES IN THE
PLEASANTVILLE LAND MANAGEMENT CODE WHICH MAY
OCCUR FROM TIME TO TIME.
THIS ZONING PERMIT DOES NOT SIGNIFY
CONSTRUCTION CODE REVIEW OR APPROVAL.
APPLICATION IS NOT AUTHORIZATION TO UNDERTAKE
ANY WORK WITHOUT SUCH REVIEW AND APPROVAL
(WHERE EITHER IS REQUIRED).
BEFORE ANY STRUCTURE TO WHICH THIS ZONING
PERMIT IS APPLICABLE MAY BE OCCUPIED OR USED FOR
ANY PURPOSE, A CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY OR
OCCUPANCY PERMIT MUST BE OBTAINED IN
ACCORDANCE WITH § 300-43 AND CHAPTER 119
(CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM) OF THE
PLEASANTVILLE CITY CODE.
(7) In any case where an application is denied, the Zoning Officer shall
state the specific reasons therefor, shall cite the specific provisions
of this chapter upon which such denial is based and shall state any
special approval procedure for relief of such denial available under
this chapter but beyond the jurisdiction of the Zoning Officer.
(8) A duplicate copy of every zoning permit issued or denied pursuant
to this section, numbered consecutively and showing the fee
charged therefor, together with such portions of the application as
the Zoning Officer may consider necessary for the proper
administration of this chapter, shall be kept on file by the Zoning
Officer as a public record, open to inspection by interested parties
at reasonable times and upon reasonable notice.
(9) Effect of approval.
(a) The issuance of a zoning permit shall not authorize the
establishment or extension of any use nor the development,
construction, relocation, alteration or moving of any building
or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing
and processing of applications for any additional permits and
approvals which may be required by the codes and ordinances
§ 300-34 WATER § 300-34
285:877
§ 300-35. Preapplication conference.
of the City or other governmental agency, including but not
limited to a building permit, a certificate of occupancy and
any special permits or approvals required pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(b) Where the permit relates to specific plans or is limited to a
certification of compliance with specified provisions of this
chapter, such permit shall not be construed to certify
compliance as to any matter not shown on such plans or to any
provision other than those specified.
(10) Limitations on approval. Except to the extent that, under this
chapter, site plan and/or subdivision plat approvals confer specified
rights on the applicant which are irrevocable for specified periods
of time, the issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to this section
shall not limit the right of the City to change the provisions of this
chapter in a manner considered appropriate by it, and upon the
effective date of any such change, inconsistent with any
certification contained in any such permit, such permit shall, to the
extent of such inconsistency, be null, void and of no effect.
A. Purpose.
(1) Prior to filing any application for site plan or subdivision approval,
the prospective applicant may request a preapplication conference
with the Planning Board or Planning and Redevelopment Advisory
Committee. Included in such preapplication conference shall be
relevant City/Board staff and consultants.
(2) The preapplication conference shall be an informal, nonbinding
review of the proposed project designed to broadly acquaint all
parties with the project proposal, air views and concerns of all
parties and provide the applicant with guidance and direction as to
possible solutions to problematic project elements.
B. Submission and processing of applications.
(1) A request for a preapplication conference shall be made, in writing,
to the Planning Board Secretary. Requests shall be in such form as
is required by Checklist A and Checklist C, included in § 300-77,
and shall address as many submission items requested by Checklist
A and Checklist C as are known at the time, but in any case shall
include the information necessary to provide the Board with a
complete understanding of the proposed project. Requests for
preapplication conferences shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee and escrow deposit in accordance
with § 300-9.
(2) The Planning Board Secretary shall notify the applicant of the time
and place of the preapplication conference, which shall be held
§ 300-34 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-35
285:878
§ 300-36. Site plan and subdivision review and approval.
within 45 days following determination that all information and
documentation required by Checklist A and Checklist C and all
application fees and escrow deposits have been submitted, or
within such other time as may be consented to by the applicant.
C. Effect of approval.
(1) None. The preapplication conference shall be an informal,
nonbinding review of the proposed project.
(2) An applicant may file a formal application for a land use approval at
any time within 180 days following completion of the
preapplication conference.
A. Authority.
(1) The City of Pleasantville hereby requires site plan review and
approval for:
(a) All new construction not classified as an exempt development
(as defined in § 300-10), providing that such development rises
to the level of minor or major site plan (as defined in § 300-10).
(b) All major subdivisions.
(c) Any development requiring a variance under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d).
(d) All changes in use that increases the intensity of the use of the
property.
(e) Any development involving the construction of any new
structure in excess of (the lower of) three stories or 35 feet in
height.
(f) Any increase in building height of any existing structure
resulting in such structure increasing beyond 2 1/2 stories or
35 feet in height.
(g) Any development involving the construction or exterior
alteration of any public or private school or other educational
institution not under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey
Department of Education, or any library, place of worship or
place of public assembly.
(h) Subject to review and comment by the Planning Board under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31.
[1] Any development involving the construction of any
building to be constructed, owned, leased or operated by
any unit of the national, state or local government, or the
exterior alteration of any building to be constructed,
§ 300-35 WATER § 300-36
285:879
altered, owned, leased or operated by any such
governmental agency, or the use or development of any
land to be owned, leased or operated by any such
governmental agency.
[2] Any development involving the construction or exterior
alteration of any public or private school or other
educational institution under the jurisdiction of the New
Jersey Department of Education.
(i) Any development involving the physical expansion of any
existing rooming house or lodging house or the increasing of
the number of rooms in any existing rooming house or lodging
house.
(2) The City of Pleasantville hereby requires subdivision review and
approval for all subdivisions and resubdivisions of land.
(3) The Planning Board shall, subject to the procedures, standards and
limitations hereinafter set forth, have authority to review and
approve or disapprove site plans and subdivision plats as detailed
in § 300-36D, E, F and G.
(4) Such review and approval is required prior to any clearing or
excavation of or removal of soil from a site, prior to any affirmative
construction on a site, prior to the issuance of any building permit
or certificate of occupancy and prior to the recording of any plat or
plan.
(5) Such review and approval shall be subject to the procedures,
standards and limitations hereinafter set forth herein.
(6) Approval by the Zoning Board of Adjustment may substitute for the
approval of the Planning Board whenever the Board of Adjustment
has jurisdiction over a site plan or subdivision pursuant to this
chapter.
B. Exempt development as defined in § 300-10 shall be exempt from the
requirements of this section.
C. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish a unified set of
procedures and standards governing site plan and subdivision
review and approval.
(2) It is the purpose of the provisions of this section to assure that
development will occur only as consistent with the Master Plan,
any capital improvement program, the Official Map and this
chapter, and that adequate consideration will be given to critical
on-tract and off-tract engineering, planning and design elements so
as to assure the least possible adverse effect upon and the greatest
possible benefit to the public health, safety and welfare as a result
§ 300-36 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-36
285:880
of public and private development. In particular, it is the purpose
of this section to insure that all development subject to these
provisions are located, planned, designed, laid out, constructed and
serviced to:
(a) Provide for adequate light, air and privacy;
(b) Secure safety from fire, flood and other danger;
(c) Be served by or provide adequate public improvements, public
sites and rights-of-way and essential public and quasi-public
services and facilities;
(d) Provide the most beneficial relationship between the land use,
structural form and traffic circulation, having particular regard
to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways and
the adequate provision for pedestrian and vehicular movement
of traffic and the adequacy of parking and loading;
(e) Prevent the pollution of air, water and land;
(f) Assure the adequacy of drainage facilities;
(g) Safeguard the water table;
(h) Insure the proper use and management of natural resources in
order to preserve their integrity and stability and to ensure
appropriate development while minimizing negative impacts to
such features;
(i) Provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and
layout of the land;
(j) Provide an orderly layout and design of new subdivisions and
resubdivisions; and
(k) In the case of subdivisions, provide for the proper conveyance
of land by ensuring accurate legal descriptions and the proper
placement of monumentation.
(3) Consistent with the structure of the New Jersey Municipal Land
Use Law, this section makes no distinction between cases where
site plan approval is required and those where subdivision approval
is required, but does distinguish between major site plans and
subdivisions and minor site plans and subdivisions, as same are
defined in this chapter.
D. Procedures, general.
(1) The procedures established by this section are intended to serve as
the principal development review mechanism for all significant
development in the City, whether such development is permitted
by-right or requires discretionary (i.e., variance) approval.
§ 300-36 WATER § 300-36
285:881
(2) Requirements for by-right applications. The standards of this
section are intended as minimum standards to be met by all
developments subject to site plan and subdivision review and are
designed to insure that development permitted by-right in the
various zoning districts will be adequately planned, designed and
serviced to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(3) Requirements for discretionary approvals, combined.
(a) In cases where discretionary approval, as defined in § 300-10,
is required, the procedures for site plan and/or subdivision
approval established herein are designed to be concurrent with
such discretionary approvals so that the applications for such
approvals may be processed without the need for separate
hearings and hearing notices.
(b) Where a development requires site plan and/or subdivision
approval in connection with another discretionary approval
pursuant to other sections of this chapter, additional standards
applicable to such discretionary approvals must be met, such
standards being generally more demanding than the minimum
standards established by this section, it being recognized that
developments subject to such discretionary approvals are
generally those which are expected to have unusual impacts
either on their immediate neighborhood or on the City in
general.
(4) Initiation. An application for site plan or subdivision approval may
be filed by the owner of or other person having a contractual
interest in the subject property.
E. Minor site plans and minor subdivisions.
(1) Purpose. The provisions of this section shall apply only upon a
finding by the Zoning Officer that the proposed development
qualifies as a minor site plan and/or minor subdivision, as defined
in § 300-10, and that no useful purpose would be served by the
bifurcation of the application into preliminary and final phases and
holding separate public hearings on each matter.
(2) Submission and processing of applications.
(a) Applications for minor site plan and/or minor subdivision
approval shall be in such form and shall contain such
information and documentation as is required by Checklist A
and Checklist D, included in § 300-77, and shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee and escrow
deposit, pursuant to § 300-9.
(b) Upon determination that an applicant has been deemed
complete in accordance with § 300-27, the Planning Board or
§ 300-36 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-36
285:882
Zoning Board Secretary, as the case may be, shall notify the
applicant of the time and place of the hearing on such matter.
(c) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall act on an application for minor site plan and/or
minor subdivision approval within 45 days from the time the
application has been determined to be complete, or within
such other time as may be consented to by the applicant.
(d) Effect of approval. Approval of a minor subdivision plat shall be
deemed to be final approval of the subdivision, subject to any
condition imposed.
(e) Limitations on approval/expiration.
[1] Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from
the date of memorialization of the Board resolution
approving the application, unless within such period a plat
in conformity with such approval and the provisions of the
Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.) is filed by the
applicant with the Atlantic County Recording Officer, the
City Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such
plat accepted for filing shall have been signed by the Chair
and Secretary of the Planning Board, or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, and referred to the
Atlantic County Planning Board pursuant to this chapter.
[2] Alternatively, the filing and recording of minor
subdivisions may be accomplished by deed, provided that
such deed clearly describes the approved minor
subdivision.
[3] Approval of a minor site plan or subdivision by the
Pleasantville Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case maybe, shall not substitute for or
limit the power of the Atlantic County Planning Board to
review and approve a minor site plan or subdivision under
its jurisdiction.
F. Preliminary major site plans and preliminary major subdivisions.
(1) Purpose.
(a) A preliminary major site plan or preliminary major subdivision
plat is intended to serve as a working document in the
development of a final major site plan or final major subdivision
plat and to provide sufficiently detailed information to allow an
informed decision concerning the overall acceptability of a
proposed development.
§ 300-36 WATER § 300-36
285:883
(b) The preliminary major site plan or preliminary major
subdivision plat is the basis on which the required public
hearing is held.
(c) Approval of the preliminary major site plan or preliminary
major subdivision plat binds the applicant and the City with
respect to the following basic elements of the development (to
the extent applicable):
[1] Consistency of the layout or arrangement of the
subdivision or land development with the requirements of
this chapter.
[2] Streets in the subdivision or land development of sufficient
width and suitable grade and suitably located to:
[a] Accommodate prospective traffic.
[b] Provide access for emergency responders and their
equipment to buildings.
[c] Coordinate rights-of-way in order to create a
convenient system of conveyances, consistent with the
Official Map, if any, and the Circulation Plan Element
of the municipal Master Plan, if any.
[d] Orient rights-of-way in order to permit a reasonable
utilization of lands and buildings to maximize solar
gain, provided that no street of a width greater than
50 feet within the right-of-way lines shall be required
unless said street constitutes an extension of an
existing street of the greater width or already has
been shown at the greater width on the Official Map or
in the Master Plan.
[3] Adequate water supply, drainage, sewerage facilities and
other utilities necessary for essential services to residents
and occupants.
[4] Suitable size, shape and location for any area reserved for
public use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-44.
[5] Regulation of land designated as subject to flooding
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65e to avoid danger to life or
property.
[6] Protection and conservation of soils from erosion by wind
or water or from excavation or grading.
[7] Conformity with standards promulgated by the
Commissioner of Transportation, pursuant to the Air
Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80
§ 300-36 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-36
285:884
et seq.) for any airport hazard areas delineated
thereunder.
[8] Provisions governing the standards for grading,
improvement and construction of streets or drives and for
any required walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights,
landscaping, fire hydrants and water and drainage and
sewerage facilities and other improvements as shall be
found necessary and provisions ensuring that such
facilities shall be completed either prior to or subsequent
to final approval of the subdivision or site plan by allowing
the posting of performance bonds by the developer.
[9] Provisions for off-tract water, sewer, drainage and street
improvements which are necessitated by a subdivision or
land development, subject to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-42.
[10] Provisions ensuring, in the case of a development which
proposes construction over a period of years, the
protection of the interests of the public and of the
residents, occupants and owners of the proposed
development in the total completion of the development.
[11] Provisions that require, as a condition for local municipal
approval, the submission of proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent
on the property for which any subdivision or site plan
application is made
[12] Preservation of existing natural resources
[13] Adequate screening, landscaping and location of
structures on both the public and private portions of the
development
[14] Safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation,
parking and loading
[15] In addition to any requirements for streetlighting, exterior
lighting needed for safety.
[16] Conservation of energy and use of renewable energy
sources.
(2) Submission and processing of applications.
(a) Applications for preliminary major site plan and/or preliminary
major subdivision approval shall be in such form and shall
contain such information and documentation as is required by
Checklist A and Checklist E, included in § 300-77, and shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee and escrow
deposit, pursuant to § 300-9.
§ 300-36 WATER § 300-36
285:885
(b) Upon determination that an application has been deemed
complete in accordance with § 300-27, the Planning Board or
Zoning Board Secretary, as the case may be, shall notify the
applicant of the time and place of the hearing on such matter.
(c) The Planning Board shall act on an application for preliminary
major site plan and/or preliminary major subdivision approval
within the following time periods, or within such other time as
may be consented to by the applicant:
[1] For development involving 10 or fewer acres and 10 or
fewer lots: within 45 days following determination of a
complete application or within such other time as may be
consented to by the applicant.
[2] For development involving more than 10 acres or more
than 10 lots: within 95 days following determination of a
complete application or within such other time as may be
consented to by the applicant.
(d) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act on an application for
preliminary major site plan and/or preliminary major
subdivision approval where variance relief is required under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) within 120 days following determination
of a complete application or within such other time as may be
consented to by the applicant.
(e) Failure of either board to act within the foregoing time frames
shall constitute approval of the application.
(f) Standard for approval. No application for Preliminary major
site plan and/or preliminary major subdivision approval shall
be granted unless the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall find that, based on the
information presented to it, it is probable that the proposed
development will, upon presentation of an application for final
major site plan and/or final major subdivision pursuant to
§ 300-36G, merit approval on the basis of its compliance with
each of the standards established for site plan and/or
subdivision plat approval pursuant to this chapter.
(g) Conditions for approval.
[1] In granting preliminary major site plan and/or preliminary
major subdivision approval, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, may impose such
restrictions and conditions upon the approval, the
proposed development or the subject property as may be
necessary, in its opinion, to achieve the purposes of this
chapter and the site plan/subdivision approval process, to
ensure the compliance of the proposed development with
the standards established by this chapter and to prevent or
§ 300-36 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-36
285:886
minimize any adverse effects of the proposed development
upon any portion of the subject property, properties in
the neighborhood of the subject property and/or upon the
general health, safety and welfare of the entire community.
Where any remaining portion of the subject property is
sufficient to be subdivided and/or further developed, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, may require the applicant to submit a conceptual
feasibility plan as to how such land could be subdivided
and/or further developed in order for the Board to
determine the extent that such development might create
or exacerbate any such adverse effects.
[2] Every preliminary site plan or preliminary subdivision
approval shall be conditioned upon the timely submission
of a final site plan or final subdivision in compliance with
the provisions of § 300-36G and upon the applicant's
continuing compliance with applicable laws, ordinances
and regulations and all conditions imposed pursuant to
such approval.
[3] All conditions imposed upon any preliminary site plan or
preliminary subdivision approval, except to the extent
made applicable to all such approvals by this chapter, shall
be expressly set forth in the decision and resolution
granting such approval. The violation of any condition
upon any such approval shall be a violation of this chapter
and shall be sufficient basis for revoking such approval
and for denying any further approval required pursuant to
this chapter or any other ordinance of the City of
Pleasantville.
[4] Upon approval of an application for preliminary major site
plan and/or preliminary major subdivision approval, the
applicant shall furnish 10 copies of such approved plan/
plat to the Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be. Such approved
plan/plat shall include a notation that the plan/plat has
been approved as well as signature lines for the City
Engineer and the Board Chair and Board Secretary, who
by affixing their signatures to each copy, shall signify such
approval.
[5] Revisions to preliminary major site plans and/or
preliminary major subdivisions.
[a] The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, may condition its preliminary major
site plan and/or preliminary major subdivision
approval on such minor revisions or additions as may
be deemed necessary. All such modifications shall be
§ 300-36 WATER § 300-36
285:887
completed and submitted to the Board within 30 days
of such approval.
[b] Withdrawal and resubmission of the application shall
be required in any case where the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
determines, in its sole discretion, that the necessary
revisions or additions are so substantial in nature,
scope or extent to warrant such resubmission.
(h) Effect of approval. Unless the applicant shall fail to file the final
major site plan and/or preliminary major subdivision plat with
the appropriate County Recording Officer within 95 days of
signature by the Secretary and Chair of the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, or shall fail to
proceed with development in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter and the preliminary major site plan and/or
preliminary major subdivision application as approved, or shall
in any other manner fail to comply with any provision of this
chapter or any condition of any approval granted pursuant to
it, a preliminary major site plan or preliminary major
subdivision which has been approved or approved subject to
conditions which have been accepted by the applicant shall not
be modified, revoked or otherwise impaired, pending the
application for approval of a final major site plan and/or final
major subdivision, by any action of the City without the consent
of the applicant.
(i) Limitations on approval/expiration.
[1] Approval of a preliminary major site plan or subdivision by
the Pleasantville Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case maybe, shall not substitute for or
limit the power of the Atlantic County Planning Board to
review and approve such site plan or subdivision under its
jurisdiction.
[2] Unless a final major site plan and/or final major
subdivision plat covering at least the area designated in
the preliminary major site plan and/or preliminary major
subdivision plat as the first stage or unit of the proposed
development has been filed with the appropriate County
Recording Officer within three years following the date of
the preliminary major site plan and/or preliminary major
subdivision plat approval, or in any case where the
applicant fails to proceed with development in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and the approved the
Preliminary major site plan and/or Preliminary Major
Subdivision plat or fails in any other manner to comply
with the provisions of this chapter or any approval granted
pursuant to it, the preliminary major site plan and/or
§ 300-36 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-36
285:888
preliminary major subdivision approval shall expire and be
of no further force or effect, unless the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall,
upon written request of the applicant, waive any failure
of compliance or, to the extent permitted by Subsection
F(2)(i)[3] below, grant an extension of the time specified in
this subsection.
[3] Following the approval of a preliminary major site plan
and/or preliminary major subdivision plat, the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
may, upon written request of the applicant, grant an
extension of such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a total
extension of two years, from the original expiration date of
the preliminary approval; provided, however, that in the
case of a preliminary major site plan and/or preliminary
major subdivision plat for an area of 50 acres or more, the
responsible board may, in originally granting preliminary
approval, provide that the preliminary approval shall not
expire for such period of time, in excess of than three
years, as shall be determined by the such board, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and/or
nonresidential floor area permitted pursuant to the
preliminary approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. In the case of any
such development of 50 acres or more, the applicant may
apply for and the responsible board may grant extensions
of the preliminary approval for such additional periods of
time following the original expiration date as shall be
determined by the Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and the
nonresidential floor area permitted by the preliminary
approval, the potential number of dwelling units or
nonresidential floor area of the stage or stages of the
development awaiting final approval, economic conditions
and the comprehensiveness of the development. If the
standards for approval of a preliminary major site plan
and/or preliminary major subdivision plat have been
revised at the time a request for extension is made
pursuant to this subsection, the Board may, in its
discretion, apply the revised standards to the request for
extension.
[4] Upon the grant of final approval for any stage or unit of the
proposed development, the time period during which the
preliminary approval is to remain in effect pursuant to this
section shall expire as to that stage or unit.
(j) Site improvements.
§ 300-36 WATER § 300-36
285:889
[1] At any time following the approval of a preliminary major
site plan and/or preliminary major subdivision plat, the
applicant may, pursuant to and subject to the limitations of
the applicable codes and ordinances of the City, apply for
and receive grading permits and approvals necessary for
the installation of public improvements and private roads
within the area of the proposed development for which
preliminary approval has been given.
[2] If expressly authorized by the approval of the preliminary
major site plan and/or preliminary major subdivision plat,
the applicant may, pursuant to and subject to the
limitations of the applicable codes and ordinances of the
City, apply for and receive building permits for model
buildings or temporary structures to be constructed within
the area of the proposed development.
G. Final major site plans and final major subdivisions.
(1) Purpose. A final major site plan and/or final major subdivision plat
shall serve as a complete, thorough and permanent public record of
the proposed development and the manner in which it is to be
developed. The final plan or plat is intended only to add detail to
and to put in final form the information contained in the
preliminary major site plan and/or preliminary major subdivision
plat and shall conform to the preliminary approval in all respects,
and shall incorporate all prior approved plans and all approved
modifications thereof resulting from the site plan/subdivision
approval process and shall be responsive to and in compliance with
all conditions imposed on prior approvals.
(2) Submission and processing of applications.
(a) Applicants shall have three years from the date of Preliminary
major site plan and/or preliminary major subdivision approval
to submit an application for final major site plan and/or final
major subdivision approval.
(b) Applications for final major site plan and/or final major
subdivision approval shall be in such form and shall contain
such information and documentation as is required by
Checklist A and Checklist F, included in § 300-77, and shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee and escrow
deposit in accordance with § 300-9.
(c) The application may include the entire area of the approved
preliminary major site plan and/or preliminary major
subdivision plat or one or more stages or units thereof in
accordance with a staging plan approved as part of the
preliminary approval. The application shall add necessary
detail to and put in final form the information contained in the
approved preliminary major site plan and/or preliminary major
§ 300-36 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-36
285:890
subdivision plat and shall conform to the approved preliminary
major site plan and/or preliminary major subdivision plat and
all conditions imposed on such approval in all respects.
(d) Upon determination that an applicant has been deemed
complete in accordance with § 300-27, the Planning Board or
Zoning Board Secretary, as the case may be, shall notify the
applicant of the time and place of the hearing on such matter.
(e) Time frames for Board action.
[1] The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the
case may be, shall act on an application for final major site
plan and/or final major subdivision approval within the
following time periods:
[a] For development requiring variance approval: within
the time allowed for such approval if longer than the
time allowed pursuant to the foregoing subsections.
[b] For all other developments, within 45 days of
determination of a complete application, or within
such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
[2] Failure of the Board to act within such time frames shall
constitute approval of the application.
(f) Standard for approval.
[1] No application for final major site plan and/or final major
subdivision approval shall be granted unless the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
shall find that, based on the information presented to it,
the proposed development and the final plan/plat are in
compliance with each of the standards established for
major site plan and/or major subdivision plats approval
pursuant to this chapter.
[2] The decisions, findings and recommendations of any thirdparty
agency or official who might have jurisdiction over
an application for site plan and/or subdivision approval
shall be reviewed and carefully considered as part of the
deliberations for final major site plan and/or final major
subdivision approval by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
[3] Any approval of a preliminary major site plan and/or
preliminary major subdivision by the County Planning
Board shall be noted on the final plan/plat.
(g) Conditions for approval.
§ 300-36 WATER § 300-36
285:891
[1] In granting final major site plan and/or final major
subdivision approval, the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment, as the case may be, may impose such
restrictions and conditions upon the approval, the
proposed development or the subject property as may be
necessary, in its opinion, to achieve the purposes of this
chapter and the site plan/subdivision approval process, to
ensure the compliance of the proposed development with
the standards established by this chapter, and to prevent
or minimize any adverse effects of the proposed
development upon properties in the neighborhood and
upon the general health, safety and welfare of the entire
community.
[2] Every final plan/plat approval shall be conditioned upon
the applicant's strict compliance with all the terms,
restrictions and conditions of the approved final plan/plat,
and upon the applicant's continuing compliance with all
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. All conditions
imposed upon any final plan/plat approval, except to the
extent made applicable to all such approvals by the terms
of this chapter, shall be expressly set forth in the decision
and resolution granting such approval. Violation of any
condition of any such approval shall be a violation of this
chapter and shall be sufficient basis for revoking final site
plan and/or subdivision approval and for denying any
further approval or permit required pursuant to this
chapter or any other ordinance of the City of Pleasantville.
(h) Notice of final approval.
[1] Within 10 days following the date of memorialization of the
Board resolution approving the final major site plan and/or
final major subdivision, or the expiration, without decision,
of the time specified in § 300-36G(2)(e), the Board
Secretary shall publish notice and mail notice thereof to all
parties entitled thereto. Notice to the applicant shall
include a provision informing him/her that properly signed
and approved copies of the final plan/plat as necessary for
Atlantic County review and for recording may be obtained
upon submission of the guaranties required by § 300-49
and the presentation of proof of recording, prior to the sale
of any property to be subject to them, of any documents,
easements, restrictions or covenants required to be
recorded as a condition of final approval.
[2] Approval of the final plan or plat shall be evidenced by the
signature thereon of the Board Secretary, which shall not,
however, be affixed until the applicant has posted the
guaranties required by § 300-49.
§ 300-36 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-36
285:892
[3] In the case of failure of the Board to act on an application
for final major site plan and/or final major subdivision
approval, a certificate evidencing such failure shall be
issued by the Board Secretary Zoning Officer, upon written
request of the applicant and the posting of guaranties as
required by § 300-49.
[4] Such certificate shall be sufficient, in lieu of the written
endorsements herein required, and shall be so accepted by
the Atlantic County Recording Officer for purposes of filing
of approved final major site plans and/or final major
subdivision plats. The date the Board Secretary issues
such certificate shall be the date of final approval.
[5] Published and mailed notice of the final disposition of an
application for final major site plan and/or final major
subdivision approval shall be made in accordance with
§ 300-30G through J.
(i) Recording of final approval. The applicant shall, within 95 days
following the date of memorialization of the Board resolution
approving the application, file an approved final major
subdivision plat with the County Recording Officer. The
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, may, for good cause shown, extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from
the date of final approval. If the applicant fails to record the
plat or plan within the prescribed time, final approval shall
expire.
(j) Limitations on approval/expiration.
[1] Unless an applicant shall fail to comply with any condition
or provision of this chapter or any approval granted
pursuant to it, all rights conferred upon the applicant
pursuant to a final plan/plat approval granted in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, whether
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years or such longer period as may be
established pursuant to the provisions of Subsection
G(2)(j)[3] below after the date of said final approval. The
rights so conferred shall expire if the plat has not been
duly recorded within the time period provided in
Subsection G(2)(i) above.
[2] If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for
final approval and has duly recorded the plat, the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
may, upon written request of the applicant, extend such
period of protection for up to one year; provided, however,
that not more than three such extensions shall be granted,
§ 300-36 WATER § 300-36
285:893
§ 300-37. Variances.
except pursuant to the provisions of Subsection G(2)(j)[3]
below.
[3] In the case of a site plan/subdivision plat for 150 acres or
more, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, may extend the original period during
which rights conferred pursuant to a final approval shall
not be changed for such period of time, longer than two
years, as it shall determine to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and the
nonresidential floor area permissible under the final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness
of the development. The applicant may thereafter apply for
and the Board may thereafter grant an extension of final
approval for such additional period of time as shall be
determined by the Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and the
nonresidential floor area permissible under the final
approval, the number of dwelling units and the
nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed,
economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
A. Authority. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the
case may be, shall, subject to the procedures, standards and limitations
hereinafter set forth, have authority to review and grant or deny
variances from the strict application of this chapter.
B. Purpose and general prohibitions.
(1) The variance procedure is intended to provide a narrowly
circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from
unforeseen particular applications of the provisions of this chapter,
where such provisions create peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties or exceptional and undue hardships or where special
reasons exist for varying the use and structure restrictions of such
provisions. Only where no other procedure exists to remedy such
difficulty or hardship or to respond to such special reasons is an
application for relief pursuant to this section appropriate.
(2) In adopting this Land Management Code, the City has provided
specific, preordained regulations as well as a variety of
administrative procedures whereby specific properties and uses
may be given individual attention within the confines of a wellstructured
overall plan of development regulation. The variance
procedure is essentially a procedure that operates outside of that
structured plan and is, by its very purpose and definition,
destructive of that plan.
§ 300-36 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-37
285:894
(3) Accordingly, the City Council hereby finds as fact and states as
policy that no relief pursuant to this section may be validly granted
in any case where relief pursuant to any other section of this
chapter is or might be available.
C. "C" variances (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c).
(1) Reasons for granting variances.
(a) Subject to the general prohibitions of § 300-37B, and to the
other terms and provisions of this section, the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, may grant
a variance from the strict application of any provision of this
chapter, other than the provisions hereof restricting the uses to
which land and structures may be devoted or the types of
structures which may be located in a district and other than
the provisions hereof restricting the erection of buildings and
structures in public areas mapped on the Official Map or on
lots not abutting a street, upon a showing that:
[1] By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or
shape of a specific piece of property or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or physical features
uniquely affecting the subject property or by reason of an
extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting
a specific piece of property or the structures lawfully
existing thereon, the strict application of any regulation
pursuant to this chapter would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and
undue hardship upon the developer of such property; or
[2] The grant of the requested variance would advance one of
the purposes of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2, adopted by the City of Pleasantville as
§ 300-3).
(b) The grant of a "c" variance shall require the affirmative vote of
a majority of Board members present at the time of the vote.
(2) No "c" variance shall be granted which would result in a substantial
detriment to the public good or a substantial impairment of the
City's Zone Plan.
(3) No "c" variance shall be granted pursuant to this subsection which
would allow a structure or use in a district restricted against such
structure or use. Any variance which would permit, on any lot or
parcel, one or more dwelling units in addition to the number that
would be permitted by a strict application of the provisions of this
chapter shall be considered to be within the prohibition of this
subsection.
§ 300-37 WATER § 300-37
285:895
(4) No "c" variance shall be granted pursuant to this subsection which
would permit the erection of a building or other structure within
the bed of a street or public drainageway, flood control basin or
public area shown on the Official Map of the City or which would
permit erection of a building on a lot which does not abut a street
giving access to such building or structure.
(5) No "c" variance shall be granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment
pursuant to this subsection where the proposed development for
which such variance is sought also requires site plan and/or
subdivision approval, unless such development also requires a
variance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
D. "D" variances (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d).
(1) Subject to the general prohibitions of § 300-37B, and to the other
terms and provisions of this section, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may grant a variance to permit a use of a parcel of land
or a structure, or the location of a structure in a zoning district
restricted against such use or structure, upon a showing that:
(a) By reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a
specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or physical features uniquely affecting
the subject property or by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict
application of any regulation pursuant to this act would result
in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such
property; or
(b) The grant of the requested variance would advance one of the
purposes of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-2, adopted by the City of Pleasantville as § 300-3); and
(c) The grant of the requested variance would not result in a
substantial detriment to the public good or a substantial
impairment of the goals and purposes of the Master Plan, the
Official Map, any capital improvement program and this
chapter.
(2) The grant of a "d" variance shall require the affirmative vote of five
Board members.
E. Official Map variances (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b).
(1) Subject to the general prohibitions of § 300-37B, and to the other
terms and provisions of this section, the Board of Adjustment may
grant a variance from the application of § 300-16B(2) and (3) upon
the terms and conditions hereinafter specified:
§ 300-37 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-37
285:896
(a) Variance to erect a building or other structure within a
reserved public area. Whenever one or more parcels of land
upon which is located the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or other public area reserved
pursuant to § 300-16B(2) cannot yield a reasonable return to
the owner unless a building permit is granted, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment may grant a variance from the application
of said subsection and direct the issuance of a permit for a
building or structure in such reserved area. Every such
variance shall be limited so as to increase the cost of opening
such street or developing such drainageway, flood control
basin or other public area as little as practicable and to cause
the minimum possible change in the Official Map.
(b) Variance to erect a building or other structure which does not
abut a street. Where the enforcement of § 300-16B(3) requiring
that no building permit be issued for any building or structure
not abutting a street would entail practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship on an applicant, or where circumstances
do not require the proposed building or structure to be related
to a street, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may grant a
variance from the application of said subsection and direct the
issuance of a building permit for the proposed building or
structure. Every such variance shall be so conditioned as to
assure that adequate access to such building or structure will
be provided for fire-fighting equipment, ambulances and other
emergency vehicles necessary for the protection of health and
safety, and so as to protect any future street layout shown on
the Official Map or on the Circulation Plan Element of the
Master Plan.
(2) The grant of an Official Map variance shall require the affirmative
vote of a majority of the Board members present at the time of the
vote.
F. Submission and processing of applications.
(1) Applications for variance relief shall be in such form and shall
contain such information and documentation as is required by
Checklist A and Checklist H (for "c" variances) and/or Checklist I
(for "d" variances), included in § 300-77, and shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application fee and escrow deposit in
accordance with § 300-9.
(2) Upon determination that an application has been deemed complete
in accordance with § 300-27, the Planning Board or Zoning Board
Secretary, as the case may be, shall notify the applicant of the time
and place of the hearing on such matter.
§ 300-37 WATER § 300-37
285:897
(3) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall act on an application for variance relief within 120
days following determination of a complete application.
(4) Standard for approval.
(a) The application for a variance shall be denied where the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, finds:
[1] That other relief pursuant to this chapter exists to remedy
or respond to the hardship, difficulty or special reason and
the applicant has not sought relief pursuant thereto;
[2] That the grant of the requested variance would result in a
substantial impairment of the goals and purposes of the
Master Plan, the Official Map, any capital improvement
program or this chapter; or
[3] That any ground exists pursuant to this chapter for denial
of the variance.
(b) The failure of the Board to act within 120 days or such longer
period of time as may be agreed to by the applicant shall
constitute approval of the application.
(c) A variance less than or different from that requested may be
granted when the record supports the applicant's right to some
relief but not to the relief requested, provided that the grant of
such variance does not conflict with any public notices
required under § 300-29.
(5) Conditions for approval.
(a) In granting variance approval, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, may impose such
restrictions and conditions upon the approval, the proposed
use and the premises to be developed or use pursuant to such
approval as may be necessary, in its opinion, to ensure the
compatibility of the proposed use and development with
surrounding development, to ensure the compliance and
consistency of the proposed use and development with the
standards of this chapter and the general purposes, goals and
objectives of this chapter, the Master Plan, any capital
improvement program and the Official Map; and to prevent or
minimize adverse effects from the proposed use and
development upon other properties in the neighborhood and
upon the general health, safety and welfare of the entire City to
the end that no variance granted pursuant to this section shall
result in a substantial detriment to the public good or a
substantial impairment of the land use plans and policies of the
City.
§ 300-37 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-37
285:898
(b) All conditions imposed upon any variance approval, except to
the extent made applicable to all such approvals by this
chapter, shall be expressly set forth in the decision and
resolution granting such approval. The violation of any
condition upon any such approval shall be a violation of this
chapter and shall be sufficient basis for revoking such approval
and for denying any further approval required pursuant to this
chapter or any other ordinance of the City of Pleasantville.
(c) Every variance granted shall be conditioned upon the
developer's continuing compliance with all applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations and all conditions imposed upon
such approval.
(d) Action by applicant.
[1] In the event that a variance is granted or granted subject
to conditions acceptable to the applicant, the applicant
shall, in writing, within 10 days following publication of
notice of such decision pursuant to § 300-30G through I,
acknowledge the grant of such variance and
unconditionally accept and agree to any such conditions.
[2] In the event that an application for a variance is denied or
is approved subject to conditions which are not acceptable
to the applicant, or a variance less than requested is
granted and is unacceptable to the applicant, the applicant
may, within the aforesaid time period, either appeal such
decision to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to
law or abandon the application.
(6) Effect of approval. The grant of variance relief shall not authorize
the establishment or extension of any use or the development,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building
or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing and
processing of applications for any permits and approvals which
may be required by the codes and ordinances of the City and other
governmental agencies having jurisdiction, including but not
limited to a zoning permit, building permit and certificate of
occupancy.
(7) Limitations on approval/expiration.
(a) Variances from the terms of this chapter granted by the
Planning Board attendant to a subdivision or site plan approval
permitting the construction or alteration of any building or
structure on any premises shall run co-terminus with such
subdivision or site plan approval. Accordingly, approvals of
such variances are protected as provided for under
§ 300-36E(2)(e), § 300-36F(2)(h) and (i), and § 300-36G(2)(j)
herein.
§ 300-37 WATER § 300-37
285:899
§ 300-38. Interpretations.
(b) Variances from the terms of this chapter granted by the Board
of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d shall expire by
limitation unless, within one year from the adoption of the
decision and resolution of the Board approving such
variance(s), the use or construction or alteration permitted by
such variance shall have actually commenced and is thereafter
diligently pursued to completion.
(c) Any variance from the terms of this chapter granted by the
Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c in
conjunction with a variance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d shall
run co-terminus with such ("d") variance.
(d) Any variance from the terms of this chapter granted by the
Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c not
attendant to a variance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d shall expire
by limitation unless, within two years from the adoption of the
decision and resolution of the Board approving such
variance(s), the construction or alteration permitted by such
variance shall have actually commenced and is thereafter
diligently pursued to completion.
(e) The running of the period(s) of limitation under the foregoing
subsections shall be stopped from the date of filing of an
appeal from such decision of the Board in accordance with
§ 300-12P, until such appeal has been finally resolved.
(f) In addition to the other penalties and remedies for violations of
this chapter, it shall be a condition of every variance granted
pursuant to this section that such variance may be revoked for
violation of any condition imposed upon such variance either
by the provisions of this chapter or by the provisions of the
decision and resolution granting such variance; provided,
however, that no such variance shall be revoked except by
resolution of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, adopted following a public
hearing, noticed and conducted by the Board in the same
manner as provided for the original granting of the variance,
whereat the existence of such violation is established.
A. Authority. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may, subject to the
procedures, standards and limitations set forth herein, render
interpretations of any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation
issued pursuant to it, including interpretations of the various permitted
uses detailed in this chapter and the permissibility of any use not
expressly detailed in this chapter.
B. Purpose. The provisions of this section are intended to provide:
§ 300-37 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-38
285:900
(1) A simple and expeditious method for clarifying ambiguities in the
text of this chapter, the Zoning Map which it incorporates and the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto; and
(2) A simple, yet circumscribed, procedure for overcoming inadvertent
rigidities and limitations inherent in the promulgation of finite use
lists in a world characterized by infinite permutations of essentially
similar uses.
C. Submission and processing of applications.
(1) All requests for interpretation of any provision of this chapter, the
Zoning Map or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant to this
chapter shall be made, in writing, to the Zoning Board Secretary,
shall be in such form and shall contain such information and
documentation as is required by Checklist A and Checklist G,
included in § 300-77, and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee and escrow deposit in accordance with § 300-9.
Each such request shall set forth the specific provision or
provisions to be interpreted, the facts of the specific situation
giving rise to the request for interpretation and the precise
interpretation asserted by the applicant to be correct. Before the
rendering of any interpretation, the Zoning Board of Adjustment
may require such further facts and information as are necessary to
a meaningful interpretation of the provision in question.
(2) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act on an application for
interpretation within 120 days following determination of a
complete application. In so doing, the Board shall state the specific
precedent and the reasons and analysis upon which such
interpretation is based.
(3) The failure of the Board of Adjustment to act within 120 days, or
within such other time as may be consented to by the applicant,
shall be deemed to be a rejection of the applicant's proposed
interpretation.
D. Standards for use interpretations. The following conditions shall govern
the Zoning Board of Adjustment in issuing use interpretations:
(1) No use interpretation shall allow the establishment of any use
which was previously considered and rejected by the Planning
Board or by the Zoning Board of Adjustment on an application for
amendment or on an application for a use variance.
(2) No use interpretation shall permit a specifically prohibited use to
be established in any such district or any more restrictive district.
(3) No use interpretation shall permit a use listed as a permitted or
conditional use in any district to be established in any district in
which such use is not so listed.
§ 300-38 WATER § 300-38
285:901
(4) No use interpretation shall permit any use in a particular district
unless such use is substantially similar to other uses permitted in
such district and is more similar to such other uses than to uses
permitted or conditionally permitted in a less restrictive district.
E. Effect of favorable use interpretations. No use interpretation finding a
particular use to be permitted or conditionally permitted in a specific
district shall authorize the establishment of such use nor the
development, construction, reconstruction, alteration or moving of any
building or structure, but shall merely authorize the preparation, filing
and processing of applications for any permits and approvals which may
be required by the codes and ordinances of the City or other
governmental agencies having jurisdiction, including but not limited to
site plan and/or subdivision approval, zoning permit, building permit
and certificate of occupancy.
F. Limitations on use interpretations/expiration.
(1) No use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or
conditionally permitted in a specified district shall be valid for a
period longer than one year from the date of issue, unless a
building permit is issued and construction actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion or a
certificate of occupancy is obtained and a use commenced within
that period.
(2) A use interpretation finding a particular use to be permitted or
conditionally permitted in a specified district shall be deemed to
authorize only the particular use at the particular location for
which it was issued, and such permit shall not be deemed to
authorize any allegedly similar use for which a separate use
interpretation has not been issued.
G. Maintenance of records; annual report.
(1) The Zoning Board Secretary shall keep a record of each use
interpretation rendered and shall include a report of all such
interpretations in his/her annual report.
(2) Such report shall include a recommendation of the Zoning Board
regarding any amendments to this chapter for the addition of new
uses to reflect the use interpretations given pursuant to this
section.
H. Failure to amend regulations. In any case where, upon the expiration of
one year following the receipt of the recommendations of the Zoning
Board pursuant to § 300-38G(2), the City Council shall have failed to
adopt an ordinance amendment with respect to any use interpretation
included in such recommendation:
(1) No use authorized pursuant to such interpretation, but not yet
established or under construction, shall be established.
§ 300-38 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-38
285:902
§ 300-39. Appeals.
(2) Any use authorized and established pursuant to such interpretation
shall be permitted to continue, subject to the provisions of § 300-20
regarding nonconformities.
(3) No similar use interpretation shall be given in the future.
A. Authority.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have authority to hear and
decide appeals from any order, decision, requirement or refusal of
an Administrative Officer based on or made in the enforcement of
this chapter or the Official Map, and to that end it shall have all of
the same powers and be subject to all of the same standards and
limitations as said Administrative Officer with respect to any order,
decision, requirement or refusal being appealed.
(2) Accordingly, any interested party affected by any order, decision,
requirement or refusal of an Administrative Officer based on or
made in the enforcement of this chapter or the Official Map may
appeal such order, decision, requirement or refusal to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
B. Submission and processing of applications.
(1) Notice of appeal.
(a) All requests for appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
pursuant to this section shall be made, in writing, to the Zoning
Officer within 20 days following the order, decision,
requirement or refusal being appealed. Such requests shall be
in such form and shall contain such information and
documentation as is required by Checklist A and Checklist G,
included in § 300-77, and shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable application fee and escrow deposit, pursuant to
§ 300-9. A copy of said notice shall also be filed with the
Administrative Officer whose action has prompted the appeal.
(b) Each such request shall set forth the specific issues to be
appealed, the facts of the specific situation giving rise to the
appeal and the precise action requested. Before the rendering
of any decision, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may require
such further facts and information as are necessary to a
meaningful determination of the issue.
(c) The Zoning Officer shall forthwith assemble and transmit to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment a copy of the notice of appeal
and all papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken. Where the appeal is based on an
order, decision, requirement or refusal from an Administrative
Officer other than the Zoning Officer, such individual shall
§ 300-38 WATER § 300-39
285:903
§ 300-40. Building permits.
forthwith assemble and transmit to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment a copy of all papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
(d) An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect to which
the appealed order, decision, requirement or refusal was made,
unless the Administrative Officer whose action has prompted
the appeal certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice
of appeal shall have been filed, that, by reason of facts stated in
the certificate, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed other than by an order of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or by the Superior Court, upon application or
notice to such Administrative Officer and on due cause shown.
(2) Public hearing.
(a) A public hearing shall be set, noticed and conducted by the
Board of Adjustment in accordance with § 300-30.
(b) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act on an application for
appeal within 120 days following the filing by the appellant of a
notice to appeal, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Such decision may reverse or
affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the appealed order,
decision, requirement or refusal.
(c) The failure of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to render a
decision within the aforesaid 120 days, or such longer period of
time as may be agreed to by the appellant, shall constitute a
decision favorable to the appellant.
(3) Right to grant variance. In any case where the notice of appeal is
accompanied by an application for variance in accordance with
§ 300-37, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the authority
to grant, as part of the relief, a variance, but only in strict
compliance with each provision of such section.
(4) Effect of conditions and limitations on appeals granted. In any case
where this chapter imposes or permits the imposition of conditions
and limitations upon any right, any such right granted by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment on appeal shall be subject to such
conditions and limitations, and the Board shall have the right to
impose such conditions and limitations in the same manner and to
the same extent as if such right were secured without the necessity
of appeal.
§ 300-39 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-40
285:904
§ 300-41. Referral to Atlantic County Planning Board.
A. No building or structure in any zoning district in the City shall be
erected, enlarged or structurally altered without first receiving a
building permit from the Building Subcode Official.
B. No such permit shall be issued unless the proposed building or
structure conforms with the requirements of this chapter.
C. No such permit shall be issued unless water service and sanitary sewer,
adequate to serve the proposed development as specified in all relevant
City codes and ordinances, are available.
D. Individual building permits shall be issued for each lot, regardless of
the number of lots subject to construction or the scope of work
proposed for any individual lot.
E. Submission and processing of applications.
(1) An application for a building permit hall be made, in writing, to the
Construction Code Official, shall be in such form and shall contain
such information and documentation as is required by such Official,
and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in
accordance with § 119-3 of the City Code.
(2) No building permit shall be issued for a building to be used for any
use in any district where such use requires relief from the Zoning
Board of Adjustment unless and until such relief is obtained by the
applicant.
(3) The Construction Code Official may, with the consent of the City
Engineer, issue a temporary certificate of occupancy ("TCO")
permitting occupancy of the structure, provided that all life and
safety requirements have been completed for that portion of the
structure receiving a TCO and that only exterior site work remains
to complete the project. Such TCO shall include a timetable for the
completion of all outstanding items. The Construction Code Official
shall be empowered to revoke the TCO should the applicant fail to
comply with such timetable.
A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, all final actions
regarding preliminary or final major site plan and/or subdivision plat
approval shall be contingent on a letter of no interest or on an approval
from the Atlantic County Planning Board.
B. All such applications therefor shall be made in accordance with the
rules and regulations promulgated by the Atlantic County Planning
Board.
C. All such applications shall include a written request that the County
Planning Board acknowledge the date of receipt of such referral, review
such application in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3
§ 300-40 WATER § 300-41
285:905
§ 300-42. Additional jurisdictions.
In addition to the approvals required by this chapter:
§ 300-43. Certificates of occupancy, occupancy permits and transfer
of ownership permits. [Amended 10-17-2016 by Ord. No. 18-2016]
and/or 40:27-6.6, and report the results of such review to the Zoning
Officer.
D. Copies of site plans and/or subdivision plans/plats, suitable for filing
with the County Recording Officer and containing all necessary City
approvals and signatures, shall be submitted to the county for review
prior to recording pursuant to § 300-36E(2)(e) and § 300-36F(2)(h).
A. Development of a facility enumerated in N.J.S.A. 13:19-3c in the coastal
area described in N.J.S.A. 13:19-4 shall also file an application for the
appropriate permit from the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
B. Applications for development which disturbs 5,000 square feet or more
of land surface area shall receive a certification from the Atlantic
County Soil Conservation District pursuant to the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act (N.J.S.A. 4:24-1 et seq.).
C. Applications for development which involves the design of a central
well water system shall obtain approval from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
D. Applications for development which involves a sewerage disposal
system shall obtain approval from the Atlantic County Board of Health.
E. Any and all land use approvals, certifications, permits and/or like and
similar authorizations, issued with or without variance relief, granted in
accordance with this chapter by the Zoning Officer, Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall be and are
expressly conditioned upon receipt of all necessary approvals,
certifications, permits and/or like and similar authorizations issued by
the County of Atlantic, the State of New Jersey and/or the federal
government, or any department of agency thereof.
A. Authority.
(1) The Construction Code Official or a duly authorized delegate shall
have authority to issue certificates of occupancy as provided for
herein; provided, however, that no such certificate shall be issued
except in accordance with the provisions of this section and
Chapter 119 (Construction Codes, Uniform) of the Pleasantville
City Code.
(2) The Code Enforcement Officer or a duly authorized delegate shall
have authority to issue occupancy permits as provided for herein;
§ 300-41 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-43
285:906
provided, however, that no such permit shall be issued except in
accordance with the provisions of this section and Chapter 143
(Housing Standards) of the City Code.
B. Purpose. For the purposes of this chapter, the certificate of occupancy
provides a procedure for the inspection of completed premises to
ensure their compliance with this chapter and approved plans prior to
commencement of the use or occupancy, and the occupancy permit
provides a procedure for the ongoing inspection of dwelling units and
nonresidential spaces to ensure their continued compliance with this
chapter and applicable housing and other codes.
C. Certificates of occupancy. Unless a certificate of occupancy shall have
first been obtained certifying compliance with the provisions of this
chapter:
(1) No structure or addition thereto constructed, reconstructed,
remodeled, altered or moved after the effective date of this chapter
shall be occupied or used for any purpose.
(2) No land vacant on the effective date of this chapter shall be used or
occupied for any purpose.
(3) No use or occupancy of any land or structure shall be changed to
any other use or occupancy, whether or not construction,
reconstruction, remodeling, alteration or moving is involved.
(4) No home occupation or group family household shall be
established.
D. Inspections.
(1) No dwelling unit shall be sold, rented, transferred, granted, leased,
let, mortgaged with right of occupancy, and the ownership or
occupancy thereof shall not be disposed of, in whole or in part, by
any owner, agent, agent of an owner, real estate agent or broker,
firm, company, partnership, corporation or person, or persons,
whether nor not for a consideration and whether such disposal or
occupancy is temporary or permanent, unless and until an
inspection has been made by the City's Code Enforcement Officer
or designee for the purpose of determining whether said dwelling
unit is in violation of any of the applicable laws of the City of
Pleasantville, the State of New Jersey or the United States of
America, or any agency or instrumentality thereof and a certificate
of occupancy, temporary certificate of occupancy, occupancy
permit, or temporary occupancy permit shall have first been
obtained certifying compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) For the purpose of selling, renting, transferring, granting, leasing,
letting, mortgaging, without the right of occupancy and the
ownership thereof shall be disposed of in whole or in part by any
owner, agent, agent of an owner, real-estate agent or broker, firm,
§ 300-43 WATER § 300-43
285:907
company, partnership, corporation. or person, or persons, whether
or not for a consideration and whether such disposal is temporary
or permanent unless and until an inspection has been made by
the City's Code Enforcement Officer or designee for the purpose of
determining whether said dwelling unit is in violation of any of the
applicable laws of the City of Pleasantville, the State of New Jersey
or the United States of America, or any agency or instrumentality
thereof a certificate of occupancy or occupancy permit shall be
obtained following the provisions outlined in Subsection E(1) or
(2) of this chapter within a six-month time period. Extensions to
the six-month time period may be granted for extenuating
circumstances at the discretion of the City Code Enforcement
Officer or designee.
(3) All businesses and nonresidential uses shall be inspected by the
Zoning Officer, Building Sub-Code Official and the Fire Official, or
their designees, for compliance with the Uniform Construction
Code, the Uniform Fire Code and this chapter.
E. Submission and processing of applications.
(1) Certificate of occupancy.
(a) Where no zoning permit is required, applications for
certificates of occupancy shall be submitted to the City's
Construction Code Official in the same form as required for a
zoning permit under § 300-34, except to the extent that
requirements of said section are expressly waived by the
Construction Code Official as not relevant or necessary to
determine that all requirements of this chapter have been met
in a particular case.
(b) Where a zoning permit has been issued, application for a
certificate of occupancy shall be made by written notification
to the Construction Code Official that the structure or
premises is ready for use and occupancy.
(c) In all cases involving any construction, reconstruction,
remodeling, alteration or moving of any building or structure,
the application shall be accompanied by as-built plans certified
by a professional land surveyor, engineer, architect, planner
(all of which shall be licensed in their respective fields by the
State of New Jersey) or owner-designer, as may be appropriate,
to accurately depict the structure or use as constructed and
certified to be in conformity in all respects with the provisions
of this chapter and the terms and conditions of all approvals
granted pursuant to this chapter.
(d) An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made, in
writing, to the Construction Code Official, shall be in such form
and shall contain such information and documentation as is
required by the Construction Code Official, and shall be
§ 300-43 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-43
285:908
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in accordance
with § 300-9.
(e) The Construction Code Official shall act on an application for a
certificate of occupancy within 30 days following receipt of a
completed application therefore by causing the subject
structure or premises to be inspected and taking one of the
following actions based on such inspection:
[1] If all work has been completed and the structure or
premises is certified by the inspecting officer to be in full
and complete compliance with all the applicable provisions
of this chapter and other relevant codes and ordinances of
the City and with the applicant's plans, as approved, and
with the terms and conditions of any special approval
issued with respect to such structure, premises or use, the
Construction Code Official shall issue a certificate of
occupancy.
[2] If all work has not been completed and the structure or
premises is not certified by the inspecting officer to be in
full and complete compliance with all the applicable
provisions of this chapter and other relevant codes and
ordinances of the City and with the applicant's plans, as
approved, and with the terms and conditions of any special
approval issued with respect to such structure, premises
or use, the Construction Code Official shall inform the
applicant, in writing, of the specific reasons why such
certificate cannot be issued, citing the particular
provisions of the codes and ordinances of the City, the
particular items in the applicant's plans or the applicable
special approval terms and conditions with respect to
which compliance is lacking. The applicant shall thereafter
correct any deficiencies and resubmit the request for the
certificate of occupancy.
(2) Occupancy permits.
(a) Applications for occupancy permits shall be made, in writing,
to the City's Code Enforcement Officer in such form and under
such procedures as may be established by the Code
Enforcement Officer for this purpose, and shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in accordance
with § 300-9.
(b) Where no zoning permit is required, applications for
occupancy permits shall be submitted directly to the City's
Code Enforcement Officer.
(c) Where a zoning permit is required, such permit must be
obtained before application for an occupancy permit may be
granted.
§ 300-43 WATER § 300-43
285:909
(d) The Code Enforcement Officer shall act on an application for a
residential occupancy permit within 10 days following receipt
of a completed application therefor by causing the subject
structure or premises to be inspected and taking one of the
following actions based on such inspection:
[1] If no such violation is found, the Code Enforcement Officer,
or designee, shall issue an occupancy permit so indicating.
[2] If a violation is found, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
inform the applicant, in writing, of the specific reasons
why such permit cannot be issued, citing the particular
provisions of the codes and ordinances of the City and the
specific violations found. The applicant shall thereafter
correct any deficiencies and resubmit a request for a
certificate of occupancy or occupancy permit as directed
by the Code Enforcement Officer or designee.
(e) Inspections for businesses and nonresidential occupancy
permits shall be made not less than once annually.
(3) Transfer of ownership permit.
(a) Applications for transfer of ownership permits shall be made,
in writing, to the City's Code Enforcement Officer in such form
and under such procedures as may be established by the Code
Enforcement Officer for this purpose, and shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in accordance
with § 300-9.
(b) The Code Enforcement Officer shall act on an application for a
transfer of ownership permit within 10 days following receipt
of a completed application therefor causing the subject
structure or premises to be inspected and taking one of the
following actions based on such inspection:
[1] If no such violation is found, the Code Enforcement Officer,
or designee, shall issue a transfer of ownership permit so
indicating.
[2] If a violation is found, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
inform the applicant, in writing, that a certificate of
occupancy or occupancy permit shall be obtained by the
applicant following the provisions outlined in Subsection
D(2), of this section.
F. Contents.
(1) Certificate of occupancy. In addition to the matters specified in
Chapter 119 (Construction Codes, Uniform) of the Pleasantville
City Code, each certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to this
§ 300-43 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-43
285:910
section shall state any conditions imposed by any special approval
granted pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Occupancy permit.
(a) All applications for occupancy permits for rental dwelling units
shall include:
[1] The address of the premises;
[2] The name, address and contact telephone number of the
owner of the premises. If the owner of said premises is a
corporation or entity other than an individual, such
statement shall be made under oath by the president or
secretary of said corporation or by a principal of such
entity;
[3] The name, address and contact telephone number of the
superintendent or the agent in charge of the premises;
[4] The number of dwelling units therein;
[5] A description, by number or letter, of each dwelling unit
therein; and
[6] The name of the tenant located within each such described
dwelling unit on the date the statement was prepared.
(b) At the time of inspection of each dwelling unit prior to the
issuance of an occupancy permit, the Code Enforcement
Officer or designee shall post in a conspicuous place in such
premises a notice stating the number of persons which shall be
permitted to occupy each such dwelling unit as a resident.
[1] In no event shall residency in any such dwelling unit
exceed such posted number, whether by the landlord or
the tenant.
[2] For the purposes of determining residency, any person
who sleeps upon the premises or generally dwells therein
for more than two successive days or nights shall be
considered to be residing therein.
(3) Transfer of ownership permit.
(a) All applications for transfer of ownership permits for all
dwelling units and properties shall include:
[1] A signed and notarized statement by the new proposed
owner of the property attesting that they are responsible
for abating outstanding code violations identified in the
inspection made by the City's Code Enforcement Officer or
designee as in response to the transfer of ownership
application. All outstanding violations must be corrected
§ 300-43 WATER § 300-43
285:911
by the due date on the transfer of ownership permit.
Failure to correct identified and outstanding property
maintenance violations by due date will result in the
issuance of a court summons. Penalties include fines,
community service or imprisonment as defined in § 300-8,
Enforcement; violations and penalties, of Chapter 300,
Land Management.
[2] The address of the premises.
[3] The name, address and contact telephone number of the
owner of the premises. If the owner of said premises is a
corporation or entity other than an individual, such
statement shall be made under oath by the president or
secretary of said corporation or by a principal of such
entity.
[4] The name, address and contact telephone number of the
superintendent or the agent in charge of the premises.
[5] The number of dwelling units therein.
[6] The name, address and contact telephone number of the
proposed new owner of the premises. If the proposed new
owner of said premises is a corporation or entity other
than an individual, such statement shall be made under
oath by the president or secretary of said corporation or by
a principal of such entity.
[7] Dwelling units upon inspection that have been found to
have City of Pleasantville property maintenance violations
shall include language on the transfer of ownership permit
stating and confirming that the new owner or entity that
the property is being transferred to; agrees that: the
transfer of ownership permit is being issued for the
exclusive and sole purpose of changing ownership. Upon
inspection, this unit and/or property has been found to
have City of Pleasantville Property Maintenance Code
violations. The new proposed owner of the property is
responsible for abating outstanding code violations. All
outstanding violations must be corrected by the due date
on the permit. Failure to correct identified and outstanding
property maintenance violations by due date will result in
the issuance of a court summons. Penalties include fines,
community service or imprisonment as defined in § 300-8,
Enforcement; violations and penalties, of Chapter 300,
Land Management.
G. Temporary certificate of occupancy and temporary occupancy permits.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of § 300-43E(1)(c), where
construction, reconstruction, remodeling or alteration of a
§ 300-43 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-43
285:912
structure does not require the vacating of the structure or where
parts of the structure are finished and ready for occupancy before
the completion of such construction, reconstruction, remodeling
or alteration and are certified, upon inspection, to be safe for
use or occupancy and to be in full compliance with all applicable
provisions of this chapter, other relevant codes and ordinances of
the City, the applicant's plans, as approved, and the terms and
conditions of any special approvals issued with respect to such
structure, premises or use, a temporary certificate of occupancy
may be issued for a period not to exceed six months from its date,
which temporary certificate of occupancy shall bear on its face, in
bold, capital letters, a statement of its temporary nature.
(2) In the case of any occupancy permit to be issued for a dwelling unit,
found upon inspection safe for use or occupancy, deemed to be fit
for human habitation, and where conditions exist therein which are
not inherently dangerous to the health or safety of the unit's
occupants or of the residents of the City, a temporary occupancy
permit may be issued for a period not to exceed three months from
its date, which the temporary occupancy permit shall bear on its
face, in bold, capital letters, a statement of its temporary nature.
H. Filing of certificates of occupancy and occupancy permits. Duplicate
copies of all Certificates of occupancy and occupancy permits,
numbered consecutively, shall be kept on file in the office of the
Construction Code Official or Code Enforcement Officer, as the case
may be, together with such portions of the applications therefor as such
official may consider necessary to the proper administration of his
duties as a public record, open to inspection by interested parties at
reasonable times and upon reasonable notice.
I. Cooperation between offices.
(1) The Construction Code Official and Code Enforcement Officer shall,
on a daily basis, forward copies of all newly filed applications for
certificates of occupancy and occupancy permits to the Zoning
Officer. Should the Zoning Officer, upon review of any such
application, observe any problem, deficiency or special
circumstances arising out of or relating to the provisions of this
chapter or any special approval issued pursuant to it which
requires attention prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy or occupancy permit, he shall immediately notify the
Construction Code Official or Code Enforcement Officer thereof.
(2) Should, during the course of the processing of any such application
by the Construction Code Official or Code Enforcement Officer, any
question arise concerning the full and complete compliance of the
structure, premises or use with the provisions of this chapter or any
approval issued pursuant to it, the officer shall promptly refer such
question to the Zoning Officer for his review and determination.
Upon taking any final action upon any application for a certificate
§ 300-43 WATER § 300-43
285:913
of occupancy or occupancy permit, the Construction Code Official
or Code Enforcement Officer shall immediately inform the Zoning
Officer thereof.
§ 300-43 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-43
285:914
ARTICLE IX
Site Plan and/or Subdivision Approval Standards
§ 300-44. Consistency with other standards and regulations.
No application for site plan and/or subdivision plat approval shall be
granted unless the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, shall find that, in addition to complying with each of
the standards made applicable to site plans and subdivision plats by this
chapter, the proposed development complies, except to the extent waived,
varied or modified pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, with all of
the standards and conditions applicable in the zoning district in which it is
proposed to be located; complies with any special standards applicable to
the particular type of development being proposed or to the particular area
in which the development is proposed or to any special approvals required
in connection with such a development or area; and complies with all other
federal, state, county and City laws, ordinances and regulations applicable
to it.
§ 300-45. Adequacy of public improvements.
A. No application for site plan and/or subdivision plat approval shall be
granted unless the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, shall find, pursuant to the provisions of this section,
that the proposed use in the proposed location is or can and will be, by
reason of the developer's compliance with conditions imposed pursuant
to the provisions of this section, adequately served by and will not
impose an undue burden upon the public improvements, sites and
rights-of-way by which it will be served or benefited or which exist or
are planned for installation within its boundaries or their immediate
vicinity.
B. Determination of necessary public improvements and special benefits.
(1) Whenever an application for site plan and/or subdivision plat
approval is filed with the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, pursuant to this chapter, the Board
shall determine what, if any, public improvements, whether ontract
or off-tract, are to be installed, constructed, improved or
rehabilitated to serve or benefit the proposed development, and
shall also determine whether any part of the subject property
should be reserved for use as a public site or right-of-way. The
Board shall base its determination on:
(a) The nature and scope of the proposed development.
(b) The provisions of this chapter specifically applicable to the
type of development being proposed.
(c) The provisions of the Master Plan, Capital Improvement
Program, if any, Official Map and any other plans, programs or
§ 300-44 WATER § 300-45
285:915
maps adopted by or under consideration pursuant to public
notice by the City or other governmental agencies having
jurisdiction to guide growth and development.
(d) The provisions of this chapter and other development
regulations adopted by the City or other governmental
agencies having jurisdiction, with particular attention to any
such provisions specifically applicable to the type of
development being proposed or the area in which it is
proposed and special restrictions or conditions on such
developments or areas, and the studies, reports and opinions
of City departments, officials and consultants having special
knowledge, expertise or responsibility with respect to the
development, improvements or conditions under
consideration.
(2) In determining whether the installation, construction,
improvement or rehabilitation of a public improvement is
necessary to serve the proposed development, the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall be guided
by the principle that no new development should be allowed to
utilize existing capacity of a public improvement unless such
improvement, in its existing condition or with such improvements
as have already been authorized for completion as general
improvements to be paid for out of public funds already
appropriated for the purpose, has adequate capacity to meet the
full demands that would be placed upon it if all reasonably
foreseeable public and private development planned or permitted
pursuant to the Master Plan and chapter were to occur.
(3) In the event that the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall determine, pursuant to
Subsection B(1) above, that one or more on-site public
improvements are necessary to serve the proposed development,
the Board shall require the installation of such improvements as a
condition to the approval of any site plan and/or subdivision plat. In
such event, the developer shall, as provided in § 300-45D, estimate
the cost thereof and provide such information to the City Engineer.
(4) In the event that the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall determine, pursuant to
Subsection B(1) above, that either a public site or a public right-ofway
or public improvement that will not serve the subject
development is required on the subject tract, the applicant shall
proceed as provided in § 300-45E.
(5) In the event that the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall determine, pursuant to
Subsection B(1) above, that one or more off-tract public
improvements are necessary to serve the subject development, the
Board shall determine, as to each such improvement, whether the
§ 300-45 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-45
285:916
improvement will specially benefit only the subject property or will
benefit other properties in addition to the subject property.
(6) In the case of any such improvement that will benefit only the
subject property, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall require the installation of
such improvement. In such event, the developer shall, as provided
in § 300-45F, estimate the cost thereof and provide such
information to the City Engineer.
(7) In the case of any such improvement that will benefit other
properties in addition to the subject property, the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall determine
the extent to which each benefited property, including the subject
property, is benefited and also the extent to which the improvement
results in a general benefit not specifically attributable to any
specific property and shall apportion the cost of such improvement
and require its installation. In such event, the developer shall, as
provided in § 300-45G, estimate the cost and apportionment
thereof and provide such information to the City Engineer.
(8) In determining which properties are specifically benefited by a
public improvement, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall be governed by the
interpretation given by the New Jersey Supreme Court to the term
"special or peculiar benefit" in N.J.S.A. 40:56-27. In apportioning
the benefit among the benefited properties and the general benefit,
the Board shall be generally guided by the principles applicable to
the apportionment of special benefits in connection with local
improvements subject to N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq.
(9) When, in performing its duties hereunder, the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, determines that a
property, other than the subject property, will be benefited by an
improvement to be installed as a condition of its approval of the
subject application, it shall require the developer to give the owner
of each such property, as shown in the latest property tax records,
notice thereof. The Board shall provide such entities a reasonable
opportunity to be heard thereon and shall either delay approval of
the subject application pending such notice and hearing, or shall
condition such approval to permit revisions in its determination
made pursuant to this subsection based upon information obtained
at such hearing.
(10) In performing its duties hereunder, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall enlist the assistance
of the City Engineer or such other City officials, employees and
consultants as have special knowledge or expertise in estimating
and apportioning the costs and benefits of public improvements.
§ 300-45 WATER § 300-45
285:917
(11) The requirements for public improvements and the developers'
responsibility with respect to their provision and installation
pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed to be the minimum
requirements applicable to all developments requiring site plan/
subdivision approval but otherwise permitted as a matter of right in
the zoning district proposed. Additional requirements applicable to
developments requiring certain discretionary approvals pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter may be imposed pursuant to
§ 300-45H.
C. On-tract public improvements serving the subject development.
(1) The developer of every proposed development shall be required, as
a condition of any approval pursuant to this chapter, to provide all
on-tract, whether on-site or off-site, public improvements to which
the subject development will be connected or by which it will be
served or benefited.
(a) Except as noted in Subsection C(2) below, all such
improvements shall be designed, sized and installed in
accordance with the Master Plan, any capital improvement
program, the Official Map, this chapter, and such other plans,
programs, maps and ordinances adopted by or under
consideration pursuant to public notice by the City or other
governmental agencies having jurisdiction to guide growth and
development at the time the first application in connection
with such development is filed.
(b) In the absence of any such plan, program, map or ordinance,
the public improvements shall be required, designed, sized and
installed in accordance with the City Engineer's determination
based on good engineering practice and all available
information concerning present and future needs. The cost of
providing and installing such improvements shall be paid in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection C(3) below.
(2) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, may, as a condition of any approval required to be given by
it pursuant to this chapter, require the installation of a public
improvement of greater size or capacity than required by
Subsection C(1) above when it deems such greater size or capacity
to be necessary in light of factors not known or considered at the
time the aforesaid plan, program, map or ordinance was adopted or
placed under consideration. If such factors relate solely to the
development under consideration, the increased cost due to
installing such greater size or capacity public improvement shall be
paid in accordance with the provisions of Subsection C(3) below. If
such factors do not relate solely to such development, such
increased cost shall be paid in the same manner as provided in
§ 300-45G for off-tract improvements benefiting more than one
tract.
§ 300-45 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-45
285:918
(3) Except as provided in Subsection C(2) above, it shall be a condition
of every approval granted pursuant to this chapter that all public
improvements required to be installed pursuant to this subsection
shall be installed at the sole cost and expense of the developer. The
City Engineer shall, as part of his/her review of detailed plans,
specifications and cost estimates pursuant to § 300-49, estimate
the cost of all such improvements, and the developer shall, as a
condition to final plan/plat approval, provide performance and
maintenance guaranties pursuant to § 300-49, to ensure the timely
and proper installation of such improvements. The developer shall
be responsible for installing all improvements required pursuant to
this subsection, and for that purpose shall engage only properly
licensed and qualified contractors and subcontractors for the type
of work involved; provided, however, that where an ongoing or
proposed City Public Improvement Program offers a more efficient
and orderly vehicle for installing such improvements, the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, may
require such improvements to be installed by the City as part of
such program and require the developer to pay the cost thereof.
D. On-tract public sites, on-tract public rights-of-way and public
improvements not serving the subject development.
(1) Whenever the Master Plan, Capital Improvement Program, Official
Map or other plan, program, map or ordinance adopted, or under
consideration pursuant to official notice, by the City provides for
the reservation on the subject property of a public site not
associated with a public improvement or for the reservation of a
public right-of-way or the installation of a public improvement,
which right-of-way or improvement will not serve or benefit the
subject tract, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, may, pursuant to the procedure set out in
Subsection D(3) below and as a condition of any approval required
pursuant to this chapter, require such site, right-of-way or
improvement to be shown on the plans or plats of the proposed
development in a manner, size and location consistent with the City
plan, program, map or ordinance in question and may reserve the
necessary land areas for such site, right-of-way or improvement for
a period of one year or such further time as may be agreed to by the
developer following final site plan subdivision plat approval. Unless
during such period, or an agreed extension thereof, the City shall
have entered into a contract to purchase, or shall have instituted
condemnation proceedings according to law to acquire, the fee or a
lesser interest in the reserved land area, the developer shall not be
bound by such reservation and may proceed to use such land for
private use in accordance with applicable development regulations.
(2) The developer shall be entitled to just compensation for the actual
loss found to be caused by any temporary reservation and
deprivation of use pursuant to Subsection D(1) above. Unless a
§ 300-45 WATER § 300-45
285:919
lesser amount has been mutually agreed upon, just compensation
shall be deemed to be the fair market value of an option to
purchase the land reserved for the period of reservation, provided
that determination of such fair market value shall include, but not
be limited to, consideration of the real property taxes apportioned
to the land reserved and prorated for the period of reservation.
(3) The developer shall also be compensated for the reasonable
increased cost of legal, engineering or other professional services
incurred as a result of the reservation in connection with obtaining
site plan and/or subdivision approval. The compensation payable
pursuant to this subsection shall be determined in accordance with
the provisions of Subsection D(4) below.
(4) Upon submission to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, of an application for site plan and/
or subdivision approval for a land area subject to reservation
pursuant to Subsection D(1) above, the Board Secretary shall, in
addition to the usual distribution of such application, forward a
copy thereof to the City Council with a report summarizing the
provisions of the City plan, program, map or ordinance, indicating
the need for the reservation, providing a current assessment of the
public need for such reservation and setting forth the date upon
which the Board is expected to take final action on the application.
Before such date, the City Council shall decide upon, and give the
Board notice of, one of the following courses of action to be
followed:
(a) The City shall forego the right to reserve the land area in
question. The Board then shall consider the proposed
development as if no such right existed.
(b) The City Council has, prior to the date set for final action on the
application, negotiated a price for the acquisition of any
interests in land necessary, a program for the installation of
any public improvements and an agreement as to any
incidental compensation which may be due, and all approvals
granted by the Board shall reflect such agreements.
(c) The Board shall exercise the right of reservation pursuant to
Subsection D(1) above, and the City Council shall negotiate
just compensation for the reserved land or shall institute
condemnation proceedings during the reservation period.
(5) Should the City Council fail to so notify the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, the Board shall
proceed as if notified and pursue the course of action set out in
Subsection D(4)(a) above.
(6) Should the City Council elect to proceed pursuant to Subsection
D(4)(c) above and then fail to negotiate compensation or to
institute condemnation proceedings during the reservation period,
§ 300-45 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-45
285:920
the reservation shall expire, and the City Council shall, within 30
days following the end of the reservation period, tender to the
developer an amount considered by it to be just compensation for
all compensable claims of the developer, pursuant to Subsection
D(1) above, arising out of the temporary reservation. The developer
shall either accept and, in writing, acknowledge his acceptance
of such tender in full settlement of his claim for compensation or
shall institute an appropriate action for judicial determination and
enforcement of his claim.
E. Off-tract public improvements specially benefiting only the subject
development.
(1) The developer of every proposed development shall be required, as
a condition of the grant of any approval pursuant to this chapter, to
provide all off-tract public improvements which are necessary to
serve or which benefit the subject property and which provide no
special benefit to any other property. Except as noted in Subsection
E(2) below, all such improvements shall be required, designed,
sized and installed in accordance with the Master Plan, Capital
Improvement Program, if any, Official Map, this chapter and such
other plans, programs, maps and ordinances adopted by or under
consideration pursuant to public notice by the City or other
governmental agencies having jurisdiction to guide growth and
development at the time the first application in connection with
such development is filed. In the absence of any such plan,
program, map or ordinance, the public improvements shall be
required, designed, sized and installed in accordance with the City
Engineer's determination based on good engineering practice and
all available information concerning present and future needs. The
cost of providing and installing such improvements shall be paid in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection E(3) below.
(2) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be may, as a condition of any approval required to be given by
it pursuant to this chapter, require the installation of a public
improvement of greater size or capacity than required by
Subsection E(1) above when it deems such greater size or capacity
to be necessary in light of factors not known or considered at the
time the aforesaid plan, program, map or ordinance was adopted or
placed under consideration. If such factors relate solely to the
development under consideration, the increased cost due to
installing such greater size or capacity public improvement shall be
paid in accordance with Subsection E(3) below. If such factors do
not relate solely to such development, such increased cost shall be
paid in the same manner as provided in Subsection F below for offtract
improvements benefiting more than one tract.
(3) Except as provided in Subsection E(2) above, it shall be a condition
of every approval granted pursuant to this chapter that all public
improvements required to be installed pursuant to this subsection
§ 300-45 WATER § 300-45
285:921
shall be installed at the sole cost and expense of the developer.
The City Engineer shall, as part of his review of detailed plans,
specifications and cost estimates pursuant to § 300-49, estimate
the cost of all such improvements, and the developer shall, as a
condition to final plan or plat approval, provide performance and
maintenance guaranties pursuant to § 300-49 to ensure the timely
and proper installation of such improvements. The developer shall
be responsible for installing all improvements required pursuant
to this subsection, and for that purpose shall engage only such
properly licensed and qualified contractors and subcontractors as
have been approved by the City Engineer for the type of work
involved; provided, however, that where an ongoing or proposed
City Public Improvement Program offers a more efficient and
orderly vehicle for installing such improvements, the Board may
require such improvements to be installed by the City as part of
such program and require the developer to pay the cost thereof.
F. Off-tract improvements specifically benefiting more than the subject
development.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection F(3) below, the developer of every
proposed development shall be required, as a condition of the grant
of any approval pursuant to this chapter, to provide all off-tract
public improvements which are necessary to serve, or which
benefit, the subject property, even though such improvements may
also specially benefit other properties. Except as noted in
Subsection F(2) below, all such improvements shall be required,
designed, sized and installed in accordance with the Master Plan,
Capital Improvement Program, if any, Official Map, this chapter
and such other plans, programs, maps and ordinances adopted by
or under consideration pursuant to public notice by the City or
other governmental agencies having jurisdiction to guide growth
and development at the time the first application in connection with
such development is filed. In the absence of any such plan,
program, map or ordinance, the public improvements shall be
required, designed, sized and installed in accordance with the City
Engineer's determination based on good engineering practice and
all available information concerning present and future needs. The
cost of providing and installing such improvements shall be paid in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection F(3) below.
(2) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, may, as a condition of any approval required to be given by
it pursuant to this chapter, require the installation of a public
improvement of greater size or capacity than required by
Subsection F(1) above when it deems such greater size or capacity
to be necessary in light of factors not known or considered at the
time the aforesaid plan, program, map or ordinance was adopted or
placed under consideration. The costs due to installing such
§ 300-45 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-45
285:922
greater size or capacity shall be apportioned and paid in the same
manner as other costs pursuant to Subsection F(3) below.
(3) It shall be a condition of every approval granted pursuant to this
chapter, that all public improvements required to be installed
pursuant to this subsection shall be installed at the sole cost and
expense of the developer. Such approval shall, however, provide
that the developer shall be entitled to reimbursement (recapture)
in the manner and to the extent authorized by Subsection F(4)
below.
(4) Determination of reimbursement/recapture amount.
(a) Whenever a public improvement, or any portion thereof,
required to be installed pursuant to this subsection is installed
at the sole cost and expense of a developer, or at any cost and
expense to such developer greater than his pro rata share of
the cost of such improvement as specified in Subsection F(3),
the developer shall be entitled to reimbursement of his costs
and expenses if, when and as other properties determined to
be specifically benefited by such improvement subsequently
seek approval for any development that will be served or
benefited by such improvement. The amount of such
reimbursement shall not exceed the difference between the
amount of such cost and expense paid by such developer and
such developer's pro rata share of the cost of such
improvement.
(b) In any such case, the approval of the application for the subject
property shall include a determination by the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, pursuant
to this section, of all properties specially benefited by the
improvement and of the value to each such property. The
results of said determination and notice of the obligations on
each property pursuant thereto shall be recorded by the
Zoning Officer in the records of the Atlantic County Recording
Officer with respect to each such benefited property.
(c) Thereafter, no approval or permit required by this chapter or
any other ordinance of the City with respect to any subsequent
development resulting in the use of, connection to or
enjoyment of any benefit from such improvement by any such
benefited property shall be granted or issued unless and until
the subsequent developer of such benefited property shall have
paid the original developer and any other prior developers
contributing to the cost and expense of such improvement an
amount calculated pursuant to the following formula, which
was developed to establish a fair cost-sharing for off-site
infrastructure extensions. Such formula's primary ingredients
are:
§ 300-45 WATER § 300-45
285:923
[1] Capacity usage from each participant as a portion of the
total capacity of the system and the extension quantity
(typically distance or area), which ultimately equates to
cost.
[2] Pro-rata cost share shall be calculated by multiplying the
recapture amount by the anticipated usage divided by the
total estimated usage of the affected portion of the system.
The recapture amount is the total estimated or actual
improvement cost less the subject tract improvement cost.
By way of example:
Roadway Reimbursement =
Length of Property Line along Roadway x Cost of One
l.f. of Road\Two x Half Width of Roadway
Where Cost of One l.f. of
Road =
Total Cost of Road
Construction\Total Length of
Road
Storm Sewer Reimbursement =
Acreage of Property to be Developed x Cost of One
Unit of Storm Sewer Infrastructure
Where Cost of One Unit of Storm Sewer
Infrastructure =
Total Cost of Storm Sewer
Construction\Total Acreage
to be Serviced by Storm
Sewer1
Sanitary Sewer Reimbursement =
Total Cost for Pipe
Installation\Total Number of
EDUs* to be Serviced
NOTES:
1 Including acreage within rights-of-way.
* The City Engineer shall determine other existing or
potential off-site development that may benefit from
the proposed improvements and shall take any EDUs1
anticipated from such development into consideration
when making his/her determination of usage.
§ 300-45 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-45
285:924
§ 300-46. Elimination of impacts of specified developments.
1 Equivalent Dwelling Unit. Assumes one EDU = one
single-family dwelling. The City Engineer shall
determine an appropriate EDU factor for apartments,
condominiums or other multifamily residential
development.
For commercial development, the City engineer shall
estimate the sewer usage for the proposed use. For
the purpose of determining reimbursement, it will be
assumed that one EDU is equivalent to 300 gallons per
day of sewer discharge.
For sizing new pump stations or upgrades to existing
pump stations, the capacity of the station or increased
capacity in gallons per day will be converted to EDUs
by assuming one EDU to be equivalent to 300 gallons
per day.
For other improvements to the system, the City
Engineer will determine the total number of benefited
users to share in the cost of the improvement.
[3] The City Engineer shall use the foregoing formula as a
guide and shall be empowered to make adjustments as he/
she deems necessary based on the individual
circumstances encountered.
[4] The procedures described herein apply to public utilities
only. Provisions for recapture of costs for the installation of
infrastructure provided by private utility companies [i.e.,
New Jersey American Water (potable water), South Jersey
Gas (natural gas), Atlantic City Electric (electricity)] shall
be as determined by the private utility provider.
A. General standard.
(1) The requirements set forth in § 300-45 for public improvements
and public sites shall be deemed the minimum requirements
necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare in
connection with all developments requiring site plan and/or
subdivision approval but otherwise permitted as a matter of right
as permitted uses in the various zoning districts established by this
chapter.
(2) In addition to such requirements, the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall have authority, in
connection with its review and approval of any site plan and/or
subdivision plat for any proposed development requiring variance
approval, to impose as a condition on any of said discretionary
approvals and on any related site plan and/or subdivision approval
§ 300-45 WATER § 300-46
285:925
pursuant to this chapter, additional requirements intended and
designed to eliminate or ameliorate the physical, economic and
social impacts of the proposed development on its immediate
environs and on the general health, safety and welfare of the City
and its residents and visitors.
(3) No application for such a development shall be granted unless the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
shall find, pursuant to the provisions of § 300-46B and the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the granting of the
aforesaid discretionary approvals, that the proposed use in the
proposed location will not result in any undue adverse physical,
economic or social impacts upon its immediate environs or the
general health, safety and welfare of the City, its residents and its
visitors, which will not be eliminated by reason of the developer's
compliance with conditions imposed pursuant to § 300-46B and the
provisions of this chapter applicable to the aforesaid discretionary
approvals.
B. Determination of need for special conditions.
(1) Whenever an application for site plan and/or subdivision approval
for a development requiring variance approval is filed with the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
pursuant to this chapter, the Board shall determine what, if any,
conditions on those approvals, in addition to or in lieu of conditions
to be imposed pursuant to § 300-45, are necessary to eliminate any
undue, adverse physical, economic or social impacts of the
proposed development on its immediate environs and on the
general health, safety and welfare of the City, its residents,
businesses and visitors. Such conditions may relate to the
provisions of:
(a) Public improvements;
(b) Public sites and rights-of-way;
(c) On-tract and on-site improvements, facilities, landscaping and
amenities and services; and
(d) Contributions to general public programs and projects
designed to respond to the adverse impact in question; or
(e) Any other matter found by the Board to be reasonably
necessary to eliminate any undue adverse physical, economic
or social impact which would be imposed by or have a rational
nexus with the proposed development.
(2) The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall base its determination on:
(a) The nature and scope of the proposed development;
§ 300-46 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-46
285:926
(b) The provisions of this chapter specifically applicable to the
type of development being proposed and the specific type of
discretionary approval sought;
(c) The provisions of the Master Plan, Capital Improvement
Program, if any, Official Map and any other plans, programs or
maps adopted by or under consideration pursuant to notice by
the City or other governmental agencies having jurisdiction to
guide growth and development;
(d) The provisions of this chapter and other development
regulations adopted by the City or other governmental
agencies having jurisdiction, with particular attention to any
such provisions specifically applicable to the type of
development being proposed or the area in which it is
proposed and any special restrictions or conditions on such
development or areas; and
(e) The studies, reports and opinions of City departments, officials
and consultants having special knowledge, expertise or
responsibility with respect to the development, improvements
or conditions under consideration.
(3) In determining whether conditions are necessary to eliminate
adverse impacts of a development requiring variance approval, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
shall be guided by the principles set forth in § 300-45, and by the
following additional principles:
(a) That such approvals are discretionary;
(b) That the uses permitted by right in the various zoning districts
reflect a careful balancing of the rights of the owners against
the lawfully cognizable concerns of the public;
(c) That uses requiring variance approval are placed in a special
category because they impose unusual burdens on the public
while conferring special benefits on the owner; and
(d) That the public has the right and duty to insist that those
seeking such special benefits accept the responsibility for
responding to and eliminating those unusual burdens which
are found to have a rational nexus with the special approval
sought or the development proposed.
(4) Neither the fact that a specific condition could have been imposed
pursuant to § 300-45 nor the fact that such a condition is not
authorized by said subsection shall prevent its imposition pursuant
to this section in the case of any development variance approval
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-46 WATER § 300-46
285:927
§ 300-47. Installation of public improvements, sites and rights-ofway.
(5) In the event that the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall determine, pursuant to this
section, that conditions are required to eliminate any undue
adverse physical, economic or social impacts of a development
requiring variance approval, it shall condition its grant of the
aforesaid approvals and its grant of site plan and/or subdivision
approval pursuant to this chapter as necessary to eliminate such
impacts.
C. The cost of meeting any condition imposed pursuant to this section shall
be borne solely by the developer upon which the condition is imposed,
unless the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall find that just cause exists for granting rights of
reimbursement to the extent and in the manner provided in § 300-45E
on the basis of the extent of the cost and expense of meeting the
condition imposed in relation to the value of the development for which
variance approval is sought, the degree to which the condition will
specifically benefit other specific properties and the degree to which
the subject property has or is likely to benefit, without cost or expense,
from similar conditions imposed upon other properties seeking similar
discretionary approvals. In the event that the Board shall make such
determination, the provisions of § 300-45 with respect thereto shall
apply.
A. No application for site plan and/or subdivision approval shall be
granted unless the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, shall find that the proposed development is adequately
served by public improvements, either existing or to be provided by the
developer pursuant to § 300-45 and/or § 300-46 above, which are in
compliance with the provisions of the Master Plan, any capital
improvement program, the Official Map and this chapter.
B. Sight triangles at street corners. Except as provided in § 300-58E(6)
regarding freestanding/pole signs, no building, structure, landscaping
or other obstruction to sight shall be located within the space between
2 1/2 feet and nine feet above t.o.c., or the street line where curbs are
not present, within a triangle formed by connecting the center lines of
any two intersecting streets as herein provided. The sight triangles
herein specified shall be as follows:
§ 300-46 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-47
285:928
§ 300-48. Ancillary powers: concurrent review when variance relief
required.
Road "1" Road "2"
A
(feet)
B
(feet)
C
(feet)
D
(feet)
Local street Local street 60 60 90 90
Minor collector Local street 70 60 200 90
Minor collector Minor collector 70 70 200 90
Major collector Local street 90 60 200 90
Major collector Minor collector 90 70 200 90
Major collector Major collector 90 90 200 90
Arterial Local street 100 60 300 90
Arterial Minor collector 100 70 300 90
Arterial Major collector 100 90 300 90
Arterial Arterial 100 100 300 90*
NOTES:
* Each arterial road is to be treated individually.
A. Planning Board.
(1) When reviewing applications for approval of site plans or
subdivision plats pursuant to this chapter, the Planning Board shall
have the power to grant, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, to the
same extent and subject to the same provisions, conditions and
limitations as applicable to the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
(a) Variances from bulk, space and yard requirements;
(b) Variances and direction for issuance of a permit for a building
or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area; and
(c) Variances and direction for issuance of a permit for a building
or structure not abutting a street.
(2) Submission and processing of applications.
§ 300-47 WATER § 300-48
285:929
(a) Whenever, in addition to approval of a site plan or subdivision
plat pursuant to this chapter, the applicant will, in connection
with the proposed development, require any of the approvals
authorized by this chapter, the applicant shall, at the time of
filing an application for preliminary site plan and/or
subdivision plat approval, file applications for all other
required approvals.
(b) All required notices shall include reference to the request for
any and all additional approvals.
(c) Whenever, in conjunction with an application for site plan and/
or subdivision plat approval, an applicant files applications for
other approvals pursuant to this section, the Planning Board
shall review and process all such applications at the same
public hearing.
(d) Where, pursuant to the ancillary jurisdiction granted by this
subsection, the Planning Board is reviewing an application
subject to the primary jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, all provisions of this chapter applicable to the
Zoning Board in reviewing such an application shall be deemed
to refer to and to apply to the Planning Board.
(e) In reviewing such combined applications, the Board shall,
except as hereinafter provided with respect to limitations on
the time for taking action, comply with all of the provisions of
this chapter applicable to each of the applications.
(f) The Board shall act on any such combined application within
the longest time period, not to exceed 120 days, applicable to
any one of the individual applications included in the combined
application, or within such further time as may be consented to
by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within such period
of time shall constitute approval of the application. The Zoning
Officer shall issue notices and certificates of such action or
failure to act in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
applicable to the various applications involved.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(1) When reviewing applications for "d" variance relief pursuant to this
chapter, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to
grant, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-78, to the same extent and
subject to the same provisions, conditions and limitations as
applicable to the Planning Board, site plan and/or subdivision
approval pursuant to this chapter.
(2) Submission and processing of applications.
(a) Whenever, in addition to approval of an application for "d"
variance relief pursuant to this chapter, the applicant will, in
§ 300-48 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-48
285:930
§ 300-49. Guaranties.
connection with the proposed development, require site plan
and/or subdivision approval authorized by § 300-36, the
applicant shall, at the time of filing an application for "d"
variance relief, file applications for all other required
approvals.
(b) All required notices shall include reference to the request for
any and all additional approvals.
(c) Whenever, in conjunction with an application for "d" variance
relief, an applicant files applications for site plan and/or
subdivision approvals pursuant to this subsection, the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall review and process all such
applications at the same public hearing.
(d) In reviewing such combined applications, the Board shall,
except as hereinafter provided with respect to limitations on
the time for taking action, comply with all of the provisions of
this chapter applicable to each of the applications.
(e) Where, pursuant to the ancillary jurisdiction granted by this
subsection, the Zoning Board of Adjustment is reviewing an
application subject to the primary jurisdiction of the Planning
Board, all provisions of this chapter applicable to the Planning
Board in reviewing such an application shall be deemed to
refer to and to apply to the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
(f) The Board shall act on any such combined application within
120 days after determination of a complete application, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Board to act within such period of time
shall constitute approval of the application. The Zoning Officer
shall issue notices and certificates of such action or failure to
act in accordance with the provisions of this chapter applicable
to the various applications involved.
A. No official, department, bureau, board, commission or agency of the
City shall release to a developer a final subdivision plat which has been
signed by the Chair and Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, in accordance with
§ 300-36G(2)(h)[2] and [3], or, as a condition of final site plan approval,
issue a zoning permit pursuant to § 300-34A, or issue a certificate of
approval by inaction pursuant to § 300-30H, unless and until the
applicant submits to the Board Secretary performance guarantees as
herein required. Such guaranties shall be in cash, or in the form of a
bond, irrevocable letter of credit or escrow agreement. If not in cash,
such guaranties shall be secured by a corporate surety licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey, shall be approved by the City
§ 300-48 WATER § 300-49
285:931
Solicitor as to form and shall be approved for execution by the
governing body.
B. The cost of the installation of improvements for the purposes of this
subsection shall be estimated by the City Engineer based on
documented construction costs for public improvements prevailing in
the general area of the City. The developer may appeal such estimate to
the County Construction Board of Appeals established under N.J.S.A.
52:27D-127. The City Engineer shall provide such cost estimate to the
applicant within 30 days of receipt of such request, which shall be made
by the applicant via certified mail.
C. Performance guaranty. Upon receipt of the City Engineer's cost
estimate, the applicant shall furnish a performance guaranty in the
favor of the City in an amount not to exceed 120% of the City Engineer's
estimate of the cost of installing all improvements, facilities and work
required to be installed by the applicant as a condition of final site plan
and/or subdivision plat approval, whether on site, off site, on tract or off
tract. Such improvements, facilities and work shall include, without
limitation, all public improvements, including streets, grading,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, improvement of
public and private common open spaces and surveyor's monuments as
required by the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.),190 water
mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of
sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion and sedimentation
control devices and landscaping improvements. Such performance
guaranty shall guarantee the installation of said improvements,
facilities and work in a good and workmanlike fashion in accordance
with the approved final plan or plat within the time specified in the
approved staging plan or, if no such time is specified, within two years
following the date of final plan or plat approval. The itemized cost
estimates prepared by the City Engineer for the improvements shall be
appended to each performance guaranty posted by the obligor.
D. Maintenance guaranty. The applicant shall furnish a maintenance
guaranty in favor of the City, covering all improvements, facilities and
work required to be covered by the performance guaranty required
under § 300-49C. The maintenance guaranty shall remain in full force
and effect for a period of two years following final acceptance of the
improvement, facility or work in question and shall be in an amount
equal to 15% of the cost of such improvement, facility or work.
E. Exception. In the event that a governmental agency or public utility,
other than the City of Pleasantville, will automatically own the
improvements, facilities or work to be installed pursuant to the
approved final plan or plat or in the event that such improvements,
facilities or work are covered by a performance or maintenance
guaranty required by a governmental agency other than the City of
190. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.7 to 46:23-9.16 were repealed by L. 2011, c. 217, § 2,
effective 5-1-2012. See now N.J.S.A. 46:26B-1 et seq.
§ 300-49 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-49
285:932
§ 300-49.1. Required guaranties; surety. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 7-2018]
For the purpose of assuring the installation and maintenance of bondable
land development improvements as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, as a
condition of all final site plan, subdivision, and/or zoning permit approvals,
the Board and/or Zoning Officer shall require, as appropriate, and the City
Council shall accept, in accordance with the standards adopted hereinafter:
§ 300-49.2. Other governmental agencies. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 7-2018]
In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities will
automatically own the utilities to be installed or the improvements are
covered by a performance or maintenance guaranty to another
Pleasantville, no additional performance or maintenance guaranty
covering such improvements, facilities or work shall be required
pursuant to this section.
A. The furnishing of a performance guaranty in favor of the City in an
amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the improvement, which cost
shall be determined by the City Engineer according to the method of
calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 for any and all bondable
items as permitted therein. The City Engineer shall prepare an itemized
cost estimate of the improvements covered by the performance
guaranty, which itemized cost estimate shall be appended to each
performance guaranty posted by the obligor.
B. The furnishing of a maintenance guaranty in favor of the City in an
amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the improvement, which cost
shall be determined by the City Engineer according to the method of
calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 for any and all bondable
items as permitted therein.
C. The furnishing of a temporary certificate of occupancy guaranty in the
amount of 120% of the cost of installing the remaining improvements
required to be completed before the issuance of a permanent certificate
of occupancy. The scope and amount of such a guaranty will be
determined by the City Engineer.
D. The furnishing of a safety and stabilization guaranty to return the
property to a safe and stable condition or to otherwise implement
measures to protect the public from access to an unsafe or unstable
condition. The amount of such a guaranty shall be $5,000 where the
overall bonded improvements are $100,000 or less. Where the overall
bonded improvements are $100,000 or more, then the City Engineer
shall calculate the bond amount in accord with the following: $5,000 for
the first $100,000 of bonded improvement costs, plus 2.5% of bonded
improvement costs in excess of $100,000 up to $1 million, plus 1% of
bonded improvement costs in excess of $1 million.
§ 300-49 WATER § 300-49.2
285:933
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the case
may be, shall be required by the City for such utilities or improvements.
§ 300-49.3. Failure to perform; City completion. [Added 6-18-2018
by Ord. No. 7-2018]
If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in accordance
with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if any, shall be
liable thereon to the City for the reasonable cost of the improvements
not completed or corrected, and the City may either prior to or after
the receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such improvements. Such
completion or correction of improvements shall be subject to the public
bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1,
et seq.
§ 300-49.4. Conformance with City standards. [Added 6-18-2018 by
Ord. No. 7-2018]
All improvements shall be in accordance with the design standards of the
City Code or as authorized by a design exception granted by the reviewing
board and shall be subject to inspection and approval by the City Engineer.
The City Engineer shall be notified 24 hours prior to the start of the various
phases of the work, and if discontinued, shall again be notified when the
work will be continued.
§ 300-49.5. Release or reduction of performance guaranty. [Added
6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 7-2018]
A. Upon substantial completion of all required improvements, the obligor
may request of the governing body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the City Clerk, that the City Engineer prepare, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City
Engineer and appended to the performance guaranty pursuant to this
chapter, a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactorily completed
improvements. If such a request is made, the obligor shall send a copy
of the request to the City Engineer. The request shall indicate which
improvements have been completed and which improvements remain
uncompleted in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the City
Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by the obligor's
request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the City
Council, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the obligor not
later than 45 days after receipt of the obligor's request.
B. The list prepared by the City Engineer shall state, in detail with respect
to each improvement determined to be incomplete or unsatisfactory,
the nature and extent of the incompleteness of each incomplete
improvement or the nature and extent of, and remedy for, the
unsatisfactory state of each completed improvement determined to be
unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the City Engineer shall identify
each improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory,
§ 300-49.2 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-49.5
285:934
§ 300-49.6. Inspection fees. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 7-2018]
The obligor shall reimburse the City for all reasonable inspection fees
paid to the City Engineer for the foregoing inspection of improvements,
provided that the municipality may require of the developer a deposit for
the inspection fees in accordance with § 300-50B.
§ 300-49.7. Phasing in sections. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
7-2018]
In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development
pursuant to Subsection a of Section 29 of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38), the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or
section.
§ 300-49.8. Dedication and acceptance. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord.
No. 7-2018]
To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the
City on the subdivision plat, site plan and/or zoning permit, the municipality
shall be deemed, upon the release of any performance guaranty required
hereunder, to accept dedication for public use any improvements made
together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to
be made in the performance guaranty relating to the completed and
satisfactory improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended to the
performance guaranty pursuant to this chapter.
C. The City Council, by resolution, shall either accept the improvements
determined to be complete and satisfactory by the City Engineer, or
reject any or all of these improvements upon the establishment in the
resolution of cause for rejection, and shall approve and authorize the
amount of reduction or release to be made in the performance guaranty
relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized
cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended to the
performance guaranty pursuant to this chapter. This resolution shall be
adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the list and report
prepared by the City Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the
City Council, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to
its performance guaranty, with respect to those accepted
improvements, except for that portion sufficient to secure completion
or correction of the improvements not yet accepted, provided that 30%
of the amount of the performance guaranty posted may be retained to
ensure completion and acceptability of all improvements. If any portion
of the required improvements is rejected, the City shall require the
obligor to complete or correct such improvements, and, upon
completion or correction, the same procedure of notification, as set
forth in this section, shall be followed.
§ 300-49.5 WATER § 300-49.8
285:935
thereunder, provided that such improvements have been inspected and
have received final approval by the City Engineer.
§ 300-50. Inspection of improvements, facilities and work.
A. During construction.
(1) All improvements, facilities and work required to be constructed
pursuant to an approved final plan or plat shall be regularly
inspected by the City Engineer and the Zoning Officer for
compliance with the approved plans, decision and resolution of the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
the provisions of this chapter and the requirements of all other
applicable federal, state, county and City laws, ordinances and
regulations. If, as a result of such inspections, the City Engineer or
the Zoning Officer shall determine that any improvement, facility or
work is not in compliance with said plans, decision and resolution,
laws, ordinances or regulations, he or she shall have authority to
order that all or any part of the work on the development shall be
stopped until such time as necessary steps are taken to correct any
defects or deficiencies.
(2) In order to facilitate the regular inspection program herein
required, the applicant shall notify the City Engineer at least 48
hours prior to the surfacing of any street or private road; the
installation of any curbing, gutters, sanitary or storm drainage
structures, underground utilities or other improvements; or the
grading or backfilling of any open trench or excavation in which
any public improvement has been installed. Within 48 hours
following the receipt of such notice, the City Engineer shall conduct
an on-site inspection of such work.
(3) The above notwithstanding, nothing herein shall limit the ability of
the City Engineer to perform regular and routine inspections of
construction as necessary and appropriate.
B. Inspection escrow. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 7-2018]
(1) The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for reasonable
inspection fees paid to the City Engineer for the inspections of
improvements required under § 300-49, which fees shall not exceed
the sum of the amounts set forth in Subsection B(1)(a) and (b) of
this section. The municipality may require the developer to post the
inspection fees in escrow in an amount:
(a) Not to exceed, except for extraordinary circumstances, the
greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of bonded improvements that
are subject to a performance guaranty under § 300-49.1A; and
(b) Not to exceed 5% of the cost of private site improvements that
are not subject to a performance guaranty under § 300-49.1A,
§ 300-49.8 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-50
285:936
which cost shall be determined pursuant to Section 15 of P.L.
1991, c. 256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4).
(2) For those developments for which the inspection fees total less
than $10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in
two installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a
developer shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance on
deposit drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to
the City Engineer for inspections, the developer shall deposit the
remaining 50% of the inspection fees.
(3) For those developments for which the inspection fees total $10,000
or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in four
installments. The initial amount deposited in escrow by a developer
shall be 25% of the inspection fees. When the balance on deposit
drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the amount deposited
by the developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the City
Engineer for inspection, the developer shall make additional
deposits of 25% of the inspection fees.
(4) If the municipality determines that the amount in escrow for the
payment of inspection fees, as calculated pursuant to
§ 300-50B(1)(a) and (b), is insufficient to cover the cost of
additional required inspections, the municipality may require the
developer to deposit additional funds in escrow, provided that the
municipality delivers to the developer a written inspection escrow
deposit request, signed by the City Engineer, which informs the
developer of the need for additional inspections, details the items
or undertakings that require inspection, estimates the time
required for those inspections, and estimates the cost of
performing those inspections.
C. Additional inspections by zoning officer. Following final plan or plat
approval, the Zoning Officer shall, in addition to the inspections
required pursuant to § 300-50 in connection with the installation of
improvements and facilities, at least once every six months until the
completion of the development, and continually thereafter following
completion of the development, review all permits issued and
construction undertaken and compare actual development with the
approved plans for development and with the approved development
schedule.
(1) If the Zoning Officer finds that development is not proceeding in
accordance with the approved schedule, or that it fails in any other
respect to comply with the plans or plats as finally approved, he
shall immediately notify the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, of such fact and may, if he finds it
necessary to ensure compliance with the approved plans or plats,
the decision and resolution and the provisions of this chapter, issue
§ 300-50 WATER § 300-50
285:937
an order stopping any or all work on the development until such
time as any noncompliance is cured.
(2) Board actions.
(a) Within 30 days following such notice, the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall take one
or more of the following actions as it shall deem appropriate:
[1] Compel the applicant to return to the Board for a formal
explanation of the noncompliance;
[2] Commence such steps as it shall deem necessary to
compel compliance with the final plan or plat approval;
[3] Revoke, by resolution, the final plan or plat approval and
all prior approvals and related or resulting permits; and/or
[4] Pursue such other remedies as may be available to enforce
compliance with this chapter and to punish any failure to
comply.
(b) The exercise of any of the foregoing actions shall in no way bar
or limit the taking of any other of the foregoing actions if, in the
discretion of the Board, such actions are appropriate.
D. Reduction of guaranties; notice of default to obligor and surety.
(1) If, as a result of the foregoing regular inspection program, the City
Engineer shall determine that portions of the required
improvements, facilities or work have been completed so as to
justify a reduction in the amount of the performance guaranty
posted by the applicant, he shall certify such facts to the City
Council, which may, thereupon, reduce the amount of the
performance guaranty to a sum not less than 120% of the cost of
the improvements, facilities and work yet to be completed.
(2) If, as a result of the foregoing regular inspection program, the City
Engineer determines that any of the required improvements,
facilities or work has not been or is not being performed or
corrected in accordance with the approved plans and applicable
laws, ordinances and regulations, he shall notify the City Council of
such fact, and the City may, thereupon, take such action as it shall
deem appropriate to compel performance or may, in the
alternative, declare a forfeiture of the performance guaranty, and
the obligor and surety shall thereupon be liable upon the
performance guaranty to the City for the reasonable cost of the
improvements, facilities and work not completed or corrected, and
the City may, either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds of
the performance guaranty, complete or correct such improvements,
facilities or work by the employment of such City personnel or
private contractor as it shall deem appropriate.
§ 300-50 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-50
285:938
(3) Completion and final inspection.
(a) When all of the required improvements, facilities and work
within a stage or unit of the development have been completed,
the obligor shall send written notice of such completion to the
City Council by certified mail, addressed in care of the City
Clerk. A copy of such notification shall also be sent to the City
Engineer.
(b) Upon receipt of such notice, the City Engineer shall inspect all
of the improvements, facilities and work and shall, within 45
days from receipt of the notice from the obligor, file a detailed
written report with the City Council, indicating either
approval, partial approval or rejection of the improvements
and facilities, with detailed reasons in support of any rejection.
In case part of the improvements, facilities or work is approved
and part rejected, the report of the City Engineer shall set
forth the cost of the improvements, facilities and work required
for acceptance of the rejected improvements, facilities and
work. The City Engineer shall simultaneously send a copy of
such report to the obligor.
(4) Action by City Council.
(a) Within 45 days from receipt of the report of the City Engineer,
the City Council shall, by resolution, either approve, partially
approve or reject the improvements, facilities and work on the
basis of said report and shall, within such 45 days, notify the
obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of said
report and the action of the City Council with relation thereto.
A copy of such notification shall also be sent by City Council to
the surety. Failure of City Council to send or provide such
notification to the obligor within such 45 days shall be deemed
to constitute approval of the improvement, facility or work
which was the subject of the obligor's original notice.
(b) Upon such approval or the expiration of such a period of time
without action, the obligor and surety shall be released from all
liability pursuant to the performance guaranty. Where partial
approval is granted, the obligor and surety shall be released
from all liability pursuant to the performance guaranty as to
the improvements, facilities and work approved, but shall not
be released as to any improvements, facilities or work rejected.
(c) If all or any portion of the required improvements, facilities or
work is rejected, the City Council shall require the obligor to
complete such improvements, facilities and work and to again
give notice of such completion pursuant to this section within a
period of time to be fixed by the City Council. In the
alternative, if any required improvements, facilities or work
are not completed or not corrected in accordance with the
§ 300-50 WATER § 300-50
285:939
approved final plan, decision and resolution and applicable
laws, ordinances and regulations, the City may declare a
forfeiture of the performance guaranty, and, thereupon, the
obligor and surety shall be liable upon the performance
guaranty to the City for the reasonable cost of the
improvements, facilities or work not completed or corrected,
and the City may, either prior to or after the receipt of the
proceeds of the performance guaranty, complete or correct
such improvements or facilities by the employment of such City
personnel or private contractors as it shall deem appropriate.
E. Building and other permits. Except as otherwise expressly provided in
§ 300-36G(2)(j), upon, but not before, receiving notice from the Zoning
Officer that the approved final plan or plat has been recorded and upon
application by the applicant, all appropriate officials of the City may
issue building and other permits to an applicant for development,
construction and other work in the areas encompassed by the approved
final plan or plat; provided, however, that no such permit shall be issued
unless the appropriate official is first satisfied that the requirements of
any codes or ordinances of the City, in addition to this chapter, which
are applicable to the permit sought have been satisfied. No certificate
of occupancy shall be issued for any use or structure within such area
until all improvements, facilities and work required to be guaranteed
pursuant to § 300-49 hereof have been completed and accepted as
therein provided.
§ 300-50 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-50
285:940
ARTICLE X
Design and Performance Standards
§ 300-51. Design standards.
A. For all development in the City of Pleasantville, unless otherwise
addressed herein, departures from the design standards detailed in this
Subsection A may be permitted at the discretion of the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, via variance relief
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
(1) Placement of structures.
(a) The predominant axes of all structures hereafter erected shall
be either parallel or perpendicular to the axes of adjoining
public or private streets.
(b) The front entrance to all structures shall face the street.
(c) Setbacks shall be clear, unoccupied and unobstructed
horizontal distances between the vertical walls of a building or
structure and any front, side or rear lot line, measured
perpendicular to such lot lines, and extending from grade to
sky, except for the following permitted encroachments,
provided that such encroachments are not located in a sight
triangle and do not inhibit the free flow of traffic: [Amended
6-5-2017 by Ord. No. 8-2017; 3-19-2018 by Ord. No.
2-2018]
Element
Permitted Encroachment/
Projection
Front
Yard1
Side
Yard2 Rear Yard
Windowsills,
cornices,
cantilevered roofs/
roof eaves, flues, belt
courses, leaders,
pilasters, lintels,
gutters and like and
similar utilitarian
features
Projecting not more than 12 inches
from an exterior wall
Projecting not more than 70 inches
based on a yard of 10 feet
Open porches with or
without structural
roofs, awnings and
canopies over same,
and stairs leading
thereto
Where a yard is greater than 10 feet,
such porches and steps may project
beyond 70 inches at a ratio of:
§ 300-51 WATER § 300-51
285:941
Element
Permitted Encroachment/
Projection
Front
Yard1
Side
Yard2 Rear Yard
1 inch of
additional
projection for
every 1 inch from
the 10 feet
benchmark
2 inches of
additional
projection for
every 1 inches
from the 10 feet
benchmark
Where a yard is less than 10 feet, such
porches and steps shall be reduced
below 70 inches at a ratio of:
1 inch of
projection for
every 1 inch from
the 10 feet
benchmark
2 inches of
projection for
every 1 inch from
the 10 feet
benchmark
The above notwithstanding, no porch
or stairs shall be closer than 2 feet
from any property line.
Chimneys Projecting not more than 30 inches
from an exterior wall for a maximum
width (i.e., distance parallel to such
wall) of 48 inches
Residential awnings,
canopies and
structural roofs
Projecting not more than the porch
over which the awning or canopy is
installed
Commercial awnings,
canopies and
structural roofs
Projecting not more than 36 inches
from the subject wall
Flag/banner poles No limit, provided that such poles are
not located closer than 2 feet from any
property line
Fences No limit, provided that fences are
placed a minimum of 2 inches inside of
the property line (See § 300-71 for
additional regulations.)
Landscaping,
including statuary,
arbors and trellises
No limit
(See § 300-71 for additional
regulations.)
§ 300-51 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-51
285:942
Element
Permitted Encroachment/
Projection
Front
Yard1
Side
Yard2 Rear Yard
Projecting not more than 36 inches
from the front/side wall, provided that
the total of such projections do not
exceed 33% of the horizontal distance
of such wall
And further
provided that such
projections shall
be entirely within
planes drawn from
the main corners
of the front/side
facade of the
building at an
interior angle of
not more than 23°
from the wall in
question (the
intent being to
minimize shadow
effects on
neighboring
properties from
projections at the
corners of
buildings)
And further
provided that such
projections shall
be entirely within
planes drawn from
the main corners
of the rear facade
of the building
Bay windows and
other ornamental
architectural
features
Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders,
sills, pilasters, lintels, cornices, eaves,
gutters and like and similar utilitarian
features are not permitted
encroachments under this subsection.
Porte cocheres (front
and side yards only),
off-street parking
areas and access
drives thereto
No limit
Residential
driveways
Minimum 6 inches from
the property line
§ 300-51 WATER § 300-51
285:943
Element
Permitted Encroachment/
Projection
Front
Yard1
Side
Yard2 Rear Yard
Signage
Lighting
Subject to the provisions of § 300-57
through § 300-64, provided that no
light standard is closer than 2 feet
from any property line and that no
light therefrom shall spill over to a
neighboring property
Pedestrian walkways,
breezeways and
atriums
No limit
Provided that no such item be closer
than 2 feet from any property line, and
further provided that bicycle racks are
installed such that no bicycle extends
into the public right-of-way
Bicycle racks,
benches, trash
receptacles and
other street furniture
Provided that no such item be closer
than 2 feet from any property line, and
further provided that bicycle racks are
installed such that no bicycle extends
into the public right-of-way
Balconies and
terraces
Projecting not
more than 48
inches from the
front wall
Projecting not
more than 36
inches from the
side/rear wall
No alfresco dining area shall be
permitted at a restaurant that has not
received a zoning permit or other land
use approval and does not have a valid
mercantile license from the City.
Outdoor cafes, decks,
patios, tables and
other similar alfresco
dining areas
(collectively,
"alfresco dining
area"), provided that
they are accessory to
lawfully permitted
restaurants, and
further subject to the
following:
Regardless of whether or not
permitted indoors at the host
restaurant, no service of an alcoholic
beverage, whether supplied by the
host restaurant or brought by the
patron, shall be permitted unless
approved by the New Jersey Division
of Alcoholic Beverage Control, and
confirmed by the City Clerk.
§ 300-51 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-51
285:944
Element
Permitted Encroachment/
Projection
Front
Yard1
Side
Yard2 Rear Yard
Sidewalk cafes shall be permitted only
in conjunction with and adjacent to an
existing restaurant. A sidewalk cafe
may extend onto the sidewalk in front
of an adjacent business with the
written consent of the property owner
and the first floor business tenant if
separate from the property owner.
Once consent has been obtained, the
Zoning Official will review and
determine if permitted.
Shall be set back not less than 2 feet
from the property line of the adjacent
parcel unless consent is obtained from
adjacent property owner and business
owner, if different, may be permitted
to extend into the public right-of-way
(sidewalk) provided that not less than
3 feet of accessible area remain for
pedestrian circulation and further
provided that a license and holdharmless
for any such extension is
issued by the governing body in the
case of a municipal right-of-way and by
any other governmental agency having
jurisdiction.
The number of entrances to the
alfresco dining area from the public
right-of-way shall be limited to 1
entrance for every 40 feet of frontage.
Such entrances may not be less than 4
feet nor more than 6 feet in width.
Where paper/plastic tableware (plates,
napkins, cups, utensils) is employed, 1
sufficiently sized trash and 1
sufficiently sized recycling receptacle,
with lid, are required.
Outdoor cafes, decks,
patios, tables and
other similar alfresco
dining areas
(collectively,
"alfresco dining
area"), provided that
they are accessory to
lawfully permitted
restaurants, and
further subject to the
following:
Regardless of the type of service,
standing bus-pans (jack stands) are
prohibited.
§ 300-51 WATER § 300-51
285:945
Element
Permitted Encroachment/
Projection
Front
Yard1
Side
Yard2 Rear Yard
Only canopies, awnings or umbrellas
which are anchored or adequately
secured to the host restaurant or
component(s) surface are permitted.
Canopies and awnings may have
removable side panels to protect
patrons from the elements.
No canopy or awning visible from a
public right-of-way shall contain any
advertising material or signage other
than the name and/or logo of the host
restaurant.
Dinner music may be permitted during
the hours of operation of the alfresco
dining area if in compliance with the
Code of Pleasantville and at the
discretion of the Zoning Official.
All tables, seating, planter boxes or
components of an alfresco dining area
shall be commercially available and
uniform. Handmade elements may be
permitted at the discretion of the
Zoning Official, Planning Board,
Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Planning and Redevelopment
Committee, as the case may be, upon
inspection of same for durability,
weight (wind resistance) and
aesthetics.
Outdoor cafes, decks,
patios, tables and
other similar alfresco
dining areas
(collectively,
"alfresco dining
area"), provided that
they are accessory to
lawfully permitted
restaurants, and
further subject to the
following:
All elements or components of an
alfresco dining area shall be removed
from the area when the area is not
open for business, whether by
operator's choice, inclement weather
or due to permitted hours of operation.
§ 300-51 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-51
285:946
Element
Permitted Encroachment/
Projection
Front
Yard1
Side
Yard2 Rear Yard
Other than a single posted menu and a
single "Hours of Operation" sign, no
signage shall be permitted at any
portion of an alfresco dining area.
Such signs shall be no larger than 4
square feet and may be affixed to the
building or planter box or be on an Aframe
(sandwich board) or a stanchion.
If on an A-frame or stanchion, such
element shall not be located outside of
the perimeter of the alfresco dining
area.
No alfresco dining area, or element or
component thereof, may be used for
the display or location of merchandise,
advertising materials or vending
machines.
No alfresco dining area shall be
permitted unless the operator thereof
receives a mercantile license and
zoning permit for such area.
In addition to the requirements of
Checklist B of § 300-77, the application
for an alfresco dining area must
contain: A site plan drawing indicating
the maximum (outbound) boundary of
the proposed alfresco dining area and
the location of all elements of such
area as required by this section,
including planter boxes, tables and
seating, canopy, etc., the number and
locations of entrances to the alfresco
dining area, all entrances to the host
restaurant and the area(s) from where
the alfresco dining area is to be
serviced, catalogue graphics or
photographs of the planter boxes,
seating, canopy and all other elements
proposed. Hours of operation and how
service is to be rendered to all parts of
the area.
§ 300-51 WATER § 300-51
285:947
Element
Permitted Encroachment/
Projection
Front
Yard1
Side
Yard2 Rear Yard
HVAC equipment Provided that units are not
located closer than 2 feet
from any property line
Recreational
equipment
Provided that such no
element is located closer
than 2 feet from any
property line
Swimming and
bathing pools
The edge of any bathing or
swimming pool shall be
located not closer than 10
feet to any property line
other than a public rightof-
way, in which case the
pool shall be no closer
than 20 feet from such
right-of-way.
Fire escapes or
outside stairways
Projecting from an exterior
wall not more than 36
inches
Electric vehicle
supply equipment
No owner or developer of a
property in Pleasantville
City shall install a private
electric vehicle supply
equipment in or adjacent
to a vehicle right-of-way in
such a way that private
electric vehicle supply
equipment is to be used
from a vehicle parked in a
public right-of-way and/or
on-street parking space.
The City of Pleasantville is
authorized, pursuant to
Chapter 278 of the City
Ordinances, as amended,
to designate on-street
parking spaces for electric
vehicle charging.
§ 300-51 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-51
285:948
NOTES:
1 In the case of corner lots, such regulations apply whether
or not such yards are primary or secondary frontages.
2 In the case of corner lots, the regulations for front yards
shall apply to a side yard abutting a street.
(2) Minimum distance between buildings.
(a) Buildings with a maximum building height above the lower of
2 1/2 stories or 35 feet: For principle structures located on the
same lot, the minimum distance between walls containing
openings for light and air shall be equal to 33% of the height of
the tallest structure, but not less than the rear yard
requirement applicable to the structure without expressed
written permission from the Fire Official.
(b) For all other buildings: no building or structure shall be
situated closer than 15 feet from an adjacent building or
structure, whether on the same lot or adjacent lots.
B. For all principal structures in the City of Pleasantville. Departures from
the design standards detailed in this subsection may be permitted at
the discretion of the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or
Planning and Redevelopment Advisory Committee, as the case may be,
via design waiver and not variance relief pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70.
(1) Rooftop treatment.
(a) Unless otherwise specified herein, roofs shall be clad with
approved roofing materials and shall be moderately pitched
with dormers and cornices. Steeper roof pitches are
encouraged. Colored, patterned shingle designs are
encouraged.
(b) Where sloped roofs are not practicable and therefore flat roofs
are necessary, and where such roofs are less than the
maximum building height in the subject or immediately
adjacent zoning district and therefore visible from taller
buildings, whether present or prospective, including the
rooftop decks of parking structures and decks and balconies
when accessible as public open spaces, such roofs shall be
treated with decorative roofing materials in order to create an
aesthetic appearance from above. Alternatively, such rooftops
may be aesthetically developed as pedestrian-accessible
promenades, rooftop gardens and/or active or passive
recreation areas as appropriate.
(c) Where said surfaces are pedestrian accessible, a minimum of
35% of the total exposed surface area shall be landscaped as
§ 300-51 WATER § 300-51
285:949
roof gardens. Said treatment may or may not include live
vegetation.
(d) The balance of all accessible flat roof surfaces shall be treated
in such a way as to blend with the roof gardenscape in an
aesthetically acceptable manner. Said areas shall be
constructed of nonreflective material in order to secure an
agreeable visual condition.
(e) Where said surfaces are not pedestrian accessible, surfaces
shall be treated with nonreflective, decorative materials in
order to secure an agreeable visual condition.
(f) Pergolas, trellises or other screening above parked vehicles is
required where exposed flat roofs are used as parking decks
and for mechanical and related items.
(2) Site work.
(a) Driveways.
[1] If asphalt:
[a] New paving (residential): Minimum thickness after
rolling shall be two inches when placed upon a stable
subbase. If subbase is not stable, a base of six inches
of dense graded aggregate or recycled concrete
aggregate, installed to industry standards, is required.
[b] Overlay (resurfacing) of existing residential asphalt
driveways shall be a minimum thickness of two inches.
All surface cracks or deteriorated subbase shall be
repaired.
[2] If concrete (residential): Minimum thickness shall be four
inches when placed upon a stable subbase. If subbase is
not stable, a base of six inches of dense graded aggregate
or recycled concrete aggregate, installed to industry
standards, is required.
[3] Nonresidential: Nonresidential driveways shall utilize the
requirements of this subsection as a minimum. Specific
details shall be evaluated by the City or Board Engineer on
a case-by-case basis in light of the type and weight of
vehicles, frequency of crossing and other pertinent
requirements of the subject use.
(b) Sidewalks: shall be Class "B" concrete, with a minimum
thickness of four inches when placed upon a stable subbase. If
subbase is not stable, a base of four inches to six inches of
dense graded aggregate or recycled concrete aggregate,
installed to industry standards, is required.
§ 300-51 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-51
285:950
(c) Contractors shall be responsible for assessing all site
conditions and determining appropriate treatment prior to
commencement of work.
(d) Landscaping shall be in accordance with § 300-65 through
§ 300-70.
(e) Fencing and walls shall be in accordance with § 300-71.
(3) Treatment of structural surfaces. Structural surfaces shall
generally be treated with nonreflective materials. Where reflective
materials are utilized, the reflective surface shall not cause an
adverse impact on surrounding uses, such as increasing the cooling
loads of the structures upon which they reflect heat (and thereby
causing visual discomfort or related effects).
(4) Exterior building architecture (Note: Form, materials, color,
massing and detailing elements for building facades, windows,
awnings, lighting, signage, etc.) shall coordinate design elements
to achieve design harmony and continuity for all building
elevations, both within a single structure and between separate
structures.
(5) The entirety of all building elevations fronting a public right-of-way,
regardless of building height, shall be considered a front yard and
primary elevation, with facades and appurtenances treated
accordingly.
(6) In order to create an attractive and inviting pedestrian-scaled
environment, the entire first floor of a building's right-of-way
frontage, with the exception of ground-floor garage entryways and
exitways, shall be of a pedestrian scale and shall be devoted to
active permitted principal or conditional uses, oriented to the rightof-
way frontage, or shall be designed as a decorative streetscape
with such treatment and features as may be required to provide a
sense of excitement and vibrancy and to avoid an otherwise lifeless
facade.
(a) Nonresidential and nonindustrial uses shall incorporate clear
storefront glass to display the nature of the use within and
produce an interesting pedestrian streetscape.
(b) In considering facade treatment, developers are encouraged to
include a combination of rich detailing, texture, shadow lines
and color.
(c) Regardless of location, such treatment for nonresidential
development may include, but need not be limited to:
[1] Awnings and canopies.
[2] Coping, fascia, soffits and architectural filigree.
§ 300-51 WATER § 300-51
285:951
[3] Use of color, light and shadows.
[4] Building articulation.
[5] Signage.
[6] Other appropriate aesthetic features.
(7) In addition to such facade treatment, development shall include
decorative streetscaping consisting of, but not limited to,
landscaping and hardscaping, benches and other street furniture,
decorative lighting (both pedestrian and architectural), statuary
and other public art, and like and similar features which achieve
the stated goal both during the day and nighttime hours, for the full
12 months of the year.
(8) Each individual use shall have its own entryway, which shall be
independent from the host structure such that patrons may access
such use without entering the larger structure. Such uses may
additionally have access from the structure if desired. The
frontages of such uses may either have identical designs to
reinforce the building architecture or varied designs to express the
individuality of the uses.
(9) Windows may be either typical commercial (large, single pane) or
may be or provide the appearance of being double-hung traditional
design (Note: multiple small panes separated by mullions. Such
windows need not operate as traditional double hung windows.) at
regular placement, including the side and rear elevations if visible
from the public right-of-way. Bay, box and/or ornamental windows
are permitted to maximize building aesthetics.
(10) Excessive runs of blank, unarticulated or unadorned exterior walls,
defined as exterior walls with an uninterrupted horizontal run
along a single plane of more than 50 l.f. and an uninterrupted
vertical run of more than 24 l.f. shall be avoided, both at the
pedestrian level and above. The intent of this regulation may be
achieved via structural or ornamental treatment, including, but not
limited to, combinations of horizontal and vertical building and
roofline articulation, facade differentiation, generous use of doors
and windows (faux or real), architectural detailing and
ornamentation, and shall be employed to create an attractive and
exciting design on all building facades.
(11)With the exception for residential sunrooms and greenhouses:
(a) Structural surfaces should be treated with nonreflective
materials. Where reflective material are utilized, the reflective
surface shall not cause an adverse impact on surrounding uses,
such as increasing the cooling loads of the structures upon
which they reflect heat (and thereby causing visual discomfort
or related effects).
§ 300-51 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-51
285:952
(b) Glass, metal or non-natural-looking material shall be limited to
architectural elements or accent features in order to provide
interest to the structure while maintaining an aesthetic
appearance.
(c) The use of glass curtain wall construction is prohibited.
(12) Mechanical equipment and similar back-of-the-house functions,
whether at grade or on the structure's roof, shall be appropriately
screened so as to not be visible from the public right-of-way or an
adjacent property.
(13) To the extent practicable, primary ingress and egress to the site
shall be from a single curb cut along the front lot line, with
additional egress points located at the side or rear lot lines.
(14) All vehicular ingress and egress points shall be clearly demarcated
and controlled to ensure safe and efficient operation of the facility
and to assure safe integration of automotive traffic with other
vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(15) Adequate lighting shall be provided for all parking, loading and
vehicular and pedestrian circulation areas.
(16) Exterior building and site lighting shall be designed so that lighting
is focused downward and shall be shielded or deflected away from
adjacent land uses so that it does not create a glare upon adjacent
land uses or public rights-of-way and does not obstruct or deter the
visibility of drivers or pedestrians on or near the site. Such lighting
shall provide for a minimum of 0.5 footcandle.
(17) Light standards shall be of an ornamental design and shall not
exceed the lower of the height of the building the lighting is
intended to service or 30 feet (measured from finished grade),
except for the RSC Zoning District, wherein height shall not exceed
50 feet (measured from finished grade).
(18) Except as otherwise provided under § 300-57 through § 300-64,
blinking or flashing lighting systems are prohibited.
(19) Exposed chimneys shall be clad with brick, organic or
manufactured stone, stucco or other appropriate material.
(20) Colors shall be neutral, earthtone or traditional palates in order to
provide a visual harmony with the surrounding natural or manmade
environment. More vibrant colors may be used for accent
purposes.
(21) While buildings may functionally have entrances on the side, rear
or interior of the project, all buildings shall be designed to give the
appearance that their primary (front) elevation faces the building's
right-of-way frontage.
§ 300-51 WATER § 300-51
285:953
(22) The incorporation of awning and similar elements is encouraged.
(23) While buildings may be constructed on pilings, exterior foundation
walls shall surround all buildings from grade to start of the siding
material. Foundation walls, whether structural or not, shall be
treated with latticework; brickwork; stucco or stucco-like material;
organic or manufactured stone; split-faced block; or other
appropriate materials to a height of two feet from finished grade;
the intent being to prohibit bare, unsightly block at the foundation.
Above two feet, foundations shall be finished with the same
materials and in the same architectural fashion as the balance of
the subject elevation.
(24) The use of dramatic corporate icons, architectural brand theming
and outdoor theatrical lighting is encouraged at the upper levels of
commercial structures or vertical (residential) development.
(25) Buildings with a maximum building height above the lower of 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet:
(a) With the exception of access drives, a minimum ten-foot-wide
landscaped buffer shall be provided along all lot lines. Along
the front lot line (Note: See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot
depth," "lot frontage, primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and
"lot line, front" for measurements related to corner lots.), such
landscaping shall primarily consist of low-growing shrubs,
flowering plants and similar vegetation, but may include
deciduous trees if not located within any sight triangle
required by § 300-47B. A more intense vegetative buffer,
consisting of coniferous trees (at a minimum of 10 feet in
height at time of planting and planted in double alternating
rows), taller shrubs, berms and other appropriate elements,
shall be required along the side and rear lot lines.
(b) All building elevations above grade level shall present the
illusion of an active residential use (if such actual use is not
practicable) or shall be heavily treated with architectural or
ornamental elements so as to avoid a monolithic facade both
during the day and nighttime hours, for the full 12 months of
the year.
(c) It is the City's intention not to permit traditional, open parking
decks wherein parked vehicles are visible to the public.
Window-like cutouts and/or other architectural elements are
required so as to resemble residential units while providing for
garage ventilation as necessary.
C. Residential dwelling units in the form of apartments, including agerestricted
housing for qualifying individuals other than nursing homes
or related facilities. In addition to the provisions of § 300-51A and B
herein, the following standards shall apply:
§ 300-51 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-51
285:954
(1) Shall be limited to above-ground-floor permitted uses.
(2) Shall be functionally separated, by floor, by structural elements on
a floor, and by dedicated entranceway, from the commercial or
other uses within the building.
(3) Apartments shall contain not less than 800 square feet and have
less than one bedroom and one bathroom (internal to the unit).
Studio apartments are prohibited.
(4) Townhouses and garden apartments shall contain not less than
1,000 square feet.
(5) Access to all residential units and public areas shall be in
accordance with the International Building Code and the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
D. Central Business District. In addition to the provisions of § 300-51A, B
and, as applicable, C herein, in order to accommodate parking for midblock
commercial establishments with no ability for side yard parking
and no ability to access rear yard parking from the street, and to
minimize curb cuts along heavily traveled rights-of-way, it is
encouraged that rear yard parking lots be designed with and include
cross-easements at the side lot lines to permit vehicle traffic from one
lot to another.
E. Lakes Bay, Absecon Bay and the marine tidal marshes adjacent thereto.
In addition to the provisions of § 300-51A, B and, as applicable, C
herein, the following standards shall apply:
(1) The longest dimension of any structure abutting Lakes Bay,
Absecon Bay and the marine tidal marshes adjacent thereto, and
extending higher than 48 inches from grade, shall be oriented
perpendicular to such features; provided, however, that the
Planning Board, as part of the site plan/subdivision review process,
may authorize the longest dimension structure to be oriented
parallel to such features where justified as part of an energy
conservation design for such structure.
(2) Subsection E(1) notwithstanding, in no event shall a structure built
with its largest dimension parallel to Lakes Bay, Absecon Bay or the
marine tidal marshes, as the case may be, be more than 250 feet in
length along such features or extend over or through a natural or
man-made wetland or drainage canal without the express
authorization of NJDEP via a CAFRA and/or waterfront
development permit.
F. Child-care centers shall be designed and include, in addition to the
provisions of § 300-51A and B herein, the following standards shall
apply:
§ 300-51 WATER § 300-51
285:955
(1) An appropriate porte-cochere area wherein enrolled children may
be picked up or dropped off in a secured environment which is
clearly separated from general street traffic. The appropriatenes"
of such porte-cochere area shall be determined by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, within
the context of the project concepts and description of project
elements submitted;
(2) Dedicated on-site parking for all employees as well as one space for
each four enrolled children in order to provide parking for parents
wishing to observe the operations or meet with facility staff;
(3) The porte-cochere area, on-site parking areas and all pedestrian
walkways and similar areas shall be lighted so that the property
may be safely used during nondaylight hours. No light therefrom
shall be directed off site;
(4) Dedicated, fenced, fully secured and age-appropriate lawn area for
outdoor recreation space for enrolled children of various age
groups. The appropriateness of such recreation space shall be
determined by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, within the context of the project concepts and
description of project elements submitted; and
(5) All elements so described shall comply with the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
G. Automobile or watercraft sales through franchise dealers; automobile
fueling stations (with or without automotive and/or marine engine, body
or interior repair, which may or may not include convenience stores on
premises); automated or manual car washes. In addition to the
provisions of § 300-51A and B herein, the following standards shall
apply:
(1) Except for gasoline or oil sales and the manual washing of
inventoried vehicles, the servicing (repair) of vehicles shall be
undertaken in fully enclosed structures.
(2) The outdoor storage of equipment or parts is prohibited. No
vehicle, in whatever condition, may be stored out-of-doors for more
than 10 consecutive days.
(3) All fuels shall be stored underground. Lubricants may be stored
aboveground if fully enclosed in the principal structure.
(4) With the exception of access drives, a minimum ten-foot-wide
landscaped buffer shall be provided along all lot lines. Along the
front lot line (Note: See definitions of "lot, corner," "lot depth," "lot
frontage, primary," "lot frontage, secondary" and "lot line, front" for
measurements related to corner lots.), such landscaping shall
primarily consist of low-growing shrubs, flowering plants and
similar vegetation, but may include deciduous trees if not located
§ 300-51 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-51
285:956
within any sight triangle required by § 300-47B. A more intense
vegetative buffer, consisting of coniferous trees (at a minimum
of 10 feet in height at time of planting and planted in double
alternating rows), taller shrubs, berms and other appropriate
elements, shall be required along the side and rear lot lines.
H. Waterfront Residential Zoning District. In addition to the provisions of
§ 300-51A and, as applicable, B, and in order to provide for light, air and
open space, to protect adjacent residential communities and natural
resources while maximizing views, all structures in the WR Zoning
District shall conform to the following building envelope regulations:
(1) That portion of a principal structure abutting a WR Zone boundary
line and extending interior to the WR Zoning District for a distance
of 25 feet from the zone boundary line: the lower of 2 1/2 stories or
35 feet.
(2) Thereafter, as development extends interior to the WB Zoning
District, building height may increase at a ratio of one foot of
building height for every two feet of horizontal distance until such
structure reaches the lower of the building envelope established
herein or 60 feet maximum building height.
I. Bayside Mixed-Use Zoning District. In addition to the provisions of
§ 300-51A, B and, as applicable, C herein, the following standards shall
apply:
(1) In order to provide for light, air and open space, to protect adjacent
residential communities and natural resources while maximizing
views, all structures in the BMU Zoning District shall conform to
the following building envelope regulations:
(a) That portion of a principal structure abutting the Franklin
Boulevard BMU Zone boundary line and extending east for a
distance of 25 feet from the Franklin Boulevard setback line:
the lower of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(b) That portion of a principal structure abutting the Ingersoll
Avenue BMU Zone boundary line and extending south for a
distance of 25 feet from the Ingersoll Avenue setback line: the
lower of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(c) That portion of a principal structure abutting the western BMU
Zone boundary line north of Engersoll Avenue and extending
east for a distance of 25 feet from the north of Engersoll
Avenue setback line: the lower of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
§ 300-51 WATER § 300-51
285:957
§ 300-52. Performance standards.
(d) That portion of a principal structure abutting the Milan Avenue
BMU Zone boundary line and extending north for a distance of
25 feet from the north of Milan Avenue setback line: the lower
of 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(e) From the twenty-five-foot building height setbacks established
under Subsection I(1)(a) through (d) above, a structure may
increase in height as it extends east from Franklin Boulevard
and the western BMU Zone boundary line north of Engersoll
Avenue, south from Ingersoll Avenue and north from Milan
Avenue, at a ratio of 1.5 feet of building height for every one
foot of horizontal distance until such structure reaches the
lower of the building envelope established herein or 150 feet
maximum building height.
(f) For elevations not subject to the one foot to 1.5 feet ratio,
building setbacks are required, at a minimum, between the
sixty-foot and eighty-foot levels and between the one-hundredfoot
and one-hundred-twenty-foot levels (provided the
structure, or portion thereof, reaches such heights) on all
building elevations. Specific setbacks are not dictated, but
shall be appropriate to the architecture of the project.
However, minimum setbacks equal to 66% of the rise to the
next setback level is required. Such articulation need not be on
the same horizontal plane and should be designed to provide
differentiation and interest to the structure's massing.
(2) Where the exterior wall(s) of a building abut Milan Avenue,
Ingersoll Avenue and the western BMU Zone boundary line north of
Engersoll Avenue, the at-grade setback area shall be heavily
landscaped and buffered.
A. Purpose.
§ 300-51 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-52
285:958
(1) The intent of these regulations is to prevent land or structures,
including those permitted by right or by special approval, from
being used or occupied in any manner so as to create any
dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable or
hazardous condition and thereby adversely affect the surrounding
area.
(2) Compliance with the requirements of this section shall not be
interpreted as authorizing any practice or operation which would
constitute a violation of any other provisions of this chapter or any
other applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
B. Application. All uses in all zoning districts shall conform in operation,
location and construction to the performance standards herein
specified.
(1) Fire and explosive hazards.
(a) All uses and operations involving the use, storage or handling
of explosive or flammable matter shall be in compliance with
the fire protection regulations of the City of Pleasantville as
they exist or may hereafter be amended.
(b) No activities, other than approved demolition, involving the
manufacture, storage or utilization of materials or products
which decompose by detonation (i.e., explosives) shall be
permitted, except that small quantities of chlorates, nitrates,
perchorates, phosphorous and similar substances and
compounds for use by industry, schools, government,
laboratories or druggists may be permitted.
(c) The storage and use of all flammable liquids and materials
such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents and
petroleum products shall be authorized only by the approval of
the Fire Chief.
(2) Glare.
(a) No use in any zoning district shall be operated so as to produce
direct or sky-reflected glare or direct illumination across any
lot line from a visible source of illumination of such intensity as
to create a nuisance or traffic hazard or detract from the use or
enjoyment of adjacent property.
(b) All permitted exterior lights, including signs, floodlights,
parking lot lighting, streetlights and lighting necessary for the
safety and protection of property, shall be made up of a light
source and reflector so selected that, acting together, the light
beam is controlled and not directed across any lot line.
(c) With the exception of streetlights:
§ 300-52 WATER § 300-52
285:959
[1] All exterior lighting fixtures within or adjacent to any
residential zoning district shall be directed and shaded
wherever necessary to prevent the intensity of light from
exceeding 1/2 footcandle as measured at any residential
property line.
[2] All exterior lighting fixtures within commercial or
industrial districts shall be directed and shaded wherever
necessary to prevent the intensity of light from exceeding
one footcandle as measured at any lot line.
(d) Lighting of parking or loading areas shall, except for
emergency or safety lighting, cease at or before the hour of
12:00 midnight whenever the distance from the nearest light to
the nearest residence is less than 250 feet.
(e) Except as part of holiday decorations and as otherwise
specifically permitted by this chapter, no exterior lights that
blink or shine with an intermittent phase are permitted in any
zoning district.
(3) Heat. No use or activity in any zoning district shall be so operated
as to emit or transmit heat or heated air so as to be discernible at or
beyond the property line of the lot on which it is located.
(4) Odorous matter.
(a) Any condition or operation which results in the creation of
odors of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to
the health and welfare of the public, or which interfere
unreasonably with the comfort of the public, shall be removed,
stopped or so modified as to remove the odor.
(b) No continuous, frequent or repetitive emission of odors or
odor-causing substances shall exceed the odor threshold at or
beyond the lot line of the tract on which the odor emission is
initiated. An odor emitted no more than 15 minutes in any one
day shall not be deemed as continuous, frequent or repetitive
within the meaning of these regulations.
(c) The odor threshold as herein referred to shall be determined
by observation. In any case where the owner or operator of an
odor-emitting use or activity disagrees with the enforcement
officer, or where specific measurement of odor concentration is
required, the method and procedures specified by the
American Society for Testing and Materials, ASTM D 1391-57,
entitled "Standard Method for Measuring Odors in
Atmosphere," shall be used.
(d) Any process which may involve the creation or emission of
odors which would be in violation of this subsection shall be
provided with both a primary and a secondary safeguard
§ 300-52 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-52
285:960
§ 300-53. Solar energy systems.
system so that control will be maintained if the primary
safeguard system fails.
(5) Radioactive materials. The handling of radioactive materials, the
discharge of such materials into air and water and the disposal of
radioactive wastes shall be in conformance with:
(a) The applicable regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission.
(b) The applicable regulations of any instrumentality of the State
of New Jersey.
(6) Smoke, particulate matter and other air contaminants.
(a) No use or activity in any zoning district shall cause, create or
allow the emission of air contaminants for more than three
minutes in any one hour which, at or beyond the emission
point, are as dark or darker in shade as that designated No. 1
on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, as published by the United
States Bureau of Mines.
(b) Open storage and open processing operations, including onsite
transportation movements which are the source of windborne
dust and other particulate matter or which involve dust
or other particulate air-contaminant generating equipment,
such as used in paint spraying; sand, gravel or concrete
processing, storage or recycling; or sandblasting, shall be so
conducted that dust and other particulated air contaminants so
generated are not transported across the lot line of the tract on
which the use is located.
A. Applicability.
(1) The regulations contained herein shall apply to solar energy
systems intended for the provision of the electrical energy needs of
the owner/operator of the system and/or the property on which the
solar energy system is situated, and not for the generation of
electricity for commercial purposes for resale, except that excess
electricity not utilized for the use on the lot whereon said system is
located may be introduced into the energy grid for credit under
New Jersey's Net Metering and Interconnection Standards
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 14:4-9.
(2) This section shall apply to roof-mounted solar energy systems only.
Pole, tower or ground-mounted solar energy systems of any size
shall require minor site plan approval pursuant to § 300-36E.
B. Solar energy systems shall only be permitted as indicated in § 300-22
through § 300-25.
§ 300-52 WATER § 300-53
285:961
C. Approvals.
(1) All solar energy systems shall require a zoning permit from the
Zoning Officer and a building permit from the Construction Code
Official prior to installation. Applications for a solar energy system
shall include information demonstrating compliance with the
provisions of this section.
(2) Approvals under Subsection C(1) shall apply to solar energy
systems intended for use as detailed under § 300-53A(1).
(3) Solar energy systems not intended for use as detailed under
§ 300-53A(1) shall require approval by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be. Solar energy
systems not in conformance with any of the following regulations
shall require variance approval by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
(4) Submission requirements and procedures for zoning permit.
(a) Applications for a solar energy system shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer in accordance with § 300-34A.
(b) In addition to the requirements for a zoning permit pursuant to
Checklist A and Checklist B of § 300-77, applications for the
installation of a solar energy system shall be accompanied by
the following documentation and plans, which shall contain
sufficient information and appropriate detail for the Zoning
Officer to make an informed decision on the application. The
level of information required shall be determined by the
Zoning Officer:
[1] Property lines and physical dimensions of the property.
[2] Locations, dimensions (including height) and types of
existing major structures on the property.
[3] A sketch plan or survey which shall accurately depict the
locations, dimensions and type of solar energy system
proposed.
[4] All rights-of-way is contiguous with the subject property.
[5] Manufacturer specifications and/or "cut sheets" of the
proposed solar energy system, certified by a New Jersey
licensed professional engineer, including manufacturer
and model.
[6] Notification of utility company for interconnection
purposes.
(c) Applications for zoning permits for solar energy systems shall
be accompanied by the required fee pursuant to § 300-9.
§ 300-53 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-53
285:962
(d) The Zoning Officer shall review the application in accordance
with § 300-34A and shall issue or deny an application for a
zoning permit for a solar energy system within 10 days of the
date on which the application is received.
(e) Once a zoning permit for a solar energy system is received, the
applicant shall apply for a building permit under the rules,
regulations and procedures established under N.J.A.C. 5:23.
(f) Expiration. A permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall
expire if:
[1] The solar energy system is not installed and functioning
within 24 months from the date the zoning permit is
issued; or
[2] The solar energy system is out of service or otherwise
unused for a continuous twelve-month period.
D. Design standards.
(1) Solar panels shall be permitted as a rooftop installation where
permitted under § 300-22 through § 300-25.
(2) The structural, electrical and other pertinent elements of any solar
energy system shall be designed by a New Jersey licensed
professional engineer. Such design(s) shall be signed and sealed by
said engineer, certifying that the design complies with all of the
standards set forth for safety and stability in all applicable codes
then in effect in the State of New Jersey as well as all provisions of
this section.
(3) Solar panels shall not exceed a height of 12 inches from the surface
of the roof on which they are affixed.
(4) In no event shall the rooftop placement of solar panels result in a
total height, as defined in § 300-10, greater than 12 inches from the
maximum building height for a principal building permitted in the
zoning district in which they are located.
(5) Solar panels installed in a rooftop configuration shall be installed
within the actual boundaries or edges of the roof area and cannot
overhang any portion of the edge of roof.
(6) Installations must not interfere with any operation of any fixture
protruding from the rooftop level as required by the International
Building Code or other applicable codes.
(7) With the exception of the manufacturer's or installer's
identification in accordance with § 300-53D(11)(b), appropriate
warning signs and owner identification, no signage shall be posted,
attached, affixed or otherwise installed on any component of a solar
§ 300-53 WATER § 300-53
285:963
energy system. In no case shall any of the aforementioned
permitted exceptions be visible from any property line.
(8) Ground-based interconnection cabinets and other mechanical
equipment associated with and necessary for the operation of a
solar energy system shall conform with all setback and coverage
requirements for accessory structures in the zoning district where
they are located. Such cabinets shall not exceed 120 square feet in
area nor eight feet in height and shall be equipped with a lock.
(9) In addition to City approvals required under this chapter, the
property owner/installer of the solar energy system must receive
approvals from any outside agencies having jurisdiction over such
systems prior to the installation.
(10) Utility notifications and interconnections.
(a) Solar energy systems that connect to the electric utility shall
comply with New Jersey's Net Metering and Interconnection
Standards for Class I renewable energy systems pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 14:4-9.
(b) Labeling requirements. The interconnection cabinet of the
solar energy system shall be posted with the following:
[1] A minimum of one "High Voltage" placard shall be posted
at or near ground level.
[2] A second placard shall be posted at or near ground level
informing:
[a] That batteries and storage cells are located therein;
[b] The maximum power output of the system;
[c] Nominal voltage and maximum current;
[d] Manufacturer's name, address and telephone number,
serial number and model number; and
[e] Emergency and normal shutdown procedures.
[3] Similar signage shall be placed on the outside of the
building, near the electrical meter, where an
interconnection cabinet is located on the inside of a
structure.
(c) Utility company notification.
[1] The Atlantic City Electric Company, its successors and
assigns, and/or as designated by state authority, shall be
notified, in writing, of any proposed interface to that
company's grid prior to installation of a solar energy
system and shall conform to any legislated requirements
§ 300-53 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-53
285:964
governing installations of solar energy systems so as to
comply with the utility tariff specifications.
[2] Evidence of such notification shall be submitted to the City
at time of application.
E. Construction and installation standards.
(1) Solar energy systems shall be constructed in accordance with the
appropriate sections of the International Building Code, and any
future amendments and/or revisions thereto.
(2) The installation of a solar energy system shall conform to the
National Electric Code and shall be subject to, in perpetuity, any
and all requirements for interconnection of the Atlantic City
Electric Company, its successors and assigns, and/or as designated
by state authority.
(3) Wires and cables at ground level shall be properly installed
underground in accordance with the International Building Code.
(4) Wires and cables on a structure shall be properly installed so as to
be hidden from view or otherwise treated in as aesthetically a
manner as possible.
F. Violations and penalties.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a solar
energy system other than in compliance with this subsection.
(2) Solar energy systems installed prior to the adoption of this chapter
are exempt from the requirements of this subsection.
(3) Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this
subsection shall be subject to enforcement and penalties as
stipulated in § 300-8.
G. No easement created.
(1) The approval of a solar energy system shall not create any actual or
inferred solar energy system easement against adjacent property
and/or structure.
(2) The owner/operator of a solar energy system shall not infer or
claim any rights to protective writs to any caused shadows or
operating ineffectiveness against future development adjacent to,
higher than or otherwise impacting the subject solar energy
system.
(3) The approval of any solar energy system granted under this
subsection shall not create any future liability or infer any vested
rights to the owner and/or operator of the solar energy system on
the part of the City or by any other officer or employee thereof for
any future claims against such approval that result from reliance on
§ 300-53 WATER § 300-53
285:965
this subsection or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§ 300-53 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-53
285:966
ARTICLE XI
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 300-54. Purpose and intent.
A. The purpose of this section is to prevent or alleviate the congestion of
public rights-of-way and to promote the safety and welfare of the public
by establishing minimum requirements for the off-street parking and
loading of motor vehicles in accordance with the use to which a
property is put.
B. The duty to provide and maintain off-street parking and loading spaces
shall be the joint and several responsibilities of the owner, operator and
lessee of the use for which such spaces are required.
C. Where the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, grants variance relief from these parking or loading
requirements, an approved parking plan or delivery plan, as
appropriate, including but not limited to hours of operations and
staging for deliveries, shall be made part and parcel of such grant of
variance relief.
D. Applicability.
(1) Except as otherwise provided under Subsection D(2), (3) and (4),
the provisions of this subsection shall apply to all new and existing
uses in accordance with the provisions of § 300-19 through
§ 300-25, and off-street parking spaces shall be provided as
required herein.
(2) Whenever a use existing on the effective date of this chapter is
changed to a new use, off-street parking and loading shall be
provided as required herein for such new use; except that when any
such existing use was deficient in required off-street parking or
loading spaces on such effective date, such new use may be
established with a deficiency in required parking or loading spaces
equal in number to the preexisting deficiency, provided that such
new use does not increase the demand for parking or loading on
the premises.
(3) Whenever the intensity of the use of any building, structure or use
is increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor
area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified
herein for required off-street parking and loading, off-street
parking and loading as required herein shall be provided for such
increase in intensity; provided, however, that no building, structure
or use lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter shall be
required to provide any additional parking or loading facilities
pursuant to this subsection unless and until the aggregate increase
in intensity shall equal more than 10% of the intensity existing
upon such effective date, in which case off-street parking and
§ 300-54 WATER § 300-54
285:967
§ 300-55. Off-street parking.
loading spaces as required herein shall be provided for the total
aggregate increase.
A. Structural types permitted. Parking in the City of Pleasantville is
permitted on surface parking lots, in structured parking garages or in
mechanical parking facilities.
B. Location.
(1) All residential parking requirements shall be met on site.
(2) Nonresidential uses must provide 100% of required parking on site
or within 1,000 feet of the premises, provided that no such off-site
parking shall be located within a residential zoning district.
(3) All surface parking lots, structured parking garages and
mechanical parking facilities shall be so located and designed to
minimize the unnecessary routing of traffic along public rights-ofway.
(4) When possible, parking areas shall be located within the interior of
lots and away from street frontages, which shall be developed with
permitted principal uses.
C. Computation of required spaces.
(1) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
following Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces.
(2) Should the computation of the number of required off-street
parking spaces result in a fraction of a space, any fraction up to and
including 1/2 shall be disregarded (i.e., rounded down), and any
fraction over 1/2 shall require one parking space (i.e., rounded up).
D. Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces. [Amended
3-19-2018 by Ord. No. 2-2018]
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
In addition to the number of spaces indicated, each use having
employees on the premises, whether residential or nonresidential in
nature, shall provide one space for each employee on a given shift.
Type of Development/Uses1 Required Spaces
Residential development
Single-family detached, duplexes
Two-family stacked dwelling units2
1 to 3 bedrooms 2.03
§ 300-54 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-55
285:968
Type of Development/Uses1 Required Spaces
4 to 5 bedrooms 3.0
Garden apartments and other
multifamily dwelling units as defined
in § 300-102
1 bedroom4 1.8
2 bedrooms 2.02
3 bedrooms 2.1
Townhouses and 3- to 4-family
attached dwelling units ("tri" or
"quad")2
1 bedroom 1.8
2 bedrooms 2.32
3 bedrooms 2.4
Vertical development, as defined in
§ 300-10
1 bedroom 0.8
2 bedrooms 1.35
3 bedrooms 1.9
Mobile homes
1 bedroom 1.8
2 bedrooms 2.05
3 bedrooms 2.1
Nursing homes, as defined in
§ 300-10
1 space for every 5 beds
Age-restricted housing (other than
nursing homes) as defined in
§ 300-10; community residences for
the developmentally disabled,
persons with head injuries,
terminally ill and victims of domestic
violence; and transitional home care
facilities5
The greater of 1 space for
every 2 dwelling units or in
accordance with the most
appropriate, similar dwelling
unit type and size as
described herein, plus 1 space
per client based on 30% of
capacity where adult day care
is included as an accessory
use
Nonresidential development6
Adult day-care centers 1 space for each client based
on 30% of capacity
§ 300-55 WATER § 300-55
285:969
Type of Development/Uses1 Required Spaces
Adult establishments 1 space for each 300 square
feet of gross floor area for any
retail component plus 1 space
for each seat for any theater
or similar component
Automotive uses
Car washes, automatic 5 spaces for each service
stall7
Manual 3 spaces for each service
stall7
Fueling stations 4 queueing spaces for each
fuel dispenser7
Service stations 4 spaces for each service
stall7
Fueling and service stations 4 spaces for each service
stall7
Open-air or enclosed storage
facilities for inventoried vehicles
intended for sale or rental
1 space for every 300 square
feet of showroom or lot area
Commercial activities (where not
otherwise included herein)
Downtown- and neighborhoodoriented
1 space for each 300 square
feet of gross floor area
General- and regionally oriented 1 space for each 200 square
feet of gross floor area
Contractor's warehouse and offices,
including material or design
showrooms
1 space for every 500 square
feet of gross floor area
Eating and drinking establishments
Bars and taverns 1 space for every 2 seats at 7
square feet per standing
customer, 7 square feet per
bar stool and 15 square feet
per seat per table seat where
food is served
Nightlife establishments 1 space for each customer
based on 30% capacity at 7
square feet per standing
customer, 7 square feet per
bar stool and 15 square feet
per seat per table seat
§ 300-55 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-55
285:970
Type of Development/Uses1 Required Spaces
Drive-in (takeout) restaurants,
including fast-food restaurants
with takeout component
The greater of 1 space for
each customer, based on 30%
of capacity at 15 square feet
per table seat and 1 space for
each 7 square feet of patron
queueing area
Eat-in/full-service restaurants 1 space for each customer
based on 30% of capacity at
15 square feet per table seat.
Educational uses
Child-care centers/facilities 1 space for each classroom or
child based on 30% of
capacity
Elementary school 2 spaces for each classroom
Intermediate school 1.5 spaces for each classroom
Secondary (High) school 2.5 spaces for each classroom
Public/private training facilities
offering life skills or career
educational courses
1 space for every 3 students
Family day-care homes Number of spaces required
for residential development
under this schedule plus 1
space for each child based on
30% of capacity
Food production uses 1 space for every 500 square
feet of gross floor area
Fraternal social, charitable or
eleemosynary facilities
1 space for each member
based on 30% of capacity
Funeral homes and mortuaries 1 space per viewing room/
chapel based on 30% of
capacity for mourners plus 3
spaces per viewing room/
chapel for facility vehicles
Home occupations Number of spaces required
for residential development
under this schedule plus 1
space
Hotels, motels and bed-andbreakfast
establishments
1 space for each guest room
plus the number of spaces
provided herein for amenities
and nonroom uses
Laundromats (self-service laundry
facilities)
1 space for each 3 washing
machines
§ 300-55 WATER § 300-55
285:971
Type of Development/Uses1 Required Spaces
Kennels 2 spaces minimum
Libraries; museums (cultural or
popular); art galleries; studios for
artists, musicians, photographers
and other artisans; and like and
similar activities
1 space for each 300 square
feet of gross floor area plus as
required for public assembly
areas
Light industrial operations 1 space for each 800 square
feet of gross floor area
Marinas 1 space for each boat slip
Office uses
Medical, dental, psychiatric,
veterinarian and related
1 space for every 2
examination/treatment rooms
Professional and administrative
services
1 space for each 500 square
feet of gross floor area
Governmental administrative 1 space for each 500 square
feet of gross floor area
Real estate 1 space for each 300 square
feet of gross floor area
Public parks, playgrounds, active or
passive open space, conservation
areas
5 spaces per acre or any part
thereof
Personal service establishments Where applicable, 1 space for
each 1/3 of an operator;
otherwise, 1 space for each
100 square feet of gross floor
area
Places of worship 1 space for every 3 seats (or
24 inches of pew/bench
space) plus requirements for
places of public assembly for
assembly/meeting rooms plus
1 space for each 2 residents
of an accessory rectory
Places of public assembly 1 space for each user, based
on 30% of facility capacity or
1 space for every 150 square
feet of gross floor area where
there are no fixed seats
Postal, shipping and receiving
facilities (including U.S. Postal
Service offices)
1 space for each service
window plus 1 space for every
200 square feet of gross floor
area
§ 300-55 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-55
285:972
Type of Development/Uses1 Required Spaces
Research and design laboratories 1 space for each 500 square
feet of gross floor area
Warehousing and storage facilities 1 space for each 1,000 square
feet of gross floor area
Watercraft
In-water fueling stations 1 space for each employee
Land-based fueling stations 2 spaces for each service stall
(does not include actual
service stall)
In-water service stations 1 space for each employee
Land-based service stations 4 spaces for each service stall
(does not include actual
service stall)
Land-based fueling and service
stations
2 spaces for each fueling stall
plus 4 spaces for each service
stall (does not include actual
stalls)
In-water fueling and service
stations
1 space for each employee
Open-air or enclosed storage
facilities for inventoried vehicles
intended for sale or rental
1 space for each 500 square
feet of showroom or lot area
NOTES:
1 Unless otherwise indicated, as defined in § 300-8 herein.
2 Includes guest parking at 0.5 space per dwelling units. Guests must
park on street or in common parking areas. For the purposes of this
schedule, residential garages shall not count toward the off-street
parking requirement.
3 Applicable where applicant cannot specify the number of bedrooms
per unit.
4 Efficiency and studio
5 Applicable where applicant cannot specify the number of bedrooms
per unit.
6 g.f.a. = gross floor area
7 Does not include actual service stalls.
§ 300-55 WATER § 300-55
285:973
NOTES:
8 For multifamily residential and multistory commercial buildings,
parking stalls with electric vehicle supply equipment shall be
provided at a rate of one EVSE per 20 stalls. The provision of EVSE
for single-family detached units, duplexes, garden apartments, and
townhouses shall be at the discretion of property owners. Each EVSEcapable
stall counts as 1.5 parking spaces towards the requirement.
9 Off-street parking stalls with electric vehicle supply equipment shall
be provided at a rate of one EVSE per 20 stalls. The provision of
EVSE for single-family detached units, duplexes, garden apartments,
and townhouses shall be at the discretion of property owners. Each
EVSE-capable stall counts as 1.5 parking spaces towards the
requirement. For nonresidential uses (excluding commercial/
residential mixed use), off-street parking spaces with EVSE shall be
provided at a minimum rate of one EVSE per 20 stalls. If fewer than
20 stalls are required, the provision of off-street EVSE is encouraged
and shall count as 1.5 parking spaces towards the parking
requirement.
(1) For places of worship, sporting events and other places of assembly
in which patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or other
similar seating, each 20 inches of such seating shall be counted as
one seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for offstreet
parking.
(2) When parking spaces are required on the basis of the number of
faculty, staff, students or employees, the maximum number of
personnel present at any one time shall govern.
(3) Where a use is not expressly listed in the Schedule of Off-Street
Parking Spaces, parking spaces shall be provided on the same basis
as required for the most similar use listed, or as determined by the
Zoning Officer, Planning Board or Zoning Board, as the case may
be, pursuant to their authority to interpret the provisions of this
chapter. In making such determination, the Zoning Officer,
Planning Board or Zoning Board, as the case may be, may look to
the parking requirements for the use in question or for similar uses
in neighboring municipalities for guidance.
(4) Reduction in parking requirements. In locations within 300 feet of
an established public transit route, the parking requirements
established herein may, if approved by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be at the time of site
plan and/or subdivision approval, be reduced up to 50% of the
required number of spaces for office and similar uses and up to
85% of the required number of spaces for retail and similar uses.
(5) Collective and shared parking. Subject to the following conditions,
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent collective parking
§ 300-55 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-55
285:974
arrangements for multiple uses on the same lot or shared parking
arrangements for multiple uses on separate lots:
(a) Unless site plan approval is required, in which case approval
for the collective or shared parking arrangement shall be
issued by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, a zoning permit for such collective or
shared parking arrangement shall be issued pursuant to this
chapter.
(b) Except for the following regulations for shared parking, the
total of such off-street parking spaces to be shared shall not be
less than 75% of the sum of the requirements for the various
uses computed separately.
[1] Up to 50% of the off-street parking requirement for
theaters or eating or drinking establishments (including
bars and taverns), and up to 100% of such spaces required
for places of worship or schools, may be supplied by offstreet
parking spaces provided in connection with
financial institutions, office buildings, retail stores,
personal service establishments, home improvement or
furniture stores, light industrial uses and similar uses
when not normally open, used or operated during the
principal operating hours of the aforesaid uses.
[2] Conversely, up to 50% of the off-street parking spaces
required by this section for financial institutions, office
buildings, retail stores, personal service establishments,
home improvement or furniture stores, light industrial
uses and similar uses may be supplied by off-street parking
spaces provided in connection with theaters, eating or
drinking establishments (including bars and taverns),
places of worship and schools when not normally open,
used or operated during the principal operating hours of
the aforesaid uses.
(c) The location requirements of § 300-55B shall be met for all
uses.
(d) When possible, collective or shared parking areas shall be
consolidated into a single, contiguous lot.
(e) A legal instrument establishing the rights of each party
entering into such collective or shared parking arrangement,
approved as to form and manner of execution by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board Solicitor in the case where the parking
arrangement is part of a Board action, and executed by the
parties requesting such arrangement, shall be filed with the
application for a zoning permit.
E. Design and maintenance.
§ 300-55 WATER § 300-55
285:975
(1) Minimum setbacks.
(a) No part of any surface parking lot, other than driveways for
ingress and egress, shall be located closer to its street frontage
than the minimum front yard setback, including setbacks
applicable for corner lots, required for a principal building in
the relevant zoning district, or the front facade of the principal
building on the lot in question, whichever is greater.
(b) With the exception of single-family detached, single-family
semidetached (duplex) and two-family stacked (multistory)
dwelling units, designed shopping centers and commercial
centers not located within the Central Business District, no
surface parking shall be located between the front facade of
the building such parking is designed to serve and the street.
(c) With the exception of single-family detached, single-family
semidetached (duplex) and two-family stacked (multistory)
dwelling units, no part of any surface parking lot, other than
driveways for ingress and egress, shall be located in any
required side yard or between a side lot line and the side of any
principal building on such lot, unless located to the rear of such
building.
(d) No part of any surface parking lot in a nonresidential district
shall be located within 15 feet of any lot line forming part of a
residential zoning district boundary line.
(e) Except as limited by the foregoing provisions, surface parking
lots may be located in a required rear yard.
(f) Other than for ingress and egress, no surface parking stall
(space) shall be so located as to require or permit any vehicle it
is designed to accommodate to extend into any front yard or
across any lot line.
(g) Structured parking garages and mechanical parking facilities
shall be governed by the setback requirements for principal
buildings in the zoning district where such parking garage or
parking facility is located.
(2) Screening and landscaping.
(a) In any zoning district where a front yard setback is required,
including setback requirements for corner lots, the setbacks
required by § 300-55E(1) shall be treated as a perimeter
landscaped open space.
(b) In any zoning district where no setback from streets is
required, a perimeter landscaped open space of a width of at
least five feet, or a durable and well-maintained solid wall,
fence, compact evergreen hedge or other screening device of a
§ 300-55 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-55
285:976
permanent three feet to four feet in height, shall be provided
along every street line.
(c) In all zoning districts, shade trees shall be provided at a ratio
of one tree for every 10 parking spaces, exclusive of other
landscaping that might be required under this chapter. Such
trees shall be planted throughout the parking lot.
(d) Trees in paved areas shall be installed in landscaped islands in
order to permit proper watering and fertilization, and to
protect the trees from inadvertent vehicular damage.
(e) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, no parking or
screening shall be located or designed as to obstruct any sight
triangle required by § 300-47B.
(f) For surface parking lots adjoining residential uses:
[1] The fifteen-foot setback required by § 300-55E(1)(d) shall
be treated as a perimeter landscaped open space.
[2] Sufficient screening shall be provided along all lot lines
abutting any residentially zoned or residentially developed
property to visually insulate the residential use.
(g) For structured parking garages or mechanical parking
facilities, traditional, open parking decks or mechanical
elements wherein parked vehicles are visible from the right-ofway
are prohibited. Window-like cutouts and/or other
architectural elements are required so as to resemble active
permitted uses while providing for garage ventilation as
necessary.
(3) Dimensions.
(a) Minimum spacing specifications for off-street parking stalls
shall be as follows:
(b) Off-street parking stalls designed for the disabled shall meet
the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.10.
§ 300-55 WATER § 300-55
285:977
(4) Access and circulation.
(a) Access to surface parking lots, parking garages and
mechanical parking structures shall be designed so as not to
obstruct the free flow of traffic, either interior to the parking
lot, garage or facility or between such parking and the City's
street system.
(b) Adequate provision shall be made for ingress to and egress
from all parking spaces and for circulation within parking
areas to ensure ease of mobility, ample clearances and safety of
vehicles and pedestrians.
[1] Turnaround area. Where more than three parking spaces
are served by a single driveway, a turnaround area shall be
provided or other provision shall be made to permit cars to
exit the parking lot, garage or mechanical facility without
backing onto any street or sidewalk.
[2] Backup area. Each parking space shall be provided with a
sufficient backup area to permit egress in two maneuvers
consisting of one backward and one forward movement.
[3] Driveway access. There shall be adequate provision for
ingress to and egress from all parking areas. Minimum
driveway width shall be 24 feet.
[4] Circulation aisles. There shall be adequate provision for
circulation within parking areas. Aisle width providing
access to individual parking stalls shall be determined by
the angle of the stall serviced by such isle as follows:
Aisle Width
Parking Angle
(degrees)
One-Way Aisles
(feet)
Two-Way Aisles
(feet)
0° (parallel) 12 24
30° 12 n/a
45° 15 n/a
60° 18 n/a
90° 22 24
[5] Only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles serving
single-row parking spaces placed at an angle other than
90°.
[6] Parking lots with 100 or more parking spaces shall require
a minimum of two means of ingress/egress.
(5) Surface and drainage.
§ 300-55 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-55
285:978
(a) Off-street parking lots areas shall be surfaced with an asphaltic
or portland cement binder pavement providing an all-weather,
durable and dustless surface.
(b) Individual parking stalls shall be clearly identified by markings
four inches to six inches wide.
(c) Off-street parking lots shall be designed to ensure that all
stormwater runoff will be directed away from adjacent
properties and shall further be designed to be in full
conformance with Chapter 251 (drainage and watercourses) of
the Pleasantville City Code.
(d) No area of any surface parking lot, excluding access ramps,
shall have a slope in excess of 5%. No ramp shall have a slope
in excess of 8%. Aprons shall have the same slope as the
sidewalk adjacent thereto.
(e) Fixed lighting shall be so arranged and shielded to prevent
glare beyond the lot's property lines.
(f) Suitable wheel stops or curbing shall be provided, located and
designed to protect sidewalks, screening devices, landscaping
and other vehicles from vehicles extending beyond the
required parking stall length and to provide necessary traffic
control.
(g) Special standards for residential parking areas. For accessory
parking areas located in a front yard of a residential duplex,
two-family stacked multistory dwelling, three- to four-family
attached dwelling, townhouse, garden apartment, multifamily
building or any other attached dwelling, where such parking is
developed after the effective date of this chapter:
[1] Each space shall be accessory to and permanently
assigned to a single dwelling unit and, if possible within
the requirements of this subsection, be located in the front
yard of such unit, except that parking in the front yard
shall be prohibited where the attached dwelling exceeds
30 feet in width or where the rear yard has access to a
street or alley.
[2] No more than one space (front-to-back) shall be located in
the front yard of any dwelling unit, and not more than two
spaces shall be contiguous (side-by-side) with each other.
Areas between groupings of two parking spaces shall be
landscaped in an appropriate manner so as to minimize
visual impact.
[3] A fence or landscaped buffer surrounding the parking area
is required in order to minimize the visual impact of an
automobile's presence on adjacent properties.
§ 300-55 WATER § 300-55
285:979
§ 300-56. Loading.
[4] Every parking space and driveway shall be designed and
shall be of sufficient length and width to prevent the
parked automobile from encroaching onto any street or
sidewalk. Within this context, the width of any single
driveway or parking space shall not be less than eight feet
nor greater than 10 feet, unless the width in excess of 10
feet is treated with decorative concrete, pavers or similar
surfacing.
[5] The grade of pavement from parking lot to street shall not
exceed 2%.
(6) Signage. No sign shall be displayed in any surface parking lot,
structured parking garage or mechanical parking facility except
such signs as may be necessary for the orderly use of such lot,
garage or facility.
A. Structural types permitted. Loading in the City of Pleasantville is
permitted from designated on-street loading zones, from dedicated
loading areas on surface parking lots and from structured loading
docks.
B. Location.
(1) On-street loading zones shall be located as close as is possible to
the use to for which they are intended.
(2) Off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the
building or structure to which they are accessory. No loading space
shall be located in any required front yard.
C. Computation of required spaces.
(1) On- and off-street loading spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the following Schedule of Required Off-Street Loading Spaces.
(2) Should the computation of the number of required off-street
loading spaces result in a fraction of a space, any fraction up to and
including 1/2 shall be disregarded (i.e., rounded down), and any
fraction over 1/2 shall require one loading space (i.e., rounded up).
D. Schedule of Required Off-Street Loading Spaces.
Schedule of Required Off-Street Loading Spaces
Residential Development
1 space for every 200,000 square feet of gross floor area, or any part
thereof
Nonresidential Development
Gross Floor Area Required Spaces
§ 300-55 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-56
285:980
Schedule of Required Off-Street Loading Spaces
Up to 9,999 s.f. of g.f.a. 1 space for every 5,000 g.f.a, or any
part thereof
Thereafter 1 space for every 10,000 g.f.a, or
any part thereof
(1) The requirements of this schedule notwithstanding, on- and offstreet
loading spaces shall be provided in sufficient number and of
sufficient size so as to appropriately service the use for which they
are intended, and, with the exception of on-street loading, so that
no loading and unloading operations infringe upon any street,
sidewalk or public property.
(2) Collective and shared loading. Subject to the following conditions,
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent collective loading
arrangements for multiple uses on the same lot or shared loading
arrangements for multiple uses on separate lots:
(a) Unless site plan approval is required, in which case approval
for the collective or shared loading arrangement shall be
issued by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, a zoning permit for such collective or
shared loading arrangement shall be issued pursuant to this
chapter.
(b) The total of such off-street loading spaces to be shared shall
not be less than 50% of the sum of the requirements for the
various uses computed separately.
(c) When possible, collective or shared loading areas shall be
consolidated into a single, contiguous space.
(d) A legal instrument establishing the rights of each party
entering into such collective or shared loading arrangement,
approved as to form and manner of execution by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board Solicitor in the case where the loading
arrangement is part of a Board action, or by the City Solicitor
in the case where the loading arrangement is approved by the
Zoning Officer pursuant to Subsection D(2)(a) hereinabove,
and executed by the parties requesting such arrangement,
shall be filed with the application for a zoning permit.
E. Design and maintenance.
(1) Minimum setbacks. Off-street loading areas shall comply with the
setbacks required by § 300-55E(1), and no loading space shall be so
located as to require or permit any vehicle it is designed to
accommodate to extend into any front yard or across any lot line
while being loaded or unloaded.
(2) Screening.
§ 300-56 WATER § 300-56
285:981
(a) Off-street loading areas accessory to uses with floor areas in
excess of 100,000 square feet, exclusive of required off-street
parking areas, shall be located internally and not be visible
from any public street.
(b) To the extent possible, open-air off-street loading areas shall be
located and screened as to be visually insulated from public
rights-of-way or adjacent properties.
(3) Dimensions. Off-street loading spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet
in width and 35 feet in length and have a minimum vertical
clearance of 10 feet. These dimensions notwithstanding, all offstreet
loading spaces shall be sized for the delivery vehicles
anticipated.
(4) Access and circulation.
(a) Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and arranged to
provide access to a street or alley in a manner which will
create the least possible interference with traffic movement,
both interior to the loading area or between the loading area
and the City's street system.
(b) Adequate provision shall be made for ingress to and egress
from all loading spaces and for circulation within loading areas
to ensure ease of mobility, ample clearances and safety of
vehicles and pedestrians.
(c) Unless approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, in the course of site plan,
subdivision and/or variance review, access to and from loading
spaces shall be approved by the Zoning Officer.
(5) Surface and drainage.
(a) Every off-street loading space shall be surfaced with an
asphaltic or portland cement binder pavement providing an allweather,
durable and dustless surface.
(b) Off-street loading areas shall be designed to ensure that all
stormwater runoff will be directed away from adjacent
properties and shall further be designed to be in full
conformance with Chapter 251 (drainage and watercourses) of
the Pleasantville City Code.
(c) Individual loading stalls shall be clearly identified by markings
four inches to six inches wide.
(d) Fixed lighting shall be so arranged and shielded to prevent
glare beyond the lot's property lines.
§ 300-56 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-56
285:982
F. Signage. No signs shall be displayed in any off-street loading area
except such signs as may be necessary for the orderly use of the loading
spaces.
§ 300-56 WATER § 300-56
285:983

ARTICLE XII
Signage
§ 300-57. Purpose and intent.
A. The regulation of signs under this chapter is intended to promote and
protect the public health, safety and welfare and support economic
development in the City of Pleasantville by:
(1) Minimizing the adverse effects of signage on public and private
property, thereby enhancing and protecting the aesthetic
environment in the City by minimizing excess or undue signage
what has come to be known as sign pollution.
(2) Reducing the depreciation of property values caused by signs
which are incompatible with surrounding land uses.
(3) Creating a more attractive residential and economic climate within
the City and thereby maintain and enhance the City's ability to
retain existing businesses and attract new commercial operators.
(4) Reducing distractions, obstructions and hazards caused by the
indiscriminate placement and use of signs.
(5) Encouraging the effective use of signage as a means of
communication.
(6) Enabling the fair and consistent enforcement of signage
regulations.
B. Scope.
(1) The regulations of this section shall govern and control the
erection, enlargement, expansion, alteration, operation,
maintenance, relocation and removal of signs within the City of
Pleasantville which are visible from any street, road, sidewalk,
public or private property.
(2) The regulations of this section relate to the location of signs, by
function and type, within the City's various zoning districts, and
shall be in addition to provisions of the International Building Code
and the National Electrical Code applicable to the construction and
maintenance of signs.
(3) Any sign not expressly permitted by these regulations shall be
prohibited.
C. Zoning permit required.
(1) Except as expressly provided in § 300-61, no sign shall be erected,
enlarged, expanded, altered or relocated unless a zoning permit
evidencing compliance of such work with the provisions of this
section and other applicable provisions of this chapter shall have
§ 300-57 WATER § 300-57
285:985
§ 300-58. General standards.
first been issued; provided, however, that routine sign
maintenance, changing of parts designed to be changed or
changing the content of a sign in any manner which does not
change the functional classification of the sign shall not, in and of
itself, be considered an alteration of the sign requiring the issuance
of a zoning permit.
(2) In addition to the information and documents required by
§ 300-34A and Checklist B, every application for a zoning permit for
a sign shall be accompanied by:
(a) A copy of the plans and specifications for the propose sign,
depicting the method of construction, illumination and support
of such sign and a sketch, drawn to a scale of not less than one
inch equals 1/8 inches, showing all sign faces, exposed
surfaces and the proposed message and design accurately
represented as to size, area, proportion and color;
(b) Current color photographs of all street frontages for the
subject property, showing all existing signs on the property;
(c) A calculation of the total sign area presently existing on the
property; and
(d) The applicant's attestation that the number of all signs and the
sum of the areas of the requested and existing signs do not
exceed the maximum allowable by the provisions of this
chapter.
A. All signs must be professionally designed and constructed. Homemadetype
plywood, paper, Coroplast or cardboard signs, or home-computergenerated-
type signs are expressly prohibited.
B. Illumination. Unless otherwise provided for herein, no sign in the City
of Pleasantville shall be:
(1) Illuminated by other than a shielded or otherwise directed,
nonflashing light source, or by a light from the interior of a sign
with a translucent face.
(2) Placed or directed so as to permit the beams and illumination
therefrom to be directed upon any adjacent public or private
premises so as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a
nuisance or traffic hazard.
(3) Located on a lot adjacent to or across the street from any
residential zoning district and visible from such residential zoning
district and be illuminated between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., unless the use to which the sign pertains is open for
business.
§ 300-57 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-58
285:986
(4) Flashing, animated, moving, intermittently moving or reflecting.
(5) Other than neon signs where permitted under § 300-62, of a bare
incandescent light source.
C. Electrical elements.
(1) All wiring, fittings and materials used in the construction,
connection and operation of electrically illuminated signs shall be
in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code.
(2) An Underwriters Laboratories (Note: "UL") label shall be affixed to
every sign having any electrical component.
D. Structural elements.
(1) The construction and structural components of all signs shall be in
accordance with the standards and regulations of the International
Building Code.
(2) In no case shall the structural elements of a freestanding or pole
sign extend above the top of the sign face.
(3) Any movable parts of a sign shall be securely fastened by screws,
hinges or other appropriate mechanism.
E. Obstructions prohibited. No sign, part of a sign, or part of a sign
structure shall:
(1) Obstruct the free ingress to or egress from a fire escape, door,
window or other required accessway.
(2) Be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
(3) Be erected or maintained within the zone of light obstruction, as
defined in § 300-10, for any window opening into any habitable
room of any residential unit.
(4) Project over, occupy or obstruct any window surface required for
light or ventilation by any applicable law, ordinance or regulation.
(5) Be maintained at any location where, by reason of its position, size,
shape, content or color, such sign may obstruct, impair, obscure,
interfere with the view of or be confused with any traffic control
sign, signal or device or where it may interfere with, mislead or
confuse traffic.
(6) Obstruct the sight triangle required by § 300-47B (other than a
supporting pole or brace no greater than 18 inches in width or
diameter).
F. Signs in rights-of-way. No sign, except publicly owned signs, shall be
placed in or extend into or over any public right-of-way, unless a
revocable license agreement therefor, holding the City harmless and
§ 300-58 WATER § 300-58
285:987
naming the City an additionally insured, approved as to form and
manner of execution by the City Solicitor and adopted by resolution
of the City Council, and thereafter executed by the parties requesting
such arrangement, shall first be obtained.
G. Signs painted on walls. No sign shall be painted directly on a building
wall.
H. Sign identification. Billboards shall be plainly marked with the name of
the person, firm or corporation hanging or erecting the sign and the
sign permit number.
I. Sign maintenance and sign safety.
(1) Signage falling into a state of disrepair shall immediately be
repaired or replaced.
(2) No vacant signs or sign boxes shall be permitted. Where vacancies
occur, corresponding signage shall be immediately replaced with
general project or other appropriate signage.
(3) In the case of advertising signs, as defined in § 300-10, the owner of
such sign and, in the case of all other signs, the owner of the sign
and the owner of the premises on which such sign is located, shall
be jointly and severally liable to maintain such sign, including its
sign face, source(s) of illumination and its electrical and structural
elements, in a neat and orderly condition and good working order
at all times, to repair all damage to such sign and constituent
components in an expeditious manner and to prevent the
development of any rust, corrosion, rotting or other deterioration in
the physical appearance or safety of such sign.
(4) Unsafe, unsightly, damaged or deteriorated signs, or signs in
danger of falling, in whole or in part, shall be expeditiously
repaired or removed upon written notice.
(5) Immediate compliance is required for the repair or removal of
unsafe signs.
(6) If compliance is not achieved within the time period specified by
any notice issued by the Zoning Officer or other City official
empowered to issue such notice, the sign shall be repaired or
removed by the City and the costs therefore assessed to the
property owner.
(7) Legal nonconforming signs shall be permitted to continue in
operation, and normal maintenance shall be permitted. For the
purposes of this section only, "normal maintenance" shall be
construed to include the replacement of an existing sign face with a
new sign face upon change of use or ownership of the property or
operation for which the sign is intended. Nonconforming signs in
violation of the maintenance requirements of this subsection shall
§ 300-58 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-58
285:988
lose their nonconforming status. Nonconforming signs removed for
maintenance purposes may be replaced, provided the degree of
nonconformity is not increased.
J. Sign measurement.
(1) Sign area. In addition to the directions for measuring sign area
contained in the definition of "sign, area (of)" in this chapter:
(a) The supporting structure or bracing of a sign shall not be
included in measuring the area of the sign, unless such
structure or bracing is made part of the message, face or
decorative or ornamental architecture of the sign.
(b) Where a single sign has two display faces back to back or in
some other configuration where only two sign faces are visible
(i.e., V-shaped signs where the inside of the "V" is not visible
and therefore not usable for signage), the area of the largest
single sign face shall be used to determine the area of the sign.
Otherwise, the area of multi-faced signs shall be measured by
including all sign faces.
(c) Where a single sign has more than one display face, the area
which can be viewed simultaneously from any single location
shall be used to determine sign area.
(2) Sign height. Sign height shall be measured between finished grade
and the highest point of the highest element of the sign, excluding
any incidental structural elements such as uplift cables for a
projecting sign.
(3) Projecting signs.
(a) Projecting signs shall be supported from the wall or vertical
support in accordance with the standards and regulations of
the International Building Code, including the National
Electrical Code.
(b) No projecting sign shall extend more than four feet from the
wall.
(c) No projecting sign shall extend closer than two feet from the
curbline.
(d) No part of any projecting sign shall extend lower than eight
feet above Finished Grade.
(e) Signs projecting over a City right-of-way shall require
permission from the governing body in the form of a revocable
license agreement, specifying the parties to the agreement; the
type of sign or other improvement to be installed; the extent of
the projection over the right-of-way; the term of the license,
including any revocation terms; insurance and indemnification
§ 300-58 WATER § 300-58
285:989
§ 300-59. Sign classifications.
provisions by the licensee on behalf of the City; any specific
conditions of the license; and such consideration as the City
shall deem appropriate.
(f) Signs projecting over a county right-of-way shall require
permission from the County Planning Board.
(4) Signs near environmentally sensitive sites. No ground, pole, roof or
projecting signs shall be located within 50 feet of any designated
fresh or salt water wetlands or lands where a threatened and
endangered species has been identified via NJDEP or other official
mapping if such sign or sign structure is visible from such lot line at
a point five feet above grade.
(5) Sign materials. All signs shall have a surface or facing of
incombustible material or be of approved combustible material.
Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass, wired
glass or plate glass of a thickness in compliance with the
International Building Code.
A. Functional types. For purposes of this chapter, signs shall be classified
according to function. Definitions of the following functional types of
signs may be found in § 300-10.
(1) Advertising sign;
(2) Advertising vehicle sign;
(3) Animated or moving sign;
(4) Bulletin board sign;
(5) Construction sign;
(6) Environmental information or designation sign;
(7) Governmental sign;
(8) Historical or architectural designation sign;
(9) Holiday decorations (Any other provision of this section to the
contrary notwithstanding, such signs may be of any type, number,
area, height, illumination or animation. All such items shall be
located on the same lot as the principal use to which the
decorations are attendant.);
(10) Home occupation sign;
(11) Identification sign;
(12) Joint-identification sign;
(13) Memorial sign;
§ 300-58 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-59
285:990
§ 300-60. Signs permitted without permit or fee.
Subject to the more specific provisions of § 300-63, and except as expressly
addressed in § 300-61, and notwithstanding any other contrary provision
of this chapter, the following signs may be erected and maintained in any
zoning district other than the Conservation District, without obtaining a
zoning permit or paying the fee required for such permits, subject to the
conditions and limitations hereinafter set forth:
(14) Nameplate sign;
(15) On-site informational sign;
(16) Political sign;
(17) Private sale sign;
(18) Private event sign;
(19) Real estate sign;
(20) Temporary sign; and
(21)Warning sign.
B. Structural types. For purposes of this chapter, signs shall be classified
according to structure. Definitions of the following structural types of
signs may be found in § 300-10.
(1) Awning, canopy or marquee sign;
(2) Ground sign;
(3) Freestanding/pole sign;
(4) Portable sign;
(5) Projecting sign;
(6) Roof sign;
(7) Wall sign; and
(8) Window sign.
A. Construction signs, provided that such signs are located within the
boundaries of such development project, are limited to not more than
one wall or ground sign per street frontage, are not more than 60
square feet in area and not more than 12 feet in height, are illuminated
only by a direct source of light and are maintained for not more than 14
days following the conclusion of the construction in question.
B. Environmental information or designation signs, provided that such
signs are limited to not more than one pole or ground sign per street
frontage, are not more than six square feet in area, are not more than
§ 300-59 WATER § 300-60
285:991
12 feet in height, are illuminated only by a direct source of light and
contain no commercial advertising.
C. Flags or emblems of a government or of a political, civic, philanthropic,
educational or religious organization.
D. Governmental signs, provided that the content and size of any such sign
shall not exceed the requirements of the law, ordinance or regulation
pursuant to which such sign is erected.
E. Historical or architectural designation signs, provided that such signs
are limited to not more than one wall or ground sign, are not more than
six square feet in area, and not more than 12 feet in height, are
illuminated only by a direct source of light and contain no commercial
advertising.
F. Holiday decorations displayed for a period of not more than 60
consecutive days nor more than 20 days following the holiday in
connection with which they are displayed.
G. Home occupation signs, provided that such signs are limited to not
more than one wall or window sign per dwelling unit, are not more than
two square feet in area and are not lighted.
H. Memorial signs, provided that such signs are limited to not more than
one wall or ground sign; are made of durable material (e.g., bronze,
stone or concrete); are not more than four square feet in area; and are
illuminated only by a direct source of light.
I. Nameplate signs, provided that such signs are limited to not more than
one wall, projecting or ground sign per occupancy; are not more than
one square feet in area; and are illuminated only by a direct source of
light. No projecting sign shall extend more than six feet from the face of
a wall and no ground sign shall be higher than three feet.
J. Official public safety and information signs displaying road names,
numbers and safety directions.
K. On-site identification signs, provided that such signs are limited to not
more than one wall, window or ground sign of not more than two square
feet in area and not more than 12 feet in height.
L. On-site informational signs, provided that such signs are limited to not
more than one wall, window or ground sign of not more than two square
feet in area and not more than 12 feet in height.
M. Political signs, provided that such signs are not more than 10 square
feet in area if located in a nonresidential zoning district or four square
feet in area if located in a residential zoning district; are limited to not
more than one per lot; are located entirely on private property pursuant
to the owner's consent; are clearly marked with the name, address and
telephone number of the person responsible for the removal of such
§ 300-60 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-60
285:992
sign; are erected not more than 45 days prior to such election; and are
removed within 14 days following such election.
N. Private sale and private event signs, provided that such signs are not
more than four square feet in area; are located entirely on the premises
where such sale or event is to be conducted; are clearly marked with
the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for
the removal of such sign; are erected not more than 12 hours in
advance of such sale or 45 hours in advance of such event, and are
removed on the day following the conclusion of such sale or event.
O. Real estate signs, provided that:
(1) Residential property with structure(s) less than 40 feet in height
and vacant land shall be limited to not more than one wall or
ground sign and not more than eight square feet in area;
(2) Residential property with structure(s) greater than or equal to 40
feet in height shall be limited to not more than two wall or ground
signs not more than 24 square feet in area each;
(3) Commercial property with or without structure(s) shall be limited
to not more than two wall or ground signs not more than 32 square
feet in area each;
(4) Such signs shall be removed within one week of settlement of the
sale or consummation of the lease or rental; and
(5) Such signs shall be set back five feet from the right-of-way and shall
respect all sight triangles required by § 300-47B.
P. Trespassing signs or signs indicating the private nature of a road,
driveway or premises, and signs prohibiting or otherwise controlling
fishing or hunting, provided that the size of such sign does not exceed
six square feet.
Q. Warning signs, provided that such signs are limited to not more than
two wall or ground signs per property frontage, are not more than four
square feet in area each and are illuminated only by a direct source of
light.
R. Window signs.
(1) Unless otherwise provided for herein, permanent, nonilluminated
window signs or similar window obstructions, provided that the
aggregate area of all such window signs or obstructions do not
exceed 33% of the area of the window in which they are exhibited
nor block any window area required for light, ventilation or
emergency exit by any applicable code.
(2) Temporary, nonilluminated window signs advertising coming
events, special sales, contests, promotional activities and civic or
§ 300-60 WATER § 300-60
285:993
§ 300-61. Prohibited signs.
Subject to the more specific provisions of § 300-63, the following signs are
prohibited in all zoning districts and shall not be erected, maintained or
permitted to continue in any zoning district:
§ 300-62. District-specific signage regulations.
Subject to the more specific provisions of § 300-63:
political activities maintained for a period of no longer than 45 days
before such event nor more than three days after such event.
A. Animated or moving signs, except as expressly authorized by specific
zoning district regulations;
B. Portable (A-frame, sandwich board, sidewalk and curb) signs, except as
specifically authorized by specific district regulations;
C. Signs which are nailed, tacked, glued, taped, painted on or otherwise
affixed to any tree, utility pole, utility cabinet, rock, ledge or other
natural feature, whether on public or private property;
D. Signs which contain statements, words or pictures of an obscene
character or which contain advertising matter which is untruthful; and
E. Temporary signs, except as expressly authorized herein;
A. Regulations for signs accessory to a permitted principal or conditional
use, as well as all nonconforming uses, in the SFR & RD Zoning
Districts.
(1) Functional types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Bulletin board signs, when accessory to a nonresidential use.
(c) Identification signs, when accessory to a nonresidential use
and when accessory to a defined residential project of more
than eight units.
(2) Structural types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60;
(b) Ground signs;
(c) Wall signs, when accessory to a nonresidential use; and
(d) Window signs, when accessory to a nonresidential use.
(3) Number of signs permitted.
§ 300-60 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-62
285:994
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Ground sign: one per street frontage.
(c) Wall sign: one per building elevation.
(d) Window sign: one per nonresidential use.
(4) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Ground sign: 15 square feet per sign face and not more than
two, back-to-back sign faces.
(c) Wall sign: 10 square feet per sign face and not more than one
sign face.
(d) Window signs: not to exceed 33% of the nonresidential window
in which they are exhibited, nor block any window area
required for light, ventilation or emergency exit by any
applicable code.
(5) Maximum height of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Ground signs: three feet.
(c) Wall signs: the lower of 15 feet or the 2nd floor window sill.
(d) Window signs: no higher than within a window on the level at
which the principal use takes place.
(6) Minimum setback required for ground signs: five feet from all lot
lines.
(7) Illumination. In addition to the regulations established under
§ 300-58B, no window sign installed in a window above the ground
floor shall be illuminated.
B. Regulations for signs accessory to a permitted principal or conditional
use, as well as all nonconforming uses, in the in the MF, WR and NC
Zoning Districts, and the Franklin Boulevard Professional Office
Overlay, the Main Street Neighborhood Commercial Overlay and the
New Road Professional Office Overlay.
(1) Functional types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
§ 300-62 WATER § 300-62
285:995
(b) Bulletin board signs, when accessory to a nonresidential use.
(c) Identification signs, when accessory to a nonresidential use
and when accessory to a defined residential project of more
than eight units in the MF and WF Zoning Districts.
(d) Joint identification signs, when accessory to a nonresidential
use and when accessory to a defined residential project of
more than eight units in the MF and WF Zoning Districts.
(2) Structural types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60;
(b) Awning, canopy or marquee signs;
(c) Ground signs;
(d) Wall signs, when accessory to a nonresidential use; and
(e) Window signs, when accessory to a nonresidential use.
(3) Number of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) One awning, canopy or marquee sign, projecting sign or
window sign per building elevation.
(c) One ground sign, portable sign or wall sign per street frontage.
(4) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Awning, canopy or marquee signs: not to exceed 50% of the
area of the awning, canopy, marquee on which they are placed.
(c) Ground signs: 25 square feet per sign face and not more than
two, back-to-back sign faces per street frontage.
(d) Portable signs: 15 square feet per sign face and not more than
two, back-to-back sign faces per street frontage.
(e) Projecting signs: 12 square feet per sign face and not more
than two back-to-back sign faces per building elevation.
(f) Wall sign: one sign face not to exceed 7.5% of the total wall
surface per elevation.
(g) Window signs: not to exceed 25% of the area of the window in
which they are exhibited nor block any window area required
for light, ventilation or emergency exit by any applicable code.
§ 300-62 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-62
285:996
(5) Maximum height of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Awning canopy or marquee signs projecting signs: the lower of
20 feet or the second-floor window sill.
(c) Ground signs and portable signs: five feet.
(d) Wall signs: the lower of 20 feet or the second-floor window sill.
(e) Window signs: no higher than within a window on the level at
which the principal use takes place.
(6) Minimum setback required:
(a) Awning, canopy or marquee signs. No such sign shall project
beyond the physical dimensions of the awning, canopy or
marquee on which it is attached.
(b) Projecting signs. No greater than six feet from the structure on
which such sign is attached.
(c) Ground signs and portable signs: five feet from all lot lines.
(7) Illumination. In addition to the regulations established under
§ 300-58B:
(a) Neon or other gas-tube illumination is permitted.
(b) No window sign installed in a window above the ground floor
shall be illuminated.
(c) Awning, canopy and marquee signs may be illuminated along
the front or side facade by interior or direct illumination, the
source for which shall in no case extend beyond the surface of
the sign on which such source of illumination is to be installed.
C. Regulations for signs accessory to a permitted principal or conditional
use, as well as all nonconforming uses, in the CBD, GC, RC, LI and BMU
Zoning Districts, and the Bayside Mixed-Use Overlay and City Center
Support Overlay.
(1) Functional types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60;
(b) Bulletin board signs;
(c) Identification signs and joint-identification signs; and
(d) Advertising signs, provided that no advertising material shall
be placed upon the top of any awing, canopy or marquee.
§ 300-62 WATER § 300-62
285:997
(2) Structural types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60;
(b) All structural types specified in § 300-59B, except
freestanding/pole and roof signs; except that hotels/motels in
the GC and RC Zone shall be permitted one freestanding/pole
sign.
(3) Number of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Awning, canopy or marquee signs, projecting signs, wall signs
and window signs: one sign per building elevation.
(c) Ground signs, portable signs: one sign per street frontage.
(d) For hotel/motel uses in the GC and RC Zoning Districts: one
freestanding/pole sign.
(4) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Awning, canopy, marquee signs: not to exceed 50% of the area
of the awning, canopy, marquee on which they are placed.
(c) Ground signs: 50 square feet per sign face and not more than
two back-to-back sign faces per street frontage.
(d) Portable signs: 15 square feet per sign face and not more than
two back-to-back sign faces per street frontage.
(e) Projecting signs: 12 square feet per sign face and not more
than two back-to-back sign faces per building elevation.
(f) Wall sign: one sign face not to exceed 20% of the total wall
surface per building elevation.
(g) Window signs: not to exceed 25% of the area of the window in
which they are exhibited nor block any window area required
for light, ventilation or emergency exit by any applicable code.
(h) Freestanding/pole signs for hotel/motel uses in the GC and RC
Zoning Districts: not to exceed 25 square feet in area.
(5) Maximum height of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
§ 300-62 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-62
285:998
(b) Awning, canopy or marquee signs and projecting signs: the
lower of 20 feet or the 2nd floor window sill.
(c) Ground signs and portable signs: five feet.
(d) Wall signs: no higher than the roofline of the wall supporting
said sign.
(e) Window signs: no higher than within a window on the level at
which the principal use takes place.
(f) Freestanding/pole signs for hotel/motel uses in the GC and RC
Zoning Districts: 15 feet.
(6) Minimum setback required for ground signs and freestanding/pole
signs.
(a) Five feet from all lot lines.
(b) For hotel/motel uses in the GC and RC Zoning Districts: 10 feet
from the front lot line, five feet from all remaining lot lines.
(c) No such sign or supporting elements shall be located within
any sight triangle.
(7) Illumination. In addition to the regulations established under
§ 300-58B.:
(a) Neon or other gas-tube illumination is permitted.
(b) No window sign installed in a window above the ground floor
shall be illuminated.
(c) Awning, canopy and marquee signs may be illuminated along
the front or side facade by interior or direct illumination, the
source for which shall in no case extend beyond the surface of
the sign on which such source of illumination is to be installed.
D. Regulations for signs accessory to a permitted principal or conditional
use, as well as all nonconforming uses, in the RSC Zoning District
(1) Hotel/motel uses.
(a) Functional types permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60; and
[2] Identification and joint-identification signs.
(b) Structural types permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60;
[2] Freestanding/pole signs; and
§ 300-62 WATER § 300-62
285:999
[3] Wall signs.
(c) Number of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: one.
[3] Wall signs: three.
(d) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: not to exceed 150 square feet per
sign side.
[3] Wall signs: not to exceed 20% of the area of wall on which
such sign is mounted.
(e) Maximum height of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: 25 feet.
[3] Wall signs: no higher than the roofline of the wall
supporting said sign.
(f) Minimum setback required.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60;
[a] Front yard: 40 feet.
[b] Rear yard: 40 feet.
[c] Side yard: 20 feet.
[2] Wall signs shall not extend more than 16 inches from the
building on which such sign is mounted.
(g) Illumination. In addition to the regulations established under
§ 300-58B, neon or other gas-tube illumination is permitted;
(2) Commercial/retail uses.
(a) Functional types permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60; and
§ 300-62 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-62
285:1000
[2] Identification and joint-identification signs.
(b) Structural types permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60;
[2] Freestanding/pole signs; and
[3] Wall signs.
(c) Number of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60:
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: one.
[3] Wall-mounted identification signs: one.
[4] Wall-mounted joint-identification signs: one sign per
tenant or use.
(d) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: not to exceed 150 square feet per
sign side.
[3] Wall-mounted identification signs: 200 square feet,
configured not more than 40 feet in length and not more
than five feet in height.
[4] Wall-mounted joint-identification signs: not more than 30
feet in height and not more than 70% of the frontage of the
use to which such sign is accessory.
(e) Maximum height of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: 25 feet.
[3] Wall signs: no higher than the roofline of the wall
supporting said sign.
(f) Minimum setback required.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Front yard: 40 feet.
§ 300-62 WATER § 300-62
285:1001
[3] Rear yard: 40 feet.
[4] Side yard: 20 feet.
[5] Wall mounted identification signs: not to extend more than
16 inches from the building on which such sign is
mounted.
[6] Wall-mounted joint-identification signs: not to extend more
than 12 inches from the building on which such sign is
mounted.
(g) Illumination. In addition to the regulations established under
§ 300-58B, neon or other gas-tube illumination is permitted.
(3) Office buildings, administrative and educational uses.
(a) Functional types permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Identification and joint-identification signs.
(b) Structural types permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60;
[2] Freestanding/pole signs; and
[3] Wall signs.
(c) Number of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: one per building.
[3] Wall signs: one.
(d) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: not to exceed 150 square feet per
sign side.
[3] Wall signs: not more than five feet in height and not more
than 40 feet in length, but in no case more than 10% of the
wall on which such sign is mounted.
(e) Maximum height of signs permitted.
§ 300-62 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-62
285:1002
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: 12 feet
[3] Wall signs: no higher than the roofline of the wall
supporting said sign.
(f) Minimum setback required.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Front yard: 40 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 40 feet.
[4] Side yard: 20 feet.
[5] Wall-mounted identification signs: not to extend more than
16 inches from the building on which such sign is
mounted.
[6] Wall-mounted joint-identification signs: not to extend more
than 12 inches from the building on which such sign is
mounted.
(g) Illumination. In addition to the regulations established under
§ 300-58B, neon or other gas-tube illumination is permitted.
(4) Food and beverage uses.
(a) Functional types permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Identification and joint-identification signs.
(b) Structural types permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60;
[2] Freestanding/pole signs; and
[3] Wall signs.
(c) Number of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: one per building.
[3] Wall signs: one per building.
§ 300-62 WATER § 300-62
285:1003
(d) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: not to exceed 120 square feet per
sign side.
[3] Wall signs: not more than three feet in height and not more
than 25 feet in length, but in no case more than 10% of the
wall on which such sign is mounted.
(e) Maximum height of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: 12 feet.
[3] Wall signs: not to extend higher than the roof on which
such sign is mounted.
(f) Minimum setback required.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Front yard: 40 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 40 feet.
[4] Side yard: 20 feet.
[5] Wall signs: not to extend more than 16 inches from the
building on which such sign is mounted.
(g) Illumination. In addition to the regulations established under
§ 300-58B, neon or other gas-tube illumination is permitted.
(5) Other permitted uses.
(a) Functional types permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Identification and joint-identification signs.
(b) Structural types permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60;
[2] Freestanding/pole signs; and
[3] Wall signs.
§ 300-62 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-62
285:1004
(c) Number of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: one per building.
[3] Wall signs: one per building.
(d) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: not to exceed 120 square feet per
sign side.
[3] Wall signs: not more than three feet in height and not more
than 25 feet in length, but in no case more than 10% of the
wall on which such sign is mounted.
(e) Maximum height of signs permitted.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Freestanding/pole signs: 12 feet.
[3] Wall signs: not to extend higher than the roof on which
such sign is mounted.
(f) Minimum setback required.
[1] Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or
fee under § 300-60.
[2] Front yard: 40 feet.
[3] Rear yard: 40 feet.
[4] Side yard: 20 feet.
[5] Wall signs: not to extend more than 16 inches from the
building on which such sign is mounted.
(g) Illumination. In addition to the regulations established under
§ 300-58B, neon or other gas-tube illumination is permitted.
E. Regulations for signs accessory to a permitted principal or conditional
use, as well as all nonconforming uses, in the CEM Zoning District.
(1) Functional types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60;
§ 300-62 WATER § 300-62
285:1005
(b) Memorial signs; and
(c) Nameplate signs.
(2) Structural types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Ground signs.
(c) Freestanding/pole signs.
(d) Inscriptions or engravings on mausoleums, headstones and
grave markers shall not be considered signs.
(3) Number of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) One ground or freestanding/pole sign at each entrance to the
cemetery.
(4) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Ground signs: 50 square feet per sign face and not more than
two back-to-back sign faces per street frontage.
(c) Freestanding/pole signs: 25 square feet per sign face and not
more than two back-to-back sign faces per street frontage.
(5) Maximum height of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Ground signs: five feet.
(c) Freestanding/pole signs: 15 feet.
(6) Minimum setback required for ground and freestanding/pole signs:
five feet from all lot lines.
(7) Illumination.
(a) Direct or internal illumination is permitted.
(b) Animated signs are prohibited.
F. Regulations for signs accessory to a permitted principal or conditional
use, as well as all nonconforming uses, in the CONSERV Zoning
District.
§ 300-62 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-62
285:1006
§ 300-63. Sign regulations applicable to specific land uses.
(1) Functional types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60;
(b) Governmental signs;
(c) Environmental information or designation signs;
(d) Memorial signs; and
(e) Nameplate signs.
(2) Structural types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Ground signs.
(3) Number of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) One ground sign per 250 feet of street frontage, placed at the
edges of the CONSERV Zoning District(s). Where more than
one such sign is permitted, no sign shall be placed closer than
250 feet from any other sign.
(4) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Ground signs: six square feet.
(5) Maximum height of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) Ground signs: three feet.
(6) Minimum setback required for ground signs: five feet from all lot
lines.
(7) Illumination: no sign shall be illuminated.
A. The following regulations, rather than the district-based regulations of
§ 300-62, shall apply to digns accessory to specific land uses located in
the CBD, NC, GC, RC, LI and BMU Zoning Districts where such uses are
permitted.
§ 300-62 WATER § 300-63
285:1007
B. Signs accessory to a nonconforming residential use shall be subject to
the regulations of § 300-62A.
C. Signs accessory to any other nonconforming use shall be subject to the
regulations of this subsection.
D. Parking lot and parking garage signs.
(1) Functional types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60;
(b) Identification signs;
(c) Current rate signs;
(d) Tariff signs;
(e) Towing signs; and
(f) Open/closed signs.
(2) Structural types permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60;
(b) Awning, canopy or marquee signs;
(c) Ground signs;
(d) Freestanding/pole signs;
(e) Projected signs; and
(f) Wall signs.
(3) Number of signs permitted.
(a) Signs permitted in any zoning district without permit or fee
under § 300-60.
(b) As provided in each respective zoning district.
(4) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
(a) Identification signs: 16 square feet in area.
(b) Current rate signs: 16 square feet in a four-foot-by-four-foot
configuration;.
(c) Tariff signs: six square feet in a two-foot-by-three-foot
configuration.
(d) Towing signs: eight square feet in a two-foot-by-four-foot
configuration.
§ 300-63 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-63
285:1008
(e) Open/closed signs: sized to fit over the fee of the current rate
sign.
(5) Maximum height of signs permitted.
(a) Identification signs: no lower than four feet and no higher than
14 feet.
(b) Current rate signs: no lower than four feet and no higher than
eight feet.
(c) Tariff signs: sufficiently high to permit visibility from all
entrances when the lot is full, but in no case higher than eight
feet.
(d) Towing signs: no lower than four feet and no higher than eight
feet.
(e) Open/closed signs: no lower than four feet and no higher than
eight feet.
(6) Sign placement.
(a) Identification signs: placed where most desirable to fit the
needs of the individual business.
(b) Current rate signs: perpendicular to the street frontage.
(c) Tariff signs: posted prominently, in an unobstructed location,
permanently affixed to the attendant's booth.
(d) Towing signs: posted in a visible, unobstructed location at all
entrances to the facility. If the entrance requirement is not
sufficient due to the largeness of the facility, then posted in a
visible location or locations so that a sign is clearly visible to all
entrances and parking places within the parking facility.
(e) Open/closed signs: posted at all entrances to the facility.
(7) Message requirements.
(a) Identification signs: shall be similar in style and coloring with
the operator's logo, trademark or other identifying symbol.
(b) Current rate signs.
[1] Rates must be in accordance with the tariff sign, with all
rates being the same size.
[2] The sign must display the period(s) of time which the
vehicle is permitted to be stored or parked, and the initial
fee and the subsequent fee (if different than the initial fee)
in effect for the time that the sign is displayed. Such
information shall be displayed as follows:
§ 300-63 WATER § 300-63
285:1009
[a] White background with Helvetica Medium letter style
font;
[b] "CURRENT RATE" in capital letters, six inches high,
black lettering;
[c] Fee numerals in eight inches minimum, 16 inches
maximum, red lettering; and
[d] Interchangeable inserts (slots) for rate fee and time.
(c) Tariff signs: shall indicate that the current year rate schedule
for the parking facility is on file with the City Clerk. All rates
must be the same size, with white background, black lettering
and red numerals and the name of the operator, mercantile
license number and the address clearly visible. Lettering and
numeral size shall be as large as possible within the mandated
maximum gross surface area in order to convey the required
information in a neat and clear manner.
(d) Towing signs.
[1] Shall include the name, address and telephone number of
the towing company and the fee for said towing as follows:
[a] White background;
[b] Three-inch-high red lettering in Helvetica Medium
letter style font;
[c] Company name in a seven-inch-by twelve-inch box;
[d] Company address and telephone number in a seveninch-
by-twelve-inch box; and
[e] Towing fee in a four-inch-by-four-inch box.
[2] Such information shall be printed below the following
language:
[a] Public lots: "Unauthorized Vehicles Will Be Towed."
[b] Private lots: "Private Property, No Parking. Tow Away
Zone."
(e) Open/closed signs. Posted across current rate sign when the
lot is not open to the public. Signs shall be white background
with six-inche-high red lettering in Helvetica Medium letter
style font.
(8) Illumination. In addition to the regulations established under
§ 300-58B:
(a) Identification signs may be of neon or other gas-tube
illumination.
§ 300-63 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-63
285:1010
(b) Awning, canopy and marquee signs may be illuminated along
the front or side facade by interior or indirect illumination, the
source for which shall in no case extend beyond the surface of
the side on which such source of illumination is to be installed.
E. Time and temperature signs.
(1) Functional types permitted.
(a) Identification and joint-identification signs, whereon, in
addition to the purpose of the sign as defined in § 300-10, the
current time or temperature, or both, is indicated by
intermittent lighting; and
(b) On-site informational signs, whereon the current time or
temperature, or both, is indicated by intermittent lighting.
(2) Structural types permitted.
(a) Ground signs;
(b) Freestanding/pole signs;
(c) Projecting signs; and
(d) Wall signs.
(3) Number of signs permitted.
(a) Ground signs, freestanding/pole signs and projecting signs:
One sign per street frontage with a maximum of two back-toback
sign faces per street frontage.
(b) Wall signs: one.
(4) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
(a) Ground signs: 50 square feet per sign face and not more than
two back-to-back sign faces per street frontage.
(b) Freestanding/pole signs: 25 square feet per sign face and not
more than two back-to-back sign faces per street frontage.
(c) Projecting signs: 12 square feet per sign face and not more
than two back-to-back sign faces per building elevation.
(d) Wall signs: one sign face not to exceed 20% of the total wall
surface per elevation.
(5) Maximum height of signs permitted.
(a) Ground signs: five feet.
(b) Freestanding/pole signs: 15 feet.
§ 300-63 WATER § 300-63
285:1011
(c) Projecting signs: the lower of 20 feet or the second-floor
window sill.
(d) Wall signs: the lower of 20 feet or the second-floor window sill.
(6) Minimum setback required for ground signs and freestanding/pole
signs: 10 feet from any street line, five feet from all remaining lot
lines.
(7) Illumination. The regulations established under § 300-58B shall
apply, except that the following types of illumination shall be
permitted:
(a) Bare bulb, light emitting diode ("LED"), liquid crystal display
("LCD") and digital (television-type) signs.
(b) Neon or other gas-tube illumination.
(8) Rate of message change.
(a) Lighting changes on any such sign shall be limited to the
display of time and/or temperature.
(b) With the exception of the passage of time, display changes
shall be not less frequent than once every 15 seconds.
F. Advertising signs.
(1) A zoning permit is required for all advertising signs under this
section.
(2) Structural types permitted.
(a) Freestanding/pole signs; and
(b) Wall signs.
(3) Number of signs permitted: one.
(4) Sign location. No advertising sign shall be located:
(a) On any lot, the street line of which forms part of a frontage
wherein at least 50% of such length is used or zoned for
residential purposes.
(b) Lots or portions of lots located within 50 feet, measured
perpendicularly, from a street lot line which forms part of a
frontage which is used or zoned for residential purposes.
(c) Signs having a gross surface area less than 300 square feet:
within 200 feet of any other such sign located on the same side
of the street or within 100 feet of any other such sign.
(d) Signs having a gross surface area equal to or greater than 300
square feet: within a 500 feet radius of any other such sign.
§ 300-63 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-63
285:1012
§ 300-64. Sign regulations for redevelopment and rehabilitation
areas.
Subject to the requirements of each individual redevelopment plan, signage
regulations for portions of the City under an adopted redevelopment plan
shall be:
(e) Within 100 feet from any lot line of any school, place of
worship, library, public park or similar institution, when
located in a residential zoning district if the sign or sign
structure is visible from any such lot line at a point five feet
above finished grade.
(f) Within 100 feet of any residential zoning district, except that
no sign having a gross surface area in excess of 300 square feet
shall be located within 500 feet of any residential zoning
district.
(g) For signs oriented toward the Atlantic City Expressway or the
NJ Transit Rail Line, within a 500 feet radius of any other sign
oriented toward the Atlantic City Expressway or the NJ Transit
Rail Line.
(5) Maximum gross surface area of signs permitted.
(a) Sixty square feet per sign face, except that the maximum gross
surface area in the RC Zoning District shall not exceed 700
square feet per sign face.
(b) Signs oriented toward the Atlantic City Expressway or the NJ
Transit Rail Line shall not exceed 700 square feet per sign
face.
(6) Maximum height of signs permitted.
(a) Freestanding/pole signs: 30 feet.
(b) Wall signs: the lower of 20 feet or the second-floor windowsill;
provided, however, that if the wall area to be covered has no
windows or openings, the sign may be as high as the roof eave,
regardless of height.
(7) Minimum setback required for freestanding/pole signs: 10 feet
from any street line, five feet from all remaining lot lines.
(8) Illumination. No sign shall be illuminated except by direct or
internal illumination.
A. Block 189 Rehabilitation Area: as specified for the SFR-75 Zoning
District.
B. California Avenue Rehabilitation Area: as specified for the SFR-75
Zoning District.
§ 300-63 WATER § 300-64
285:1013
C. Cambria Avenue Redevelopment Area: as specified in the amended and
restated redevelopment plan for the Cambria Avenue Redevelopment
Area.
D. City Center Redevelopment Area: as specified for the BMU Zoning
District.
E. Lakes Bay Waterfront Redevelopment Area: as specified for the SFR-75
Zoning District.
F. Narcissus Avenue Rehabilitation Area: as specified for the RD Zoning
District.
G. Woodland Terrace Rehabilitation Area: as specified for the RD Zoning
District.
§ 300-64 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-64
285:1014
ARTICLE XIII
Landscaping, Fences and Walls
§ 300-65. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to provide regulations for the landscaping
of the various parcels and open spaces within the City of Pleasantville in
order to prevent soil erosion; enhance aesthetics; reduce air, sound and
light pollution; control winds and to provide visual barrier as appropriate.
§ 300-66. Landscape plan.
A. With the exception of exempt development pursuant to § 300-10, each
application for new development, as well as exterior renovations to
existing development shall include a comprehensive landscape plan,
addressing the entire development and integrating the various
elements of site design, topography, parking and buffering
requirements of this chapter in order to preserve and enhance the
natural character of the lot where such character exists, or to create a
pleasing visual environment where such character does not exist.
B. Landscape plans shall be approved by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, as part of the site plan/
subdivision approval process.
C. With the exception of exempt development pursuant to § 300-10,
landscape plans attendant to all other applications may be prepared by
the applicant, his/her professional planner or professional engineer, or
a horticulturist or landscaper.
D. Landscape plans shall describe, in graphic and, as appropriate,
schedule form:
(1) The location, quantity, common name, botanical (scientific) name,
size and installation details for each species, including size and
spacing at initial planting (either by caliper or width and height);
(2) Information as to how the plants will be grown and moved (e.g.,
nursery grown, moved by ball and burlap, bare roots or
containerized, etc.);
(3) The type of ground cover and mulches proposed;
(4) Fence types and height;
(5) The height, width, slope and planting cover of all berms;
(6) The type of construction materials used in landscaping (e.g.,
railroad ties, stone, paver, etc);
(7) The sod/grass seed mixture, and, as applicable, rate of application;
§ 300-65 WATER § 300-66
285:1015
§ 300-67. General requirements.
(8) Typical tree/shrub planting details, addressing existing and
finished grades, typical saucer berm graphic, area and depth of
mulch, directions for pruning, depth and width of pit, location and
type of staking, type of topsoil mixture and wrapping details for
deciduous trees; and
(9) When existing natural growth is proposed to remain, the applicant
shall include the proposed methods to protect existing elements
both during and after construction.
E. For the purposes of clarity, the landscape plan shall be an independent
sheet and not combined with other required submission items (i.e., a
combined "Landscape and Grading Plan").
F. Recognizing that landscaping involves biological life forms that
constantly evolve to changing environments, the regulations of this
chapter may be modified or waived at the request of an applicant,
provided that such waiver request is supported by evidence or
testimony from a qualified landscape professional, such as a
horticulturist or landscape architect.
A. Topsoil preservation. Topsoil moved during the course of construction
shall be, to the extent practicable, cleaned to be free of roots, branches,
stumps and other tree parts, litter, stones, leaves, weeds, brush, excess
or scrap building materials and other debris, and then redistributed on
all regraded surfaces so as to provide at least four inches of even cover
to all nondeveloped areas of the site, and shall be stabilized by seeding
or planting.
B. New topsoil. Where four inches of topsoil cannot be achieved by the
redistribution/regarding of existing soils pursuant to § 300-67A, new,
clean topsoil shall be added to provide for the minimum four inches
coverage.
C. Removal of debris. All stumps, tree parts, litter, brush, weeds, excess or
scrap building materials or other debris shall be removed from the site
and disposed in accordance with applicable law. No tree stumps,
portions of tree trunks or limbs shall be buried anywhere on site. All
dead or dying trees, standing or fallen, shall be removed from the site
and properly disposed of. Subject to approval of the City Engineer, trees
and limbs may be reduced to chips and used as mulch in landscaped
areas.
D. Protection of existing plantings. Maximum effort shall be made to save
specimen elements, as defined in § 300-10. No material or temporary
soil deposits shall be placed within four feet of shrubs or 10 feet of trees
designated to be retained and so designated on the preliminary and/or
final landscape plan. Protective barriers of tree wells shall be installed
around each plant and/or group of plants that are to remain on the site.
§ 300-66 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-67
285:1016
§ 300-68. Planting specifications.
Barriers shall not be supported by the plants they are protecting, but
shall be self-supporting, shall be a minimum of four feet high and shall
be constructed of a durable material that will last until construction
is completed. Snow fences and slit fences are examples of acceptable
barriers.
A. Natural topography and vegetation shall be employed where possible.
The species utilized shall be appropriate for the site, considering soil
and wind conditions, slope, use of the site and purpose of the plantings.
B. Deciduous trees shall have at least a 2 1/2 inches' caliper at planting,
measured 12 inches above the ground, with a minimum standing height
of 10 feet.
C. Sizes of evergreens trees and shrubs may vary depending on setting,
species and proposed use.
(1) Evergreen tress shall be no less than seven feet to eight feet in
height at time of planting.
(2) Unless specifically a dwarf variety, shrubs shall be no less than 24
inches to 30 inches at time of planting, except for shrubs used for
buffer screening, which shall be 30 inches to 36 inches.
D. Trees shall be nursery grown, of substantially uniform size and shape
with straight trunks (although ornamental trees need not have straight
trunks, but must conform in other respects with the provisions for trees
and tree plantings outlined herein). All trees shall be brought to the site
balled and burlapped, or other acceptable means, free from insects and
disease and true to species and variety.
E. Trees, shrubs and ground cover shall be properly planted in accordance
with accepted horticultural standards, shall be properly staked until
established, and provision shall be made by the applicant for regular
watering and maintenance until established.
(1) Staking.
(a) Stakes are to be driven outside the root ball.
(b) Stakes shall be hardwood. A minimum of two stakes shall be
used per tree.
(c) Stakes shall be a minimum of two inches in diameter at the
thick end.
(d) Stakes, when driven, must be 1/2 to 2/3 the height of the tree,
measured from ground level.
(e) Stakes shall be attached to the tree with twelve-gauge
galvanized wire covered with rubber or plastic hose where
§ 300-67 WATER § 300-68
285:1017
wire is likely to come in contact with the tree trunk. An
alternative may be any of the commercially available materials
designed for staking trees as approved by the Zoning Officer,
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be. The loop in contact with the tree shall be loose enough
to permit growth and prevent girding for two years but shall
be tightly bound to the stake to prevent slipping.
(f) Stakes shall remain in place at least two years and shall be
removed at that time.
(2) Wrapping.
(a) Deciduous trees shall be wrapped with an expandable paper or
cloth treated to last at least one year.
(b) The wrap shall extend from the ground level to the first
branches.
(c) To prevent scald, the wrap shall be attached or fastened at
each end with a material that will permit growth without
girding.
(3) Saucers.
(a) A ring of packed soil shall be placed around the finished
planting hole of each tree.
(b) The saucer shall be a minimum of six inches higher than the
finished grade.
(c) Saucers placed on slopes shall be level at the top end and
perpendicular to the tree trunk.
(d) Saucers are to be designed to catch and hold the maximum
amount of water either from natural precipitation or irrigation.
(4) Mulching.
(a) A two-inch minimum layer of mulch shall be applied around
each individual tree or shrub or group of trees or shrubs.
(b) Partially rotted or nitrogen-enriched wood chips may be used
(new chips are not acceptable as their natural bacteria draws
nitrogen from the soil, thus limiting the nitrogen available to
the plants).
(5) Tree pits and shrub pits shall be six inches deeper and at least 12
inches wider than the ball of the plant.
(6) Planting. Plants shall be set straight and firmly tamped, and then
adequately watered, guyed, pruned and wrapped.
§ 300-68 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-68
285:1018
§ 300-69. Plant species and functions.
(7) Backfill mixture. The types of backfill mixture shall consist of 2/3
topsoil and 1/3 peat, or other materials as required by specific
plants.
F. Dead or dying plants, including those which have been transplanted in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, shall be replaced
during the next recommended planting season.
G. All landscape plans shall contain the following note: "All plant material
not surviving for a period of two years shall be replaced with the same
or equivalent size species."
H. With the exception of single-family detached dwellings, all landscaped
areas shall be irrigated by an automatic/mechanical irrigation system.
I. Wherever possible, landscaping shall promote creativity in design,
locations and species. For example, instead of planting trees in straight
rows, the applicant might group trees into clusters with different
combinations of species in each cluster.
A. General requirements.
(1) Plant species should be hardy for Climatic Zone 7 and appropriate
in terms of function and size.
(2) Plant selection shall be varied to avoid monoculture, with species
selected for their ability to survive in an urban environment.
Species shall be salt tolerant if to be located in proximity to Lakes
Bay or Absecon Bay.
(3) Tree species may vary depending on overall effect desired.
However, as a general rule, all street trees on a particular right-ofway
shall be the same species, except where otherwise desired to
achieve a special effect (as approved by the Zoning Officer,
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may
be). Species selection shall be approved as part of the landscape
plan.
B. Street trees.
(1) Only deciduous trees shall be used as street trees.
(2) Street trees shall be installed in accordance with the approved
landscape plan. The trees shall be installed between the curbline
and the sidewalk when a grass area of at least one foot in width is
provided. If the distance between the curb and sidewalk is less than
one foot, the street trees shall be installed five feet behind the
sidewalk. Trees may be massed at critical points or spaced evenly
along the street, or both.
(3) Street tree spacing.
§ 300-68 WATER § 300-69
285:1019
(a) When street trees are planted at intervals along streets,
spacing shall depend on tree size as follows:
Tree Size
Planting Interval
(feet on center)
Trees 40 feet in height or taller at
maturity
40 to 50
Trees 30 feet to 40 feet in height
at maturity
35 to 40
Trees less than 30 feet in height
at maturity
25 to 35
(b) When the spacing interval exceeds 40 feet, small ornamental
trees may be spaced between the larger trees. If a street
canopy effect is desired, trees may be planted closer together,
following the recommendation of a New Jersey Licensed
landscape architect. The trees shall be planted so as not to
interfere with utilities, roadways, sidewalks, sight easements,
sight triangles or streetlights. Tree location, landscaping
design and spacing shall be approved by the Zoning Officer,
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, as the case may be, as part of the landscape plan.
(4) At intersections, trees shall not be located closer than 30 feet from
the intersection of the street right-of-way lines, and may be further
where the standards of § 300-47B increase the distance for sight
triangles.
(5) The landscape plan for street trees shall include a graphic treeplanting
detail which shall address the following:
(a) Thinning of branches and foliage by 1/3. The leader shall not
be cut;
(b) Staking and supporting in accordance with § 300-68E(1);
(c) The trunk shall be protected by tree wrap;
(d) Trees shall be mulched with three inches of approved organic
material;
(e) A three-inch saucer shall be constructed around the planting
area;
(f) The top of the burlap shall be untied and removed;
(g) The ball shall rest on compacted soil; and
(h) The diameter of the hole shall be two feet larger than the
diameter of the ball.
§ 300-69 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-69
285:1020
(6) Although every site is unique, certain plant materials are known to
have difficulty surviving in urban areas, areas where salt air is
prevalent or other conditions commonly experienced in the City of
Pleasantville. Accordingly, except as noted herein, the following
species are prohibited:
Latin Name Common Name
All trees with thorns
Acer negundo Box Elder
Acer platanoides Norway Maple
Acer saccharinum Silver Maple
Acer buergerianum Trident Maple Amur Maple
Acer ginnala Acer triflorum Three-flowered Maple
Acer truncatum x platantoides
'Keithsform'
Norwegian Sunset Maple
Aesculus spp. Buckeyes (unless fruitless)
Ailanthus altissima Tree of Heaven
Albizia julibrissin Mimosa
Aralia elata Japanese Angelica
Betula nigra River Birch
Betula papyrifera Paper Birch
Betula pendula European White Birch
Broussonetia papyrifera Paper Mulberry
Carya spp. Hickories
Catalpa speciosa Catalpa
Celtis koraiensis Korean Hackberry
Chionanthus retusus Chinese Fringetree
Chionanthus virginicus Native Fringetree
Cornus alternifolia Pagoda Dogwood
Crataegus laevigata English Hawthorn
Elaeagnus spp. Hardy Olives
Fraxinus pennylvanica Green Ash
Gleditsia triacanthos Common Honey Locust
Juglans nigra Black Walnut
Koelreuteria paniculata Goldenrain Tree
Liquidambar styraciflua Sweetgum (unless
Rotundiloba cultivar)
Liriodendron tulipifera Tuliptree
Maclura pomifera Osage orange
§ 300-69 WATER § 300-69
285:1021
Latin Name Common Name
Malus spp. Crabapple (unless diseaseresistant
cultivar)
Morus spp. Mulberries
Paulownia tomentosa Empress Tree
Pinus strobus White Pine
Populus deltoids Cottonwood
Populus nigra 'Italica' Lombardy Poplar
Prunus x 'Okame' Okame Cherry
Prunus serotina Black Cherry
Pyrus spp. Flowering Pear (Note:
Italicized text denotes
acceptable alternatives to
Bradford Pear.)
Robinia pseudoacacia Black Locust
Sophora japonica Scholartree
Sorbus spp. Mountain Ash
Styrax japonicus Japanese Snowbell
Syringa reticulate Tree Lilac
Tsuga canadensis Eastern Hemlock
Ulmus pumila Siberian Elm
C. Shade trees.
(1) Only deciduous trees shall be used as shade trees installed
adjacent to streets or between sidewalks and streets.
(2) Shade trees planted in the islands of parking areas shall be a mix of
evergreen and deciduous species; however, the first tree from the
intersection shall not be an evergreen.
(3) By way of guidance, and without limitation:
(a) Columnar trees shall be used for limited planting along narrow
streets, but shall not be planted between the curb and
sidewalk.
(b) Broad oval trees, globe-shaped trees and spreading-branch
trees, as well as coniferous trees may also be used.
(c) Flowering trees may be used for decorative purposes.
D. Acceptable species. Although every site is unique, the following species
have been found to be successful in locations similar to the City of
Pleasantville. Special consideration to the nature of the soil, amount of
sun, size of planting area, exposure to salt spray or salt air and the
§ 300-69 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-69
285:1022
existence of overhead wires and/or underground utilities and other
conditions should be given when considering a specific plant for a
particular application:
Latin Name Common Name
Deciduous Trees
Acer buergerianum* Trident Maple
Acer campestre* Hedge Maple
Acer ginnala* Amur Maple
Acer griseum* Paperbark Maple
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsura
Chionanthus retusus* Chinese Fringetree
Chionanthus virginicus* Native Fringetree
Cornus kousa* Kousa Dogwood
Crataegus crus-galli var. inermis* Thornless Cockspur Hawthorn
Franklinia alatamaha* Franklinia
Gingko biloba Maidenhair Tree (males only)
Gleditsia triancanthos var. enermis Honeylocust (thornless,
podless cultivars only)
Koelreuteria paniculata Goldenrain Tree
Lagerstroemia fauriei or L. indica* Crapemyrtle
Liquidambar styraciflua "Rotundiloba" Fruitless Sweetgum
Magnolia grandiflora "Little Gem"* Little Gem Magnolia
Magnolia virginiana* Sweet Bay Magnolia
Malus spp.* Crabapple (disease-resistant
cultivars only)
Nyssa sylvatica Sourgum
Oxydendrum arboretum* Sourwood
Parrotia persica* Persian Parrotia
Platanus x acerifolia "Bloodgood" Bloodgood London Planetree
Quercus acutissima Sawtooth Oak Swamp
Quercus bicolor White Oak
Quercus phellos Willow Oak
Sophora japonica Scholartree
Styrax japonicus* Japanese Snowbell
Syringa reticulate* Tree Lilac
Taxodium distichum Bald Cypress
§ 300-69 WATER § 300-69
285:1023
Latin Name Common Name
Ulmus parvifolia Lacebark Elm
Zelkova serrata Japanese Zelkova
Evergreen Trees
Cryptomeria japonica Japanese Cryptomeria
Cupressocyparis leyandii Leyland Cypress
Ilex opaca American Holly
Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar
Picea pungens "Glauca" Blue Spruce
Pinus thunbergii Japanese Black Pine
Deciduous Shrubs
Aronia arbutifolia Chokeberry
Buxus microphylla Boxwood
Clethra alnifolia Summersweet
Cotoneaster spp. Rockspray
Hydrangea macrophylla Bigleaf Hydrangea
Hydrangea quercifolia Oakleaf Hydrangea
Ilex verticillata Winterberry
Myrica pensylvanica Bayberry
Rosa rugosa Rugosa Rose
Spiraea spp. Spirea
Syringa patula "Miss Kim" Compact Lilac
Vaccinium corymbosum Highbush Blueberry
Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood
Viburnum opulus European cranberry bush
Viburnum prunifolium Blackhaw Viburnum
Evergreen Shrubs
Chamaecyparis spp. False cypress
Ilex cornuta Chinese Holly
Ilex glabra Inkberry
Juniperus chinensis Chinese Juniper
Juniperus conferta Shore Juniper
Mahonia aquifolium Oregon Holly Grape
Mahonia bealei Leatherleaf mahonia
Taxus spp. Yews
§ 300-69 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-69
285:1024
NOTES:
* Denotes potential trees to plant under overhead wires.
E. Buffer areas.
(1) Buffer areas shall be developed in an aesthetic manner for the
primary purpose of providing year-round visual screening and
noise reduction in order to minimize adverse impacts from a site on
an adjacent property or from adjacent areas, and may consist of a
combination of fencing; evergreen trees, shrubbery or hedges;
berms; rocks/boulders; decorative masonry; or other elements to
achieve the stated objectives.
(2) Buffer areas shall be planted and maintained with either grass or
ground cover together with a screen of live shrubs or scattered
planting of live trees, shrubs or other plant materials. The
preservation of natural wooded areas shall be an integral part of all
development plans, and natural wooded areas located along a site
boundary shall be integrated into the required buffer area,
provided that the growth is of a density and width sufficient for
buffering purposes. Additional plantings may be required by the
Zoning Officer, Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, to establish an appropriate tone for an effective
buffer.
(3) Buffering shall be required when topographical or other barriers do
not provide reasonable screening and when the Zoning Officer,
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
determines that there is a need to shield the site from adjacent
properties in order to minimize adverse impacts, such as
incompatible land uses, noise, glaring light and traffic. For
example, but without limitation, a board may require landscaping,
fences or walls to ensure privacy and screen dwelling units in
small-lot developments when site and building design do not
provide adequate privacy.
(4) Buffer widths shall be measured horizontally and perpendicular to
lot and street lines.
(5) The location and design of buffer areas are intended to provide
flexibility in providing effective screening. The following shall be
considered in designing buffer areas:
(a) The use of the portion of the property being screened;
(b) The distance between the use and the adjoining property line;
(c) The difference in elevations;
(d) The type of buffer (i.e., dense planting, existing woods, walls or
fences);
§ 300-69 WATER § 300-69
285:1025
(e) Buffer height and width; and
(f) Other combinations of man-made and natural features.
(6) The buffer shall be designed, planted, graded, landscaped and
developed with the general guideline that the closer a use or
activity is to a property line, or the more intense the use, the more
effective the buffer area must be in obscuring light and vision and
reducing noise beyond the site.
(7) Buffer areas and landscape screens shall consist predominately of
evergreen species having a minimum height of five feet above the
ground when planted. Such evergreens shall be placed five feet o.c.
in two or more staggered rows with a five feet separation between
rows. The selected trees shall be thickly branched and dense,
especially close to the ground, and shall have a fast growth rate in
the early years. Evergreens may be supplemented with deciduous
and flowering trees having a minimum 10 feet height at time of
planting with a minimum caliper of two inches.
(8) No structure, activity, storage of materials or parking of vehicles
shall be permitted in a buffer area.
(9) Except as otherwise provided for herein, buffers shall be a
minimum of 15 feet wide and shall be designed, planted, graded
and landscaped to provide an aesthetically pleasing separation of
uses.
(10) Where required, buffers shall be measured from side and rear
properly lines, excluding access driveways.
(11) If, in the judgment of the Zoning Officer, Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, the buffer area depicted
on the landscape plan will not adequately screen the site as
required by this section, the landscape plan shall be modified to
increase, enhance and/or redesign the buffer to achieve the desired
effect.
(12) Where residential development abuts higher-order streets
(collectors or arterials), units should front on internal streets with
landscape buffers from the collector and arterial roads as
applicable.
(13) Buffer plantings shall be broken at points of vehicular and
pedestrian ingress and egress to assure a clear sight triangle at all
street and driveway intersections.
(14)Off-street parking areas, loading areas and driveways. Except for
single-family detached and two-family dwelling units:
(a) Off-street parking areas, garbage/recycling collection areas,
utility areas and loading/unloading areas shall be screened
around their perimeter by a minimum five-foot-wide buffer
§ 300-69 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-69
285:1026
consisting of screen plantings, berms, fences, walls, or
combinations thereof, not less than four feet in height between
the subject area and any lot line or street line, except where a
building serves as the buffer between the parking area and the
lot line or street line.
(b) All loading areas shall be landscaped and screened sufficiently
to obscure the view of the parked vehicles and loading
platforms from any public street, adjacent property or
residential zoning district for the full 12 months of the year.
Such screening shall be made via an extension of the building,
fence, berm, wall or planting, or combination thereof, and shall
not be less than four feet in height.
(c) Each off-street parking area shall reserve a minimum 5% of its
land area for landscaped islands, distributed throughout the
parking area in order to break the view of parked cars in a
manner not impairing visibility.
(d) Parking areas located in front of buildings shall be generously
landscaped to separate them from adjacent sidewalks and/or
roadways.
(e) One shade tree, measuring a minimum of 2 1/2 inches caliper
at planting, shall be provided for every three parking spaces.
Trees shall be staggered or spaced so as not to interfere with
driver vision, and have branches no lower than six feet from
grade.
(f) Areas adjacent to driveways shall be planted with low-lying
plants or grass.
(15) The following trees are prohibited in all buffer areas.
Latin Name Common Name
Abies pinsapo Spanish Fir
Araucaria araucana Monkey Puzzle
Araucaria heterophylla Norfolk Island Pine
Cedrus atlantica Atlas Cedar
Cedrus libani Lebanese Cedar
Cryptomeria japonica lobbii Lobb's Japanese Cedar
Cunninghamia lanceolata Chinese Fir
Gingko biloba Maidenhair Tree
Larix decidua European Larch
Larix kaempferi or L. leptolepis Japanese Larch
Pinus wallichiana Himalayan Pine
Pinus parviflora Japanese White Pine
§ 300-69 WATER § 300-69
285:1027
Latin Name Common Name
Pinus peuce Macedonian Pine
Pinus ponderosa Ponderosa Pine
Pinus thunbergii Japanese Black Pine
Taxodium distichum (except for
wet areas)
Common Bald Cypress
Torreya nucifera Japanese Torreya
F. Additional landscaping: in addition to the street tree and buffer area
requirements of § 300-69B and E:
(1) For residential development, additional landscaping elements shall
be required where necessary for climate control, privacy or
aesthetic purposes.
(2) For nonresidential development, all areas not occupied by
buildings and required improvements shall be landscaped by the
planting of grass or other ground cover, shrubs and trees.
(3) Regional Shopping Center (RSC) Zoning District:
(a) In addition to landscape requirements of § 300-65 through
§ 300-70, a minimum twenty-five-foot landscaped buffer zone
shall be required from all lands owned by the City of
Pleasantville or the South Jersey Transportation Authority.
(b) All areas not covered by buildings, sidewalks or paving shall be
landscaped.
(c) A planted area, no less than 25 feet in width at primary street
frontage, 10 feet at rear yard and no less than five feet wide at
side yards, composed of lawn, shrubbery, trees, decorative
crushed rock, gravel or bark, shall be placed and continuously
maintained in a proper and attractive manner exclusive of
driveway and access openings.
(d) The integrity of all landscaped plantings and buffer areas shall
be protected by adequate maintenance and necessary
replacement of plant materials. Plant material shall be
sufficiently hardy to withstand the rigors of weather, vehicle
emission, wind blast, heat, glare, cold and other physical
conditions common to this section of the City. All materials
shall be adequately protected from damage resulting from
traffic movement, pedestrian circulation or other physical
conditions by designed curbing, fencing, dry wells, vent tiles,
grasses and similar protective measures.
(e) Adequate screening, composed of masonry walls or fencing of
an approved design, dense plantings of evergreen shrubs or
trees, berms, depression of visible portions of the site below
§ 300-69 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-69
285:1028
§ 300-70. Tree protection and replacement.
the grade, or similar measures, shall be carried out to ensure
that loading areas will not be visible from any adjoining
property.
(4) Light Industrial (LI) Zoning District. All uses in the Light Industrial
Zoning District shall be screened from view from any public rightof-
way or adjacent property by a fence or wall, as well as by an
appropriate combination of plant material in order to soften the
appearance of said fence or wall. The adequacy and acceptability of
the landscaping plan shall be determined by the approving Board.
A. Purpose.
(1) The purpose of this section is to establish protective regulations for
trees within the City of Pleasantville in order to assist in the control
of flooding, soil erosion, air pollution and noise pollution; protect
the public health, safety and welfare of citizens; and promote
quality development in the City and to encourage the protection of
the greatest number of trees in general, and of specimen trees in
particular, throughout the City.
(2) Every attempt shall be made by applicants to save existing trees,
even at the loss of parking spaces. Groupings of trees should be
saved over single trees.
(3) Recognizing that wild trees often do not survive when their habitat
is drastically altered, care should be taken by the Zoning Officer,
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
to properly evaluate site clearing proposals. Where loss of trees is
proposed, a compensatory planting plan is required.
B. Tree protection plan. A tree protection plan shall be required as part of
the landscape plan where one or more live trees are proposed to be cut
or removed from the site during development. Such plan shall be
submitted at time of application and shall contain the following
information:
(1) The location of all buildings, driveways, grading, septic fields,
easements, underground utility lines, rights-of-way and other
existing or proposed improvements.
(2) The location of existing natural features, including wooded areas,
watercourses, wetlands and floodplains.
(3) The limits of the proposed tree protection zone.
(4) The location of all existing live trees with trunk diameters eight
inches or greater, measured 4 1/2 feet above ground level. Each
such tree shall be noted by its species, size and general health
condition.
§ 300-69 WATER § 300-70
285:1029
(a) Whenever possible, the actual canopy spread shall be shown. If
it must be estimated, the canopy shall equal 1 1/2 feet of
diameter per one inch of trunk diameter.
(b) Where the density of forestation makes identification of
individual trees impracticable, only the outermost individuals/
canopy line need be shown, unless disturbance is proposed,
then individual trees located within 50 feet of the proposed
edge of the woodland shall be shown.
(5) A clear indication of each tree (or groups of trees) to be removed or
transplanted.
(6) A chart depicting each tree proposed for removal, indicating their
diameters and replacements pursuant to the compensatory tree
schedule as required by the compensatory planting plan detailed in
§ 300-70D.
(7) Specifications for the removal of existing trees and the protection
in place of existing trees where they are to be preserved, including
detail(s) of the Tree-protection fencing.
C. The stripping of trees or filling more than six inches around trees shall
not be permitted unless it can be demonstrated that construction
requirements necessitate these actions, in which case the lots shall be
replanted with trees to reestablish the tone of the area and to conform
to adjacent lots in accordance with the compensatory planting schedule
detailed in § 300-70D.
D. Compensatory planting plan. In the event that preservation of existing
trees within the tree protection zone is not practicable, and where a
redesign of the project or relocation of improvements is not possible, a
compensatory planting plan shall be required to replace each live tree
proposed to be removed from the tree protection zone and each
specimen tree proposed to be removed anywhere from the site. The
compensatory planting plan shall include the following:
(1) Compensatory trees shall be provided in the following ratios,
applicable to both dciduous and evergreen trees.
(a) For trees eight inches to 17 inches in diameter, one new tree
shall be provided for every one existing tree cut or removed.
(b) For trees 18 inches to 30 inches in diameter, two new trees
shall be provided for every one existing tree cut or removed.
(c) For trees 31 inches in diameter or greater, three new trees
shall be provided for every one existing tree cut or removed.
(d) One street tree shall be replanted in the street tree planting
strip for each existing street tree cut or removed.
§ 300-70 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-70
285:1030
(2) In evaluating existing trees for compensatory planting, trunk
diameters shall be measured according to the following guidelines:
(a) Single-trunked shade trees shall be measured at a point 4 1/2
feet above ground level at the location of the tree.
(b) Single-trunked ornamental trees shall be measured at a point
12 inches above ground level at the location of the tree.
(c) Evergreen trees shall be measured at a point 12 inches above
ground level at the location of the tree.
(d) Multitrunked trees that branch between one feet and 4 1/2 feet
above ground level at the location of the tree shall be
measured at a point just below the split.
(e) Multitrunked trees that branch below one feet above ground
level at the location of the tree, the diameter shall be 60% of
the sum total of all trunks measured at a point 4 1/2 feet above
such ground level.
(3) Compensatory trees shall be three inches to 3 1/2 inches in caliper
at time of planting. Evergreen and ornamental trees may be
substituted at a ratio of two to one for every shade tree otherwise
required, for up to 50% of the requirement. Alternative types of
compensatory plantings may be permitted when approved by the
Zoning Officer, Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be.
(4) The locations of compensatory trees must be clearly labeled on the
landscape plan. Planting locations shall be as close to the tree it
replaces as possible.
(5) The planting of compensatory trees shall be in addition to, and not
substitute for, plantings otherwise required by this chapter.
E. In the event that the applicant establishes, to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Officer, Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the
case may be, that constraints incidental to the land itself, including,
without limitation, extreme topography, unsuitable soils, rock outcrops
and existing dense canopy, render it impractical to provide the required
number of compensatory trees, the Zoning Officer or Board may, at its
sole discretion, require/permit the applicant to:
(1) Install compensatory trees on other public lands within the City;
(2) Contribute to the City the estimated cost of those trees which
cannot practically be installed on the property for later installation
of trees on public lands; and/or
(3) Install fewer but larger or more valuable compensatory trees on
the site with an aggregate cost as installed and guaranteed not less
§ 300-70 WATER § 300-70
285:1031
§ 300-71. Fences and walls.
than the estimated aggregate cost of the required number of
compensatory trees.
F. Compensatory planting is not required for shrubs, unless the area of
disturbance includes specimen shrubbery, in which case an appropriate
compensation plan for such shrubbery shall be submitted.
A. Fences and walls when serving as a fence, may be erected anywhere on
a lot, subject to the following (For these purposes, the terms "fences"
and "walls" shall be interchangeable.):
(1) No fence shall be located within a dedicated right-of-way.
(2) Fences shall be exempt from the setback requirements for
accessory uses established by this chapter.
(3) All perimeter fences shall be placed not less than two inches inside
of the property line.
(4) Fence height shall be measured from the finished grade at the
location of each fence post.
(5) Fences located in the front yard of a lot, including the primary front
yards on corner lots, shall not exceed four feet in height. For fences
located in the secondary or other front yards of a corner lot (i.e.,
any front yard other than the primary front yard), a fence of up to
six feet in height is permitted rearward of lines drawn parallel to
each front lot line through the points of the principal building or
structure that are the most distant from each such front lot line.
(6) Rear yard privacy fences.
(a) Fences located in the Side yard of a lot shall not exceed four
feet in height between the front lot line and a line drawn
parallel to the front lot line through the rear-most point of the
principal building or structure on such Lot. Rearward of such
point, fences shall not exceed a six feet in height.
(b) Where a principal building or structure is shaped such that the
prevailing width (i.e., 50% or more of the building's width
measured parallel to the front lot line) lies forward of the rearmost
point of such building or structure, six-foot fences shall
be permitted to extend forward of the rear-most point of the
principal building or structure to the rear-most point of the
prevailing width of the building. Forward of such point, fences
shall not exceed a four feet in height.
§ 300-70 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-71
285:1032
(7) Where a property runs street-to-street, the street frontage of the
property which does not include the primary entrance to the
structure shall be treated as a rear yard for fence height purposes.
(8) Fences in the rear or side yard of a nonresidential use within a
residential zoning district, or of any nonresidential use outside of a
residential zoning district but facing or abutting the boundaries of
a residential zoning district, may be erected to a height of seven
feet to screen the nonresidential activities from the view of
abutting residences.
(9) Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude landscaping acting
as a fence from being planted or allowed to grow beyond the height
limits enumerated in § 300-71A(6), (7) and (8).
(10)No fence shall be erected, placed or, in the case of landscaping
acting as a fence, planted or allowed to grow, in a sight triangle as
to materially impede vision between a height of 2 1/2 feet and 10
feet above the center-line grades of the intersecting streets
adjacent to the corner.
(11) Subject to the provisions of the International Building Code, fences
enclosing swimming pools shall be a minimum of four feet in height
and fitted with a self-closing, self-locking gate to prevent
unauthorized or accidental entry or unauthorized use of the
swimming pool. Such fencing may be erected so as to enclose only
the swimming pool, in which case the height of the fence shall be
six feet, the yard in which the pool is located or the entire property.
(12) Except where specifically prohibited under the terms of any other
applicable ordinance or regulations of the City, nothing herein shall
be construed to prohibit the use of hedges, trees or other plantings
anywhere on the lot.
(13) All fences or walls that have a front or finished side and a rear or
unfinished side shall be erected so that the unfinished side shall
face inward toward the property the fence is designed to protect.
(14) Concertina, barbed or razor wire fences are prohibited.
§ 300-71 WATER § 300-71
285:1033
(15) Except for commercially available pet fences wherein the animal is
fitted with a specialized collar to receive electric impulses,
electrified fences are prohibited.
§ 300-71 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-71
285:1034
ARTICLE XIV
Amendments
§ 300-72. Method of amendment.
§ 300-73. Notice.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62.1, notice of the hearing on such amendment,
modification, revision or supplement, exclusive of classification or boundary
changes recommended in a periodic general reexamination of the Master
Plan by the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-89, shall be given
prior to adoption in accordance as follows:
A. This chapter, or any part thereof, may be amended, modified, revised or
supplemented by the governing body in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-62. Such amendment, modification, revision or supplement
shall either be substantially consistent with the Land Use Plan Element
and the Housing Plan Element of the then current municipal Master
Plan or designed to effectuate such plan elements; provided that the
governing body may adopt an amendment, modification, revision or
supplement which, in whole or in part, is inconsistent with or not
designed to effectuate the Land Use Plan Element and the Housing Plan
Element by affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized
membership of the governing body, with the reasons of the governing
body for so acting set forth in a resolution and recorded in its minutes.
B. Prior to the hearing on adoption of any such amendment, modification,
revision or supplement, the governing body shall refer any such
proposal to the Planning Board for review and recommendation.
(1) Within 35 days after such referral, the Planning Board shall make
and transmit to the governing body a report including identification
of any provisions in the proposal which are inconsistent with the
then current Master Plan, recommendations concerning these
inconsistencies and any other matters as the Planning Board deems
appropriate.
(2) Consistent with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26A, the
governing body, when considering the adoption of such
amendment, modification, revision or supplement, shall review the
report of the Planning Board and may disapprove or change any
recommendation by a vote of a majority of its full authorized
membership and shall record in its minutes the reasons for not
following such recommendation.
(3) Failure of the Planning Board to transmit its report within the
thirty-five-day period provided herein shall relieve the governing
body from the requirements of this subsection.
A. Notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the hearing by the City
clerk to the owners of all real property as shown on the current tax
§ 300-72 WATER § 300-73
285:1035
§ 300-74. Objections/protest.
duplicates, located, in the case of a classification change, within the
district and within the State within 200 feet in all directions of the
boundaries of the district, and located, in the case of a boundary
change, in the state within 200 feet in all directions of the proposed
new boundaries of the district which is the subject of the hearing.
B. Notice pursuant to this section shall state the date, time and place of
the hearing, the nature of the matter to be considered and an
identification of the affected zoning districts and proposed boundary
changes, if any, by street names, common names or other identifiable
landmarks, and by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the
current tax duplicate in the municipal tax assessor's office.
C. Notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the property owner
as shown on the said current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the
property, or mailing a copy thereof by certified mail and regular mail to
the property owner at his address as shown on the said current tax
duplicate.
D. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by
appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime,
community trust or homeowners' association, because of its ownership
of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the boundaries
of the district which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in the
same manner as to a corporation, in addition to notice to unit owners,
co-owners, or homeowners on account of such common elements or
areas.
E. The City Clerk shall execute affidavits of proof of service of the notices
required by this section and shall keep the affidavits on file along with
the proof of publication of the notice. Costs of the notice provision shall
be the responsibility of the proponent of the amendment.
A. Objections to any proposed amendment, modification, revision or
supplement may be filed with the City Clerk, signed by the owners of
20% or more of the area either of the lots or land included in such
proposed change or of the lots or land extending 200 feet in all
directions therefrom inclusive of street space, whether within or
without the City.
B. Such amendment or revision shall not become effective following the
filing of such objections except by the favorable vote of 2/3 of all the
members of the governing body.
§ 300-73 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § 300-74
285:1036
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62b, no such amendment, modification,
revision or supplement shall be submitted to or adopted by initiative or
referendum.
§ 300-74 WATER § 300-74
285:1037

ARTICLE XV
Zoning Map
§ 300-75. Base Zoning.
Reference: § 300-18.
Note: Larger scale versions of this map are maintained in the office of the
Zoning Officer.
§ 300-76. Overlay Zoning.
Reference: § 300-18.
Note: Larger scale versions of this map are maintained in the office of the
Zoning Officer.
§ 300-75 WATER § 300-76
285:1039

ARTICLE XVI
Land Use Applications Packages191
§ 300-77. Purpose and intent.
A. In order to assist the public in making any of the various applications
described under this chapter, the Zoning Officer shall prepare and
maintain an Applications Package for dissemination to any interested
party.
B. Such Applications Package shall be, in form and substance,
substantially consistent with the following, and shall be deemed to be a
supplement, and not a substitute for, any of the requirements contained
in § 300-1 through § 300-74.
191. Editor's Note: The Application Package for Land Use Approval is included at the end of
this chapter.
§ 300-77 WATER § 300-77
285:1041
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
27-1998 12-21-1998 Tax abatement NCM
1-1999 2-1-1999 Tax abatement NCM
2-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Pending
3-1999 2-17-1999 Sale of property NCM
4-1999 2-17-1999 Vacation of alley NCM
5-1999 2-17-1999 Acquisition of property NCM
6-1999 2-17-1999 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
7-1999 2-17-1999 Construction
contractors
Ch. 121
8-1999 2-17-1999 Storage of recreational
vehicles and boats
Ch. 281, Art. III
9-1999 2-17-1999 Park and playground
rules and regulations
Ch. 187, Art. II
10-1999 3-1-1999 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
11-1999 3-1-1999 Acquisition of property NCM
12-1999 4-5-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
13-1999 4-19-1999 Bond amendment NCM
14-1999 4-19-1999 Street vacation NCM
15-1999 4-19-1999 Street vacation NCM
16-1999 4-19-1999 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 265
17-1999 4-19-1999 Lease of property NCM
18-1999 5-3-1999 Street vacation NCM
19-1999 5-3-1999 Lease of property NCM
20-1999 5-3-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
21-1999 5-17-1999 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
22-1999 6-7-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Hold
§ 300-77 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1042
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
23-1999 6-7-1999 Street vacation NCM
24-1999 Not adopted
25-1999 6-7-1999 Public Works
Department
Ch. 52
26-1999 6-21-1999 Tax abatement NCM
27-1999 7-7-1999 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 119
28-1999 7-7-1999 Lease of property NCM
29-1999 7-7-1999 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
30-1999 8-2-1999 Bond amendment NCM
31-1999 8-16-1999 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
32-1999 8-16-1999 Lease of property NCM
33-1999 8-16-1999 Property acceptance NCM
34-1999 9-8-1999 Sale of property NCM
35-1999 9-8-1999 Appropriation NCM
36-1999 9-20-1999 Bond amendment NCM
37-1999 11-1-1999 Bond NCM
38-1999 11-1-1999 Bond NCM
39-1999 9-20-1999 Sale of property NCM
40-1999 11-1-1999 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
41-1999 11-1-1999 Sale of property NCM
42-1999 11-1-1999 Park and playground
rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 187, Art. II
43-1999 11-1-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
44-1999 11-1-1999 Trespassing, fishing,
crabbing, etc.
Ch. 191, Art. III
45-1999 11-15-1999 Tax abatement NCM
46-1999 11-15-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
47-1999 12-6-1999 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 30
48-1999 12-20-1999 Tax abatement NCM
49-1999 12-20-1999 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1043
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
50-1999 12-20-1999 Redevelopment plan NCM
51-1999 12-20-1999 Exchange of land NCM
52-1999 12-20-1999 Tax abatement NCM
1-2000 2-7-2000 Exchange of land NCM
2-2000 2-23-2000 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
3-2000 3-6-2000 Cable television
franchise
NCM
4-2000 3-20-2000 Contract for solid waste
removal
NCM
5-2000 4-17-2000 Sale of property NCM
6-2000 4-17-2000 Tax abatement NCM
7-2000 4-17-2000 Dogs amendment;
bicycles amendment;
mercantile licensing
amendment; peddlers
and hawkers
amendment; solicitors
and canvassers
amendment
Chs. 90, Art. I;
95; 155, Art. I;
195, Arts. I and
II
8-2000 5-15-2000 Exchange of land
amendment
NCM
9-2000 5-15-2000 Defense and
indemnification
Ch. 20
10-2000 6-5-2000 Tax abatement NCM
11-2000 6-5-2000 Tax abatement NCM
12-2000 6-5-2000 Alley vacation NCM
13-2000 6-5-2000 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
14-2000 7-3-2000 Alley vacation NCM
15-2000 7-3-2000 Sale of property NCM
16-2000 7-3-2000 Appropriation NCM
17-2000 7-17-2000 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
18-2000 7-17-2000 Sale of property NCM
19-2000 7-17-2000 Tax abatement NCM
20-2000 7-17-2000 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
20A-2000 8-21-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1044
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
21-2000 8-21-2000 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
22-2000 9-6-2000 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
23-2000 9-18-2000 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
24-2000 9-18-2000 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
25-2000 10-2-2000 Cable television
franchise
NCM
26-2000 10-2-2000 Street vacation NCM
27-2000 10-2-2000 Street vacation NCM
28-2000 10-16-2000 Street vacation NCM
29-2000 10-16-2000 Sale of property NCM
30-2000 10-16-2000 Bicycles, skateboards
and scooters: bike paths
and sidewalks
Ch. 95, Art. II
31-2000 10-16-2000 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
32-2000 11-6-2000 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
33-2000 11-6-2000 Sale of property NCM
34-2000 11-20-2000 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
35-2000 11-20-2000 Mercantile licensing
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
36-2000 11-20-2000 Acquisition of land NCM
37-2000 11-20-2000 Sale of property NCM
38-2000 12-4-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
39-2000 12-4-2000 Tax abatement NCM
40-2000 12-18-2000 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
1-2001 2-5-2001 Tax abatement NCM
2-2001 3-19-2001 Street vacation NCM
3-2001 3-19-2001 Tax abatement NCM
4-2001 4-2-2001 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 265
5-2001 4-2-2001 Tax abatement NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1045
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
6-2001 4-16-2001 Abandoned or junked
vehicles
Ch. 276
7-2001 4-16-2001 Construction and repair
of sidewalks
amendment; street
openings amendment
Ch. 255, Arts. I
and II
8-2001 4-16-2001 Plot plans amendment Ch. 199
9-2001 Not adopted
10-2001 5-21-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
11-2001 5-21-2001 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 265
12-2001 6-4-2001 Park and playground
rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 187, Art. II
13-2001 6-4-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
14-2001 6-4-2001 Sale of property NCM
15-2001 6-4-2001 Vacation of alley NCM
16-2001 6-4-2001 Vacation of alley NCM
17-2001 6-18-2001 Parks and playgrounds:
Recreation Center
amendment
Ch. 187, Art. I
18-2001 7-2-2001 Disorderly conduct Ch. 125
19-2001 7-2-2001 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
20-2001 7-16-2001 Bond NCM
21-2001 7-16-2001 Bond NCM
22-2001 7-16-2001 Bond NCM
23-2001 7-2-2001 Street vacation NCM
24-2001 7-2-2001 Vacation of alley NCM
25-2001 7-2-2001 Sale of property NCM
26-2001 7-2-2001 Sale of property NCM
27-2001 7-2-2001 Sale of property NCM
28-2001 7-16-2001 Lease of property NCM
29-2001 7-16-2001 Street vacation NCM
30-2001 8-6-2001 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
31-2001 8-6-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1046
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
32-2001 9-5-2001 Exchange of land NCM
33-2001 Defeated
34-2001 Defeated
35-2001 10-1-2001 Tax abatement NCM
36-2001 10-1-2001 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
37-2001 10-15-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
38-2001 10-15-2001 Dedication of property NCM
39-2001 11-5-2001 Sale of property NCM
40-2001 11-15-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch.278
41-2001 11-5-2001 Dedication of property NCM
42-2001 12-17-2001 Tax abatement NCM
43-2001 12-17-2001 Street vacations NCM
44-2001 Defeated
45-2001 12-17-2001 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
46-2001 Defeated
1-2002 2-20-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
2-2002 2-20-2002 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 265
3-2002 2-20-2002 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
4-2002 2-20-2002 Tax collector fees Ch. 261, Art. II
5-2002 3-18-2002 Sale of property NCM
6-2002 3-18-2002 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 119
7-2002 3-18-2002 Bond NCM
8-2002 3-18-2002 Bond NCM
9-2002 3-18-2002 Bond NCM
10-2002 3-18-2002 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
11-2002 4-15-2002 Sale of property NCM
12-2002 5-6-2002 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1047
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
13-2002 5-6-2002 Business registration Ch. 155, Art. III
14-2002 5-20-2002 Sale of property NCM
15-2002 5-20-2002 Purchase property NCM
16-2002 6-3-2002 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
17-2002 6-17-2002 Parades and other
special events
Ch. 178
18-2002 6-17-2002 Wireless
telecommunications
facilities
Ch. 266
19-2002 7-1-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
20-2002 7-1-2002 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
21-2002 7-1-2002 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
22-2002 7-1-2002 Sale of property NCM
23-2002 8-5-2002 Sale of property NCM
24-2002 8-5-2002 Fees: copies of public
records
Ch. 126, Art. I
25-2002 9-4-2002 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
26-2002 Adoption
pending
Bond NCM
27-2002 9-4-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
28-2002 9-4-2002 Property maintenance:
minimum standards
amendment
Ch. 207, Art. I
29-2002 10-7-2002 Tax abatement NCM
30-2002 10-7-2002 Sale of property
amendment
NCM
31-2002 10-7-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
32-2002 10-7-2002 Uniform fire safety code
amendment
Ch. 135, Art. II
33-2002 10-7-2002 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1048
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
34-2002 10-21-2002 Parking Utility
Enterprise Fund
NCM
35-2002 10-21-2002 Sale of property NCM
36-2002 10-21-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
37-2002 11-18-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
38-2002 11-18-2002 Street vacation NCM
39-2002 12-2-2002 Acquisition of property NCM
40-2002 12-2-2002 Transfer of property NCM
41-2002
42-2002 12-16-2002 Street vacation NCM
1-2003 3-3-2003 Street vacation NCM
2-2003 3-3-2003 Street vacation NCM
3-2003 3-3-2003 Street vacation NCM
4-2003 2-3-2003 Adoption of
redevelopment plan
NCM
5-2003 3-3-2003 Tax abatement NCM
6-2003 3-3-2003 Sale of nonbuildable
properties
NCM
7-2003 4-7-2003 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
8-2003 4-21-2003 Temporary parking
regula- tions
NCM
9-2003 5-5-2003 Street vacation NCM
10-2003 5-5-2003 Tax abatement NCM
11-2003 5-5-2003 Zoning and land use
amendment
NCM
12-2003 5-19-2003 Lease of property NCM
13-2003 5-19-2003 Acceptance of gift of
property
NCM
14-2003 6-2-2003 Solid waste amendment Ch. 247
15-2003 6-2-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
16-2003 6-2-2003 Redevelopment plan NCM
17-2003 6-16-2003 Contract for trash and
recycling collection
NCM
18-2003 7-7-2003 Tax abatement NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1049
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
19-2003 7-7-2003 Uniform Fire Safety
Code amendment
Ch. 135, Art. II
20-2003 7-7-2003 Appropriation
amendment
NCM
21-2003 7-7-2003 Bond amendment NCM
22-2003 7-21-2003 Alley vacation NCM
23-2003 7-21-2003 Alley vacation NCM
24-2003 7-21-2003 Parades and other
special events
amendment
Ch. 178
25-2003 8-4-2003 Towing Ch. 269
26-2003 8-18-2003 Urban Enterprise Zone
Corporation: Board of
Trustees amendment
Ch. 65, Art. I
27-2003 9-3-2003 Alley vacation NCM
28-2003 9-3-2003 Bond NCM
29-2003 9-3-2003 Residency requirements
amendment
Ch. 41, Art. I
30-2003 9-3-2003 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
31-2003 9-15-2003 Purchase of property NCM
32-2003 9-15-2003 Transfer of property NCM
33-2003 10-20-2003 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 30
34-2003 10-20-2003 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
35-2003 10-20-2003 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
36-2003 11-17-2003 Five-year exemption and
abatement amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I,
Editor's Note
only
37-2003 11-17-2003 Fire Department
amendment
Ch. 30
38-2003 12-1-2003 Bond NCM
39-2003 12-1-2003 Solid waste amendment Ch. 247
1-2004 2-18-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
2-2004 2-18-2004 Alley vacation NCM
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1050
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
3-2004 2-18-2004 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
4-2004 4-5-2004 Boats and harbors
repealer
Ch. 99,
reference only
5-2004 4-19-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
6-2004 4-19-2004 Offering property for
sale
NCM
7-2004 5-3-2004 Hotel and motel
occupancy tax
Ch. 261, Art. III
8-2004 5-3-2004 Street vacation NCM
9-2004 5-17-2004 Tax abatement NCM
10-2004 5-17-2004 Tax abatement NCM
11-2004 5-17-2004 Lease of property NCM
12-2004 6-21-2004 Tax abatement NCM
13-2004 6-21-2004 Offering property for
sale
NCM
14-2004 6-21-2004 Alley vacation NCM
15-2004 6-21-2004 Solid waste amendment Ch. 247
16-2004 7-7-2004 Copies of public records
amendment
Ch. 126, Art. I
17-2004 7-19-2004 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 265
18-2004 8-2-2004 Street vacation NCM
19-2004 8-16-2004 Streets and sidewalks:
obstructions amendment
Ch. 255, Art. III
20-2004 9-8-2004 Sale of property NCM
21-2004 9-8-2004 Right-of-way vacation NCM
22-2004 9-8-2004 Residency requirements
amendment
Ch. 41, Art. I
23-2004 9-8-2004 Bond NCM
24-2004 9-20-2004 Sale of property NCM
25-2004 9-20-2004 Street vacation NCM
26-2004 10-18-2004 Sale of property NCM
27-2004 10-18-2004 Street vacation NCM
28-2004 10-18-2004 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
29-2004 12-6-2004 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1051
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
30-2004 12-6-2004 Salaries NCM
1-2005 2-7-2005 Salaries NCM
2-2005 2-7-2005 Personnel Officer Ch. 43
3-2005 2-7-2005 Acquisition of land NCM
4-2005 2-23-2005 Rehabilitation Plan for
the Woodland Terrace -
New Hope Community
NCM
5-2005 3-21-2005 Bond NCM
6-2005 3-7-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
7-2005 3-7-2005 Property acceptance NCM
8-2005 3-21-2005 Recreation Center
amendment
Ch. 187, Art. I
9-2005 3-21-2005 Exceed budget limit and
CAP bank
NCM
10-2005 4-4-2005 Solid waste amendment Ch. 247
11-2005 4-4-2005 Property maintenance:
minimum standards
amendment
Ch. 207, Art. I
12-2005 4-18-2005 Purchase of property NCM
13-2005 6-6-2005 Salaries NCM
14-2005 6-6-2005 Solid waste amendment Ch. 247
15-2005 7-6-2005 Purchase of property NCM
16-2005 7-18-2005 Salaries NCM
17-2005 7-18-2005 Lease of property to
county
NCM
18-2005 8-1-2005 Bond NCM
19-2005 8-15-2005 Street vacation NCM
20-2005 8-15-2005 Street name change:
Manery Avenue to
Mallard Place
NCM
21-2005 10-3-2005 Sex offender residency
prohibition
Repealed by
Ord. No.
20-2009
22-2005 9-7-2005 Land acceptance NCM
23-2005 9-7-2005 Street vacation NCM
24-2005 10-3-2005 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
See Ch. 4
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1052
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
25-2005 NCM
26-2005 11-7-2005 Bond NCM
27-2005 10-17-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
28-2005 11-7-2005 Salaries NCM
29-2005 11-7-2005 Bond NCM
30-2005 11-7-2005 Bond NCM
31-2005 11-21-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
32-2005 11-21-2005 Sale of property NCM
33-2005 11-21-2005 Pet waste Ch. 90, Art. IV
34-2005 11-21-2005 Feeding of wildlife
amendment
Ch. 90, Art. III
35-1005 11-21-2005 Sewers: illicit
connections
Ch. 235, Part 3,
Art. V
36-2005 11-21-2005 Sewers: disposal of
materials
Ch. 235, Part 3,
Art. VI
37-2005 11-21-2005 Leasing of land NCM
38-2005 NCM
39-2005 12-19-2005 Sewers amendment Ch. 235
40-2005 NCM
41-2005 12-19-2005 Fire prevention
amendment
Ch. 135, Art. II
1-2006 2-6-2006 Sale of property NCM
2-2006 2-22-2006 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
3-2006 NCM
4-2006 3-20-2006 Exceed budget limit and
CAP bank
NCM
5-2006 3-20-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
6-2006 4-3-2006 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
7-2006 4-3-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
8-2006 Bond NCM
9-2006 NCM
10-2006 4-17-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1053
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
11-2006 5-15-2006 Redevelopment plan NCM
12-2006 Salaries and wages of
officials and employees
NCM
13-2006 5-1-2006 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
14-2006 5-15-2006 Sale of property NCM
15-2006 5-25-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
16-2006 5-25-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
17-2006 5-25-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
18-2006 6-19-2006 Sale of property NCM
19-2006 6-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
20-2006 6-19-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
21-2006 7-5-2006 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 265
22-2006 7-5-2006 Bond NCM
23-2006 7-5-2006 Salary and wages of
officials and employees
NCM
24-2006 NCM
25-2006 7-5-2006 Stormwater
management: major
development
Ch. 251, Art. II
26-2006 7-17-2006 Departments, divisions,
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
27-2006 7-27-2006 Redevelopment plan NCM
28-2006 8-21-2006 Departments, divisions,
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
29-2006 8-21-2006 Sale of property NCM
30-2006 8-21-2006 Vacation of alley Repealed by
Ord. No.
34-2006
31-2006 9-6-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
32-2006 9-18-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
33-2006 9-18-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
34-2006 9-18-2006 Repeal of Ord. No.
30-2006
NCM
35-2006 9-18-2006 Redevelopment plan NCM
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1054
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
36-2006 10-2-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
37-2006 10-2-2006 Recreation Center
amendment; park and
playgrounds rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. 187, Arts. I
and II
38-2006 10-16-2006 Sewers and sewage
disposal: sewer services
amendment
Ch. 235, Part 1
39-2006 10-16-2006 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 265
40-2006 11-6-2006 Departments, divisions,
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
41-2006 11-6-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
42-2006 11-6-2006 Leasing of land to
county
NCM
43-2006 11-20-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
44-2006 11-20-2006 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
45-2006 11-20-2006 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 265
46-2006 11-20-2006 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
47-2006 11-20-2006 Salaries amendment NCM
48-2006 11-20-2006 Sale of property Repealed by
Ord. No.
52-2006
49-2006 11-20-2006 Acquisition of property NCM
50-2006 12-18-2006 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
51-2006 12-18-2006 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
52-2006 12-18-2006 Repeal of Ord. No.
48-2006
NCM
53-2006 12-18-2006 Sale of property NCM
1-2007 2-5-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
2-2007 2-5-2007 Salaries amendment See Ch. 61
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1055
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
3-2007 2-5-2007 Real property tax
exemption
NCM
4-2007 3-5-2007 Redevelopment
agreement
NCM
5-2007 3-5-2007 Tax abatement NCM
6-2007 2-21-2007 Sale of property NCM
7-2007 2-21-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
8-2007 2-21-2007 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
9-2007 2-21-2007 Rental housing Ch. 208
10-2007 3-5-2007 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
11-2007 3-5-2007 Redevelopment plan NCM
12-2007 3-5-2007 Redevelopment plan NCM
13-2007 4-2-2007 Ambulance service
amendment
Ch. 9
14-2007 4-2-2007 Sewer services
amendment
Ch. 235, Part 1
15-2007 4-2-2007 Alley vacation NCM
16-2007 4-2-2007 Exceed budget limit; cap
bank
NCM
17-2007 4-2-2007 Tax abatement NCM
18-2007 4-16-2007 Street vacation NCM
19-2007 4-16-2007 Fees: copies of
government records
amendment
Ch. 126, Art. I
20-2007 4-16-2007 Bond NCM
21-2007 4-30-2007 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
22-2007 Tabled
23-2007 4-30-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
24-2007 Not adopted
25-2007 6-4-2007 Street naming: Peterson
Way and Benjamin Court
NCM
26-2007 6-4-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
27-2007 6-18-2007 Street vacation NCM
28-2007 6-18-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1056
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
29-2007 7-2-2007 Adopting redevelopment
plan; Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
30-2007 7-30-2007 Redevelopment
agreement with ACFD
Development, LLC
NCM
31-2007 7-30-2007 Tax abatement
agreement with ACFD
Development, LLC
NCM
32-2007 8-20-2007 Lease of parking spaces NCM
33-2007 10-15-2007 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
34-2007 11-5-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
35-2007 11-5-2007 Exchange of land with G
and M Associates
NCM
36-2007 11-5-2007 Acquisition of property NCM
37-2007 11-5-2007 Exchange of land with
HKG Development, Inc.
NCM
38-2007 11-5-2007 Sale of land NCM
39-2007 11-19-2007 Alcoholic beverages:
underage possession or
consumption on private
property
Ch. 84, Art. III
40-2007 12-3-2007 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
41-2007 12-3-2007 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
42-2007 12-17-2007 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
1-2008 2-20-2008 Alley vacation NCM
2-2008 2-20-2008 Alley vacation NCM
3-2008 3-17-2008 Tax abatement
agreement with 560
Leeds Avenue, LLC
NCM
4-2008 4-7-2008 Exceed; cap bank NCM
5-2008 4-7-2008 Zoning Map amendment NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1057
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
6-2008 4-7-2008 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
7-2008 4-7-2008 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
8-2008 4-7-2008 Lease extension for 18
W. Washington Avenue
NCM
9-2008 4-21-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
10-2008 5-5-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
11-2008 5-5-2008 Alley vacation NCM
12-2008 6-2-2008 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 265
13-2008 6-16-2008 Rental housing
amendment
Ch. 208
14-2008 7-7-2008 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
15-2008 6-30-2008 Redevelopment plan NCM
16-2008 7-7-2008 Tax abatement
agreement with Zell
Enterprises, LLC
NCM
17-2008 7-21-2008 Tax abatement
agreement with Rose
3162, LLC
NCM
18-2008 7-21-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
19-2008 Not adopted
20-2008 8-4-2008 Alley vacation NCM
21-2008 8-18-2008 Property acceptance NCM
22-2008 9-3-2008 Sale of property NCM
23-2008 8-18-2008 Easement NCM
24-2008 10-6-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
25-2008 10-20-2008 Bond NCM
26-2008 10-20-2008 Bond NCM
27-2008 10-20-2008 Acquisition of property NCM
28-2008 10-20-2008 Tax collection fees
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. II
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1058
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
29-2008 11-17-2008 Park and playground
rules and regulations
amendment
Ch. 187, Art. II
30-2008 12-15-2008 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
31-2008 12-15-2008 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
1-2009 2-18-2009 Towing amendment Ch. 269
2-2009 2-18-2009 Tax exemption for
specific property
NCM
3-2009 2-18-2009 Alley vacation NCM
4-2009 2-18-2009 Property vacation NCM
5-2009 2-18-2009 Sale of property NCM
6-2009 4-6-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
7-2009 Replaced by
resolution
8-2009 4-20-2009 Uniform construction
codes amendment
Ch. 119
9-2009 4-20-2009 Housing standards
amendment; rental
housing amendment
Chs. 143; 208
10-2009 4-20-2009 Ambulance service
amendment
Ch. 9
11-2009 4-20-2009 Tax abatement
agreement with
Pleasantville Business
Center, LLC
NCM
12-2009 4-20-2009 Tax exemption for
specific property
NCM
13-2009 4-20-2009 Exceed municipal
budget; establish cap
bank
NCM
14-2009 4-20-2009 Easement NCM
15-2009 5-4-2009 Sale of property NCM
16-2009 Zoning amendment Withdrawn
17-2009 5-18-2009 Zoning and land use
amendment
Ch. 290
18-2009 6-1-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1059
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
19-2009 6-1-2009 Street vacation NCM
20-2009 6-1-2009 Sex offender residency
prohibition repealer
Ch. 236,
reference only
21-2009 7-6-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
22-2009 Pulled
23-2009 Pulled
24-2009 8-3-2009 Appropriation NCM
25-2009 8-17-2009 Sale of property NCM
26-2009 8-17-2009 Sale of property NCM
27-2009 9-9-2009 Street vacation NCM
28-2009 9-9-2009 Alley vacation NCM
29-2009 9-9-2009 Tax abatement
agreement with Coastal
Investment
NCM
30-2009 10-5-2009 Noise amendment Ch. 171
31-2009 Pulled
32-2009 10-5-2009 Transfer of property NCM
33-2009 10-5-2009 Street vacation NCM
34-2009 Pulled
35-2009 Pulled
36-2009 Defeated
37-2009 11-2-2009 Alley vacation NCM
38-2009 11-2-2009 Taxation: five-year
exemption and
abatement amendment
Ch. 261, Art. I
39-2009 11-2-2009 Sewer services
amendment
Ch. 235, Part 1
40-2009 11-2-2009 Redevelopment
agreement with V.F.V.
Properties
NCM
41-2009 11-16-2009 Bond NCM
42-2009 11-16-2009 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
43-2009 11-16-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
44-2009 11-16-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
45-2009 11-16-2009 Alley vacation NCM
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1060
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
46-2009 11-16-2009 Acceptance of easement NCM
47-2009 11-16-2009 Dedication of sidewalk
right-of-way
NCM
48-2009 12-7-2009 Acquisition of property NCM
49-2009 12-7-2009 Sewer service rates and
charges amendment
Ch. 235, Art. II
1-2010 1-20-2010 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 265
2-2010 2-17-2010 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
3-2010 2-17-2010 Property vacation NCM
4-2010 2-17-2010 Salaries and
compensation
See Ch. 61
5-2010 3-15-2010 Bond NCM
6-2010 3-15-2010 Acquisition of property NCM
7-2010 5-3-2010 Bond NCM
8-2010 5-3-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
9-2010 6-7-2010 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
10-2010 7-7-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
11-2010 8-2-2010 Adoption of amended
redevelopment plan
NCM
12-2010 9-8-2010 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
13-2010 10-4-2010 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
14-2010 10-18-2010 Peace and good order:
trespassing, fishing,
crabbing, etc.
amendment
Ch. 191, Art. III
15-2010 11-15-2010 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
16-2010 12-6-2010 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
17-2010 12-6-2010 Reappropriation NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1061
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
18-2010 12-6-2010 Redevelopment Plan for
Expanded City Center
Area amendment
NCM
19-2010 12-20-2010 Redevelopment Plan for
Bock 189 Rehabilitation
Area
NCM
1-2011 2-7-2011 Departments, divisions,
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
2-2011 2-7-2011 Solid waste amendment Ch. 247
3-2011 2-7-2011 Taxation: collection fees
amendment
Ch. 261, Art. II
4-2011 Not adopted
5-2011 4-4-2011 Alley vacation NCM
6-2011 4-4-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
7-2011 4-18-2011 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
8-2011 5-2-2011 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
9-2011 6-6-2011 Acquisition of property NCM
10-2011 6-20-2011 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
11-2011 6-20-2011 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
12-2011 7-6-2011 Redevelopment plan
amendment
NCM
13-2011 8-1-2011 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
14-2011 8-1-2011 Stormwater
management: private
storm drain inlet
retrofitting; refuse
containers and
dumpsters
Ch. 251, Arts.
III and IV
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1062
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
15-2011 8-1-2011 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
16-2011 10-3-2011 Alley vacation NCM
17-2011 10-3-2011 Bond NCM
18-2011 10-3-2011 Bond NCM
19-2011 10-17-2011 Tax abatement
agreement
NCM
20-2011 11-7-2011 Tax abatement
agreement
NCM
21-2011 11-7-2011 Property vacation NCM
22-2011 11-7-2011 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
23-2011 11-21-2011 Alley and right-of-way
vacation
NCM
24-2011 11-21-2011 Easement NCM
25-2011 Tabled
26-2011 11-21-2011 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
1-2012 2-22-2012 Bond NCM
2-2012 2-22-2012 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
3-2012 2-22-2012 Conveyance of easement NCM
4-2012 4-2-2012 Court, Municipal: Public
Defender services
Ch. 19, Art. I
5-2012 4-2-2012 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
6-2012 Not adopted
7-2012 7-2-2012 Bond NCM
8-2012 Not adopted
9-2012 7-16-2012 Land management Ch. 300
10-2012 7-16-2012 Tax abatement for
California Avenue Tract
NCM
1-2013 2-20-2013 Uniform Fire Safety
Code amendment
Ch. 135, Art. II
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1063
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
2-2013 2-20-2013 Floodplain management
amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No. 4-2013
3-2013 4-1-2013 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
4-2013 5-6-2013 Floodplain management Repealed by
Ord. No.
20-2015
5-2013 5-28-2013 Redevelopment Plan
amendment
NCM
6-2013 5-28-2013 Payment in lieu of taxes NCM
7-2013 8-5-2013 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing and control
amendment
Ch. 84, Art. I
8-2013 10-7-2013 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
9-2013 10-21-2013 Bond NCM
10-2013 12-2-2013 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
1-2014 2-19-2014 Renewal of municipal
consent (Comcast)
NCM
2-2014 3-17-2014 Grant of consent (South
Jersey Gas Company)
NCM
3-2014 4-7-2014 Appropriation NCM
4-2014 4-7-2014 Appropriation NCM
5-2014 4-21-2014 Bond NCM
6-2014 4-21-2014 Bond NCM
7-2014 4-21-2014 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
8-2014 4-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
9-2014 5-5-2014 Towing amendment Ch. 269
10-2014 5-5-2014 Parks and playgrounds:
smoking
Ch. 187, Art. III
11-2014 5-5-2014 Mercantile licensing
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
12-2014 5-19-2014 Taxation: exemption for
single-family residential
structures
Ch. 261, Art. IV
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1064
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
13-2014 7-7-2014 Bond NCM
14-2014 7-7-2014 Towing amendment Ch. 269
15-2014 7-7-2014 Abandoned or junked
vehicles amendment
Ch. 276
16-2014 7-7-2014 Business Enterprise Set-
Aside Program, Veteran
Ch. 13
17-2014 9-3-2014 Bond NCM
18-2014 9-3-2014 Land management
amendment
Ch. 300
19-2014 10-6-2014 Acceptance of land NCM
20-2014 10-6-2014 Authorization for use of
municipal property
NCM
21-2014 10-20-2014 Bond NCM
22-2014 10-20-2014 Registration and
maintenance of
abandoned residential
property
Repealed by
Ord. No.
16-2015
23-2014 10-20-2014 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
24-2014 10-20-2014 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
25-2014 12-1-2014 Curfew repealer Ch. 123,
reference only
26-2014 12-1-2014 Mercantile licensing
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
27-2014 12-1-2014 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 265
28-2014 12-15-2014 Secondhand goods,
precious metals and
gems
Ch. 231
29-2014 12-15-2014 Mercantile licensing
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. I
1-2015 2-18-2015 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
2-2015 2-18-2015 Solid waste amendment Ch. 247
3-2015 3-16-2015 Easement NCM
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1065
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
4-2015 3-16-2015 Secondhand goods,
precious metals and
gems amendment
Ch. 231
5-2015 3-16-2015 Exceed budget; cap
bank
NCM
6-2015 4-6-2015 Cancelation of
appropriation
NCM
7-2015 4-6-2015 Appropriation NCM
8-2015 4-20-2015 Tax agreement NCM
9-2015 5-18-2015 Bond NCM
10-2015 5-18-2015 Bond NCM
11-2015 8-3-2015 Land management
amendment
Ch. 300
12-2015 8-3-2015 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
13-2015 8-3-2015 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
14-2015 Failed
15-2015 10-5-2015 Economic Development,
Tourism and Special
Events Advisory
Committee
Ch. 22
16-2015 10-19-2015 Abandoned and vacant
property
Ch. 205
17-2015 10-19-2015 Departments, divisions
and positions in the City
of Pleasantville
amendment
See Ch. 4
18-2015 10-19-2015 Salaries and
compensation
amendment
See Ch. 61
19-2015 11-2-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 278
20-2015 11-16-2015 Floodplain management Ch. 139
21-2015 11-16-2015 Officers and employees:
residency requirements
amendment
Ch. 41, Art. I
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1066
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
22-2015 12-7-2015 Rental housing
amendment
Ch. 208
1-2016 2-17-2016 Police Department
amendment
Ch. 48
2-2016 2-17-2016 Fees: copies of public
records amendment
Ch. 126, Art. I
3-2016 2-17-2016 Sewer user charges
amendment
Ch. 235, Part 2
4-2016 3-7-2016 Construction Codes,
Uniform Amendment
Ch. 119
5-2016 4-4-2016 Departments, Divisions
and Positions in the City
of Pleasantville
Amendment
See Ch. 4
6-2016 4-4-2016 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
7-2016 5-16-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 278
8-2016 6-20-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 278
9-2016 8-1-2016 Animals: Dogs
Amendment
Ch. 90, Art. I
10-2016 8-1-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 278
11-2016 8-15-2016 Departments, Divisions
and Positions in the City
of Pleasantville
Amendment
See Ch. 4
12-2016 10-3-2016 Departments, Divisions
and Positions in the City
of Pleasantville
Amendment
See Ch. 4
13-2016 10-3-2016 Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM
14-2016 10-3-2016 Property Acceptance NCM
15-2016 10-3-2016 Property Acceptance NCM
16-2016 10-17-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 278
17-2016 10-17-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 278
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1067
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
18-2016 10-17-2016 Land Management
Amendment
Ch. 300
19-2016 10-17-2016 Salaries and
Compensation
See Ch. 61
20-2016 10-17-2016 Property Acceptance NCM
21-2016 11-21-2016 Tax Abatement NCM
22-2016 12-19-2016 Street Vacation NCM
1-2017 2-22-2017 Bond NCM
2-2017 4-3-2017 Property Maintenance:
Minimum Standards
Amendment
Ch. 207, Art. I
3-2017 4-3-2017 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
4-2017 4-3-2017 Lease of Property NCM
5-2017 5-1-2017 Departments, Divisions
and Positions in the City
of Pleasantville
Amendment
See Ch. 4
6-2017 5-1-2017 Bond NCM
7-2017 5-1-2017 Street Vacation
Amendment
NCM
8-2017 6-5-2017 Land Management
Amendment
Ch. 300
9-2017 6-19-2017 Fees: Marriage and Civil
Union Ceremony Fees
Ch. 126, Art. II
10-2017 7-17-2017 Bond NCM
11-2017 7-17-2017 Bond NCM
12-2017 8-21-2017 Departments, Divisions
and Positions in the City
of Pleasantville
Amendment
See Ch. 4
13-2017 8-21-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 278
14-2017 9-6-2017 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Sewer
Services Amendment
Ch. 235, Pt. 1
15-2017 10-16-2017 Construction Codes,
Uniform Amendment
Ch. 119
16-2017 11-6-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 278
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1068
Enactment Adoption Date Subject Disposition
17-2017 11-6-2017 Property Maintenance:
Minimum Standards
Amendment
Ch. 207, Art. I
18-2017 11-6-2017 Fees: Copies of
Government Records
Amendment
Ch. 126, Art. I
19-2017 11-27-2017 Emergency
Appropriation
NCM
20-2017 11-20-2017 Streets and Sidewalks:
Street Openings
Amendment
Ch. 255, Art. II
1-2018 2-5-2018 Central Business
District: Hours of
Operation
Ch. 117, Art. I
2-2018 3-19-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment; Land
Management
Amendment
Ch. 278; Ch.
300
3-2018 4-2-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM
4-2018 4-16-2018 Redevelopment Plan NCM
5-2018 6-4-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 278
6-2018 6-18-2018 Bond NCM
7-2018 6-18-2018 Land Management
Amendment
Ch. 300
8-2018 6-18-2018 Departments, Divisions
and Positions
See Ch. 4
9-2018 6-18-2018 Police Department
Amendment
Ch. 48
10-2018 6-18-2018 Salaries and
Compensation
See Ch. 61
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1-2019 3-18-2019 Officers and
Employees:
Residency
Requirements
Amendment
Ch. 41, Art.
I
61
2-2019 3-18-2019 Bond NCM 61
§ DL-1 WATER § DL-1
285:1069
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
3-2019 4-1-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 61
4-2019 4-1-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 61
5-2019 4-1-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 61
6-2019 4-15-2019 Appropriation NCM 61
7-2019 7-15-2019 Salaries and
Compensation
See Ch. 61 61
8-2019 Not adopted 61
9-2019 Not adopted 61
10-2019 8-19-2019 Bond NCM 61
11-2019 10-7-2019 Bond NCM 61
12-2019 10-7-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 278 61
13-2019 10-21-2019 Redevelopment Plan NCM 61
§ DL-1 PLEASANTVILLE CODE § DL-1
285:1070