Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 12-19-1995 as Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the City of Paterson of a
general and permanent nature adopted by the City Council of the City of
Paterson, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections
by General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through
483, together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained
and enacted as the "Code of the City of Paterson," hereinafter known and
referred to as the "Code," and may be abbreviated "TCOP."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent
ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such
ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in
force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Paterson
by impressing thereon the Seal of the City, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the City, to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the City of Paterson" shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Paterson, pursuant to law, shall cause to be
published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code
shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public
at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of
this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of the Code for
inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due
and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the City Council,
which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the periodic
supplementation thereof.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City
of Paterson to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one (1)
or more of the following: a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.), or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a period of
community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, in the discretion of the
Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 PATERSON CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Repeal of ordinances.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
Adopting Ordinance, except as hereinafter saved from repeal. In addition,
the 1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson, adopted December 18,
1979 by Ord. No. 79-111, also known as the "RGOP," is hereby specifically
repealed.
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty forfeiture incurred
or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this Article.
B. Any prosecution, action, suit or other proceeding pending or any
judgment rendered on or prior to the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this Article.
C. Any right of franchise conferred by the governing body of the City.
D. Any right, public right, right-of-way or easement acquired, established,
vacated, released or extinguished in, upon, under or over any street,
avenue, road, highway, park or other public place within the City or any
portion thereof.
E. Any ordinance providing for, designating, laying out, establishing,
opening, altering, widening, extending, relocating, straightening,
establishing grade, naming or changing name, improvement,
acceptance, dedication, releasing the dedication or vacation of any
street, avenue, road, highway, park or other public place within the City
or any portion thereof.
F. Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of
money by or for the City or authorizing the issuing of bonds and notes of
the City or other evidence of the City's indebtedness.
G. The annual budget appropriation ordinance or resolution and all
ordinances and resolutions appropriating money or transferring funds.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
H. Any ordinance acquiring or authorizing acquisition of lands or premises
or easements or rights-of-way for municipal or public use.
I. Any ordinance authorizing or providing for the sale, lease or exchange
of lands or premises owned by the City.
J. Any ordinance providing for or authorizing municipal, public, general
or local improvements.
K. Any ordinance or resolution prescribing the form of contract or
contracts or authorizing the City to enter into, execute or assume a
contract or contracts.
L. Any ordinance or resolution authorizing the foreclosure of tax liens or
certificates held by the City.
M. Any ordinance providing for the payment of a pension.
N. Any provision of any ordinance adopted by the former Board of Health
of the City and which is not in conflict or inconsistent with the
provisions of the Code of the City of Paterson, New Jersey.
O. Any provision of any ordinance in force and effect on October 24, 1995,
fixing the amount of compensation or salaries of the City's officials and
officers and employees or the pay and compensation of positions and
clerical employments or the salary ranges with respect thereto or other
benefits payable in addition to monetary compensation or salary.
P. Any provision of any ordinance in force and effect on October 24, 1995,
creating employments or positions or offices and fixing duties therefor
which are not provided for in the Code of the City of Paterson and which
is not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of the Code of the
City of Paterson.
Q. Any ordinance in force and effect on October 24, 1995, creating and
establishing offices or employments or positions within the classified
service of the Civil Service under Title 11A, entitled "Civil Service," of
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey or which are held by any officer or
employee of the City protected by any other tenure of office law, and
their respective tenure and pension rights in force and effect on
October 24, 1995.
R. Any ordinance or resolution of the City in force and effect regulating,
limiting, prohibiting or otherwise governing traffic and parking of
vehicles in or upon the public streets, avenues, roads, highways, alleys,
memorial areas, public squares or other public places or authorized
semipublic or private areas; or providing for the purchase, installation,
operation, maintenance, supervision, regulation, control and use of
traffic signals and parking meters and the establishment of parking
meter zones upon any public streets or City parking lots, together with
the establishment of parking fees connected therewith; or designating
speed limits on certain streets; or designating through streets and stop
§ 1-13 PATERSON CODE § 1-13
1:6
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
intersections or any other ordinances or resolutions regulating traffic
and parking.
S. Any provision of any ordinance in force and effect on October 24, 1995,
adopting or approving urban renewal plans or projects or establishing
or approving the name or location of urban renewal projects or
authorizing the application for funds in connection therewith.
T. Any ordinance or resolution prescribing and establishing rules and
regulations for the government and discipline of the Police Division in
the Department of Public Safety.
U. Any ordinance or resolution prescribing and establishing rules and
regulations for the government and discipline of the Fire Division in the
Department of Public Safety.
V. Any ordinance pertaining to fire prevention and not inconsistent with
the State Uniform Construction Code.
W. Any ordinance in force and effect on October 24, 1995, providing for the
division of the City into wards or election districts or providing for a
change of lines and boundaries of wards or election districts or for an
increase or decrease in the number thereof.
X. Any Zoning Ordinance or Zoning Map, and any amendments thereto, in
force and effect on October 24, 1995.
Y. An ordinance, passed July 22, 1959, amending an ordinance entitled
"An Ordinance For the Regulation of Public Parks of the City of
Paterson."
Z. An ordinance entitled "An Ordinance To Ascertain and Establish the
Water Lines of the Passaic River In the City of Paterson," passed April 7,
1879.
AA. An ordinance entitled "An Ordinance Concerning Buses," passed April
13, 1920, and the amendments thereof and supplements thereto.
BB. An ordinance in force and effect on October 24, 1995, regulating or
otherwise governing buses or their drivers, including, but not by way of
limitation, establishing or changing bus routes and bus stops.
CC. The ordinances ascertaining and establishing the water lines of the
Passaic River in the City, passed April 21, 1914, and April 8, 1924.
DD. Any ordinance adopted on final passage on or after October 24, 1995.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one (1) or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the City Council that all such changes
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the following changes, amendments or revisions are made
herewith, to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance.
(Chapter and section number references are to the ordinances as they
have been renumbered and appear in the Code):1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, Articles or sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout this Code
by a footnote referring to "Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I." During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments or additions will be replaced with
"Amended [or Added, as appropriate] 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068." A complete
description of the changes made by § 1-14B of Ord. No. 95-068 are on file in the Borough
Clerk's office.
§ 1-14 PATERSON CODE § 1-14
1:8
ARTICLE II
Terminology; Seal; Penalties
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 1 of the 1979
Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 1-15. General rules of construction.2
In the construction of the Code of the City of Paterson and of all other
ordinances of the City, words and phrases shall be read and construed with
their context and shall, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
Council or unless another or different meaning is expressly indicated, be
given their general accepted meaning according to the approved usage of
the language. Technical words and phrases and words and phrases having
a special or accepted meaning in the law shall be construed in accordance
with such technical or special and accepted meaning.
§ 1-16. Definitions and word usage.
A. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly provided or unless there is
something in the subject or context repugnant to such construction or
unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Council, the
following words and phrases, when used in the Code of the City of
Paterson or in any other ordinances of the City, shall have the meanings
herein given:
CHARTER — The provisions of the Optional Municipal Charter Law, P.L.
1950, c. 210, as amended (N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.), applicable to that
form of government provided therein known as "Mayor-Council Plan D."
CITY — The City of Paterson in the County of Passaic.
COUNCIL — The Municipal Council of the City of Paterson.
COUNTY — The County of Passaic.
GENERAL LAW — Any law or provision of law, not inconsistent with
the Optional Municipal Charter Law heretofore or hereafter enacted,
which is by its terms applicable or available to all municipalities, and
the following additional laws whether or not such additional laws are
so applicable or available to all municipalities: legislation relating to
taxation, local courts, education, health, public authorities serving
more than one (1) municipality and municipalities in unsound financial
condition.
GOVERNING BODY — The Municipal Council of the City of Paterson,
duly elected as provided by law, or such other duly authorized body as
shall be charged by law with governing the City.
MINOR — A person under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1-1, What constitutes "Revised General Ordinances";
designation, which immediately preceded this section, was deleted at time of adoption of
Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:9
MONTH — A calendar month.
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL — See "governing body."
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Paterson.
NEW JERSEY ADMINISTRATIVE CODE OR N.J.A.C. — The official
instrument of the state for codification of its rules.
NEW JERSEY STATUTES OR N.J.S. OR N.J.S.A. — That body of statutory
law containing revisions of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and
known as the "New Jersey Statutes," as amended and
supplemented.[Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
OATH — Includes "affirmation"; and "swear" and "sworn" include
"affirm" and "affirmed."
OCCUPANT — See "tenant."
OR — See "and; or" in Subsection B(1) of this section.
OWNER — Includes sole owner and any part owner, joint owner, tenant
in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety
of the whole or of a part of a building or land and personal property.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, societies, firms,
partnerships, associations, organizations and any other group or entity
acting as a unit, as well as an individual.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes goods and chattels, rights and
credits, moneys and effects, evidences of debt, choses in action and
all written instruments by which any right to, interest in or lien or
encumbrance upon property or any debt or financial obligation is
created, acknowledged, evidenced, transferred, discharged or
defeated, in whole or in part, and every thing, except real property, as
herein defined, which may be the subject of ownership.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUND, PUBLIC SQUARE OR PUBLIC PLACE SEVERALLY
— Any and every public ground, public square, public park or other
public place within the City which is within the jurisdiction and control
of the City and which is or may be in general use by all citizens and in
which all have an equal right of passage and repassage at will.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments, all
rights thereto and interests therein.
REVISED GENERAL ORDINANCES or RGO; REVISED ORDINANCES
or RO — The Revised General Ordinances of the City of Paterson, New
Jersey, adopted in 1968, recodified in 1979 and recodified again in 1995
as the Code of the City of Paterson, referred to herein as the "Code."3
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
The definition of "Revised Statutes or R.S.," which immediately followed this definition,
was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch.1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 1-16 PATERSON CODE § 1-16
1:10
§ 1-17. Effect of repeal of certain ordinances.
Whenever an ordinance that repeals an earlier ordinance or part thereof is
itself repealed, such repeal shall not revive the former ordinance or part
thereof, unless specific provision is made therefor.
§ 1-18. Official City Seal.
The Seal heretofore provided and used by and for the City as its Official Seal
is hereby established and continued as the Official Seal of the City.
§ 1-19. Violations and penalties.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street or highway between the curbline
or the lateral line of a shoulder, or, if none, the lateral line of the
roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
STREET — Includes highways, roads, avenues, boulevards, courts,
public lanes, alleys, sidewalks, footpaths and all other public highways
for vehicular or pedestrian travel.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — As applied to a building or land, includes
any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land,
whether alone or with others.
WEEK — Seven (7) days.
WRITING — Except as to signatures, "writing" and "written" include
printing and any other mode of representing words, letters and figures.
YEAR — A calendar year.4
B. Word usage.
(1) And; or. "And" may be construed as meaning "or," and "or" as "and,"
if the sense requires it.
(2) Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall apply to
females as well as to males and to firms, associations, bodies
corporate and other artificial persons.
(3) Number. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and
words used in the plural include the singular number.
(4) "Officer" or "official" and the title of an officer or official or of an
official body shall be construed as if the words "of the City of
Paterson" followed it.
4. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1-4, Revised General Ordinances construed as continuation of
heretofore existing ordinances, Sec. 1-5, References to chapters, articles and sections,
and Sec. 1-6, Analyses, section headings, source references, and notes not part of Revised
General Ordinances, all of which followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of
Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:11
A. Maximum fine. [Amended 10-11-1988 by Ord. No. 88-032;
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 1-27-2004 by Ord. No. 04-007;
2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 06-021]
(1) Whenever no specific penalty is provided in the Code of the City of
Paterson or in any other ordinance of the City for the punishment of
an act which is prohibited or which is declared to be unlawful or an
act which is required to be done, the violation of any such provision
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000, by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community
service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof,
provided, however, that when the maximum penalty is fixed by an
applicable state statute and is less, by force of said statute or by
judicial construction, than any penalty fixed in the Code of the City
of Paterson, then the limitations of such state statute shall be
applicable. Any person convicted of the violation of any municipal
ordinance may, in discretion of the court and in default of the
payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in the county
jail or other place of detention provided by the City for a term not
exceeding 90 days or be required to perform community service for
a period not exceeding 90 days.
(2) The maximum fine for the violation of any municipal ordinance
which was previously specified as $1,250 shall be raised in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 to $2,000. Where the maximum
fine was previously specified as less than $1,250, then the
maximum fine shall remain unchanged.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation of the Code of the City of Paterson or of any other
ordinance of the City, punishable by fine or imprisonment, or both,
occurs or continues.
C. The imposition of fine or imprisonment as punishment for a violation of
the Code of the City of Paterson or of any other ordinances of the City
shall not be deemed to be in lieu of any other provision therein
providing for revocation or suspension of any license or permit issued
thereunder.
D. The imposition of fine or imprisonment as punishment for a violation of
the Code of the City of Paterson or any other ordinances of the City
shall not constitute a bar to or be deemed in lieu of any other provision
therein providing for the exercise of any right or power or remedy of
the City.
E. Pursuant to the provisions of P.L. 1989, c. 114, which amends N.J.S.A.
40:69A-29, the Municipal Council of the City of Paterson hereby
determines not to impose an additional fine upon any person for
§ 1-19 PATERSON CODE § 1-19
1:12
repeated violation of any municipal ordinance as allowed by said law.5
[Added 10-24-1989 by Ord. No. 89-054]
5. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 1-10, Severability: effect of partial invalidity, Sec. 1-11, Code
adoption, Sec. 1-12, Applicability of provisions, Sec. 1-13, Repeal of conflicting
ordinances, Sec. 1-14, Ordinances continued, and Sec. 1-15, Copies on file, all of which
immediately followed this section, were deleted 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068.
§ 1-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:13
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic Beverage Control Board — See Ch.
9.
Constables — See Ch. 21.
Municipal Court — See Ch. 25.
Fire Division — See Ch. 39.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 49.
Insurance Fund Commission — See Ch. 53.
Library Board of Trustees — See Ch. 59.
Parking Authority — See Ch. 71.
Police Division — See Ch. 81.
Water Commission — See Ch. 95.
Availability of records — See Ch. 377.
§ 1-19 PATERSON CODE § 1-19
1:14
ARTICLE I
Organization of City Government
§ 5-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Administrative Code of the
City of Paterson."
§ 5-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish departments; to allocate the
City's functions, powers and duties among and within the departments; to
establish official relationships; and to prescribe standards and procedures
for the conduct of the public business, all as permitted or required by the
Optional Municipal Charter Law (P.L. 1950, c. 210, as amended, N.J.S.A.
40:69A-1 et seq.).
§ 5-3. General structure of government.
The City government shall consist of the Mayor and Council and such
appointive officers and employees as are provided by the charter6 or
otherwise authorized pursuant to law. It shall be organized within
departments, offices, boards and agencies as hereinafter established or
provided in the charter, general law or ordinance.
§ 5-4. Departments, offices, divisions and agencies. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-060]
The City government shall, in addition to the elected Municipal Council and
the Mayor, be comprised of the following offices, departments, divisions and
agencies:
A. Offices:
(1) Office of the Mayor.
(2) Office of the City Council. [Added 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
(3) Office of the City Clerk.
B. Departments:
(1) Department of Administration.
(2) Department of Finance.
(3) Department of Economic Development. [Amended 6-24-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-030]
6. Editor's Note: See the Optional Municipal Charter Law, as amended, N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et
seq.
§ 5-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-4
1:15
(4) Department of Health and Human Services. [Amended
11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078]
(5) Department of Law.
(6) Department of Public Works.
(7) Department of Police.
(8) Department of Fire.
(9) Department of Community Development. [Added 6-24-2014 by
Ord. No. 14-030]
C. Divisions of departments: the respective divisions, bureaus, boards and
offices into which such departments are divided pursuant to this
chapter or other ordinances of the City.
D. Agencies: the various judicial, legislative, advisory and independent
agencies of local government provided pursuant to the charter, general
law, this Code of the City of Paterson or other ordinances of the City.
§ 5-4 PATERSON CODE § 5-4
1:16
ARTICLE II
General Administration
§ 5-5. Allocation of administrative functions.
All of the administrative functions, powers and duties of the City other
than those vested in the office of the City Clerk shall be allocated and
assigned among and within the departments established or constituted by
this chapter, any amendments and supplements thereto or any ordinance of
the City.
§ 5-6. Appointment, term and removal of department heads.
As provided by the charter:
§ 5-7. Powers and duties of department heads.
The head of a department, subject to the charter, ordinances of the City and
the direction and supervision of the Mayor, shall:
A. Each department shall be headed by a director, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. Each
department head shall serve during the term of office of the Mayor
appointing him, and until the appointment and qualification of his
successor.
B. The Mayor may, in his discretion, remove any department head after
notice and an opportunity to be heard. Prior to removing a department
head, the Mayor shall first file written notice of the intention with the
Council and such removal shall become effective on the 20th day after
the filing of such notice unless the Council shall prior thereto have
adopted a resolution, by a two-thirds vote of the whole number of the
Council, disapproving the removal.
A. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of his department,
including, with the approval of the Mayor, the establishment of such
divisions and bureaus as may be required for the proper conduct of said
work, and make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
B. Appoint his subordinate officers and employees within his department
and may, with the approval of the Mayor, remove such officers and
employees subject to the provisions of the Revised Statutes, Title 11A,
Civil Service, or other general laws. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
C. Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to the
departmental appropriations.
D. Maintain such records of work performance and unit costs thereof as
may be approved or required by the Business Administrator.
§ 5-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-7
1:17
§ 5-8. Interim and temporary appointments.
§ 5-9. Nominations not approved by Council; provisional
appointments.
§ 5-10. Dual appointments.
§ 5-11. Residency requirements for officers, employees and
members of boards and agencies. [Amended 1-19-1993 by Ord. No.
93-003]
E. Provide such information and reports on the work of the department as
may from time to time be required by the Mayor.
F. Exercise such other or different powers of administrative supervision
and direction as the Mayor may delegate to him.
A. Whenever a vacancy exists in any office required by the charter or
ordinances to be filled by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the
Council and there is no holdover incumbent, the Mayor may
temporarily fill such vacancy, in the absence of any contrary provision
in the charter or ordinance, by appointing an acting officer to serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor.
B. Such appointee shall have all the powers, functions and duties of the
office until it is filled permanently.
C. Any such appointment shall terminate not later than 60 days after the
date of appointment, unless the Council shall, by resolution, authorize
one or more extensions of such period.
A. In the event that the Council shall fail to accept or reject any
nominations made by the Mayor of a director or officer at the next
regular meeting following the submission of the nomination, the Mayor
is then authorized to appoint the nominee on a provisional basis for a
period not to exceed 60 days.
B. Said provisional appointment shall, however, forthwith cease and
terminate immediately upon the expiration of said period of 60 days
unless the Council accepts and confirms the provisional appointment
prior thereto or, by resolution, authorizes one extension of such period.
A. The Mayor and the Business Administrator may, with the approval of
the Council, serve as head of one or more departments in addition to
the Department of Administration.
B. The same person may serve as director of two or more departments; a
department director may also be appointed to serve as the head of one
or more divisions within his department, and a division head may be
appointed as department director.
A. Requirements; exceptions.
§ 5-7 PATERSON CODE § 5-11
1:18
(1) Except as hereinafter provided, all officers and employees of the
City who have heretofore become officers and employees of the
City or who shall hereafter become employees of the City are
hereby required as a condition of their continued employment to
have their place of abode in the City and to be bona fide residents
therein. A "bona fide resident," for the purpose of this section, is a
person having a permanent domicile within the City and one which
has not been adopted with the intention of again taking up or
claiming a previous residence acquired outside the City limits.
(2) The director of any department or the Mayor or the City Clerk are
hereby authorized, for good cause shown, provided that the
Municipal Council is first advised, to appoint and to permit any
officer or employee of the City in his respective department or
office to remain in the employ of the City without complying with
the provisions hereof where:
(a) The health of any officer or employee necessitates residence
outside the City limits;
(b) The nature of the employment is such as to require residence
outside the City limits;
(c) Special talent or expertise is necessary for the operation of
government which is not available among Paterson residents;
or
(d) State or federal law preempts municipal residency
requirements.
(3) To establish good cause, the appropriate appointing authority shall:
(a) File with the Business Administrator appropriate
documentation with regard to the health of the employee; or
(b) In conjunction with the Personnel Director, submit
documentation as to the nature of the special talent or
expertise required and of the efforts made to recruit persons of
such special talent or expertise from within the City which
shall, as a minimum, require the public advertisement of such a
position by the Personnel Director.
(4) The Business Administrator shall report to the Council not less than
monthly with regard to the appointment of any nonresidents.
(5) Any employee or officer or any member of any board or agency
employed or appointed by the City in a manner contrary to the
provision of this section shall be subject to immediate removal or
discharge from the City service.
B. All officers and employees appointed or employed by the City on or after
June 30, 1978, who presently do not maintain their place of abode in the
City and who are not now bona fide residents therein, as herein defined,
§ 5-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-11
1:19
§ 5-12. Administrative rules and regulations.
No rule or regulation made by any department, officer, agency or authority
of the City, except such as relates to the organization or internal
management of the City government or a part thereof, shall take effect until
it is filed either with the City Clerk or in such manner as may be provided
by ordinance. The Council shall provide for the prompt publication of such
rules and regulations.
shall establish their place of abode in the City, and they shall become
bona fide residents therein no later than December 31, 1993. The
establishment of actual domicile in the City on or before the date
aforesaid by all officers and employees of the City who are not now
presently domiciled shall be conditioned to their continued employment
by the City.
C. Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, all
members of the Parking Authority, Housing Authority, Board of
Alcoholic Beverage Control, Board of Trustees of the Free Public
Library, Board of Adjustment, Planning Board, Local Defense Council,
Rent Leveling Board and all other boards or agencies of the City of
Paterson created by law, who have heretofore been appointed to serve
as a member thereof or who shall hereafter be appointed to serve as a
member thereof, are required as a condition of their appointment to
have their place of abode in the City of Paterson and to be bona fide
residents therein.7
D. Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary, all
members of the board or agency referred to in the preceding section or
who presently do not maintain their place of abode in the City of
Paterson and who are not now bona fide residents therein, as defined
herein, shall establish their place of abode in the City, and they shall
become bona fide residents therein no later than December 31, 1993.
The establishment of actual domicile in the City on or before the
aforesaid date by members appointed to said boards or agencies who
are not presently domiciled shall be a conditioned to their continued
appointment by their respective board or agency.
E. The Chief of Police or his designee shall conduct an investigation to
determine whether or not any officer, employee or members of boards
and agencies have their place of abode in the City and are bona fide
residents therein. A copy of the investigative report shall be submitted
to the Council upon completion.
F. All persons who shall hereafter become officers, employees or members
of boards or agencies of the City shall remain domiciled in the City as a
condition to their continued employment by the City, unless excused as
provided in Subsection A or B of this section.
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 5-11 PATERSON CODE § 5-13
1:20
§ 5-13. Public office hours; emergencies.
§ 5-14. Public records.8
§ 5-15. Delivery of funds and records upon termination of office or
employment.
Upon the termination of the term of office or the employment of any officer
or employee, he shall forthwith deliver to his successor or, if there be no
successor, to the Clerk or other person who may be designated by the Mayor
to receive the same all moneys, papers, books, memoranda, accounts and
data of any nature whatever pertaining to his office.
§ 5-16. Surety bonds.
A. The public, administrative and executive business offices shall be open
for the transaction of public business daily except Saturdays, Sundays
and legal holidays, between such hours as the Council may prescribe,
except as otherwise provided by law.
B. All departments, in times of emergency, shall provide municipal
services for 24 hours a day. The Business Administrator or a
department head may require any officer or employee to be in
attendance for work on any day or days whenever he determines that a
public exigency or emergency so requires.
A. All the books, maps, papers, accounts, statements, vouchers and other
documents whatsoever acquired or produced in any department shall
be carefully and conveniently filed, kept and preserved and be and
remain the sole property of the City and shall not at any time be
removed from the offices of such department except when required for
use in official business and shall then be returned to such office without
delay. Each department head shall be responsible for enforcing the
requirements of this section in his department. This section shall be
subject to the provisions of Destruction of Public Records Law (1953)
(N.J.S.A. 47:3-15 et seq.).
B. All public documents and records shall, during office hours, be open to
public search, inspection and examination, subject to and within the
limitations prescribed by law, and provided that such search, inspection
and examination may be made under such regulations as the officer
having custody of such records, books and documents shall establish for
the safety and preservation thereof.
A. Every officer or employee of the City who, by virtue of his office or
position or of any law, is entrusted with the receipt, custody or
expenditure of public moneys or funds of the City and any other officer
or employee who may be required so to do by the Council shall, before
entering upon the duties of his office or position, execute and deliver a
8. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 377, Records, Availability of.
§ 5-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-16
1:21
surety bond in such amount as may be fixed by resolution of the
Council, binding him to the City in its corporate name and conditioned
upon the true and faithful performance of his duty. Each officer or
employee required by this section or otherwise to give bond shall
execute such a bond with sufficient surety and deliver the same to the
Clerk, except that the Clerk shall deliver his bond to the Comptroller,
before he enters upon the discharge of the duties of his office or
employment.
B. If any officer or employee shall refuse or neglect to execute and deliver
his bond as herein required within 30 days after due notification of
election or appointment, his office may be declared vacant by the
Council.
C. In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the state or
by this section or any other ordinance to give bond for the faithful
performance of his duties, such bond shall be secured by a corporate
surety authorized to do business in this state, and the premium therefor
shall be paid by the City. Each such bond shall be approved by the
Corporation Counsel as to form and sufficiency, and nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent the use of one or more blanket
bonds when so approved.
§ 5-16 PATERSON CODE § 5-16
1:22
ARTICLE III
Council
§ 5-17. Legislative powers.
Pursuant to the charter, the legislative power of the City will be exercised
by the Council.
§ 5-18. Organization of Council; election of President; conduct of
business.
The Council will organize annually in July. At such organization meeting, it
will elect a President of the Council from among its members. The business
of the Council shall be conducted in accordance with the code and the
Council's rules of procedure which shall be provided by ordinance, unless
otherwise required by the charter.
§ 5-19. Additional salary for Council President.
The President of the Council, by reason of his additional duties, shall receive
an additional salary of $1,000 annually, to be paid as all other salaries are
paid.
§ 5-20. Rules of procedure governing conduct of Council meetings.
The following rules of procedure shall govern the conduct of the meetings
of the Municipal Council of the City of Paterson, New Jersey:
A. Rule 1, Governing rules. The methods of organization, questions of
order and the conduct of the business of the Municipal Council shall be
governed by Roberts Rules of Order, Revised, in all cases to which they
are applicable except as may be provided in the charter and in the rules
of procedure of the Council.
B. Rule 2, Regular meetings. The Council shall hold regular meetings at
the date, time and place set forth in the annual notice of regularly
scheduled meetings and any revisions thereto adopted by the Council in
accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
[Amended 11-3-1980 by Ord. No. 80-051]
C. Rule 3, Workshop sessions. The Council shall hold workshop sessions at
the date, time and place set forth in the annual notice of regularly
scheduled meetings and any revisions thereto adopted by the Council in
accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
[Amended 11-3-1980 by Ord. No. 80-051]
D. Rule 4, Special meetings.
(1) A special meeting of Council may be called by the President or by a
majority of the members of the Council. Whenever a special
meeting shall be called by the President of the Council, a notice in
writing signed by the President shall be served on the Clerk, and
§ 5-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20
1:23
whenever a special meeting shall be called by a majority of the
members of the Council, a notice in writing signed by such majority
shall be served on the Clerk. The Clerk shall forthwith serve a
written notice upon the Mayor and each member of the Council at
his place of residence or by telephone communication if possible, at
such place as the Councilman may previously in writing designate,
stating the date and hour of the meeting and the purpose for which
such meeting is called, and no other business shall be transacted
at said special meeting. The Clerk in his notice of a special meeting
shall allow at least 24 hours to elapse between the call of the
meeting and the date and hour of the meeting.
(2) Whenever an emergency exists which requires immediate action by
the Council, the Mayor may call a meeting by notifying the Clerk or,
in his absence, the President of the Council, who shall cause the
Council to meet on short notice in special meeting.
E. Rule 5, Agenda; publication.
(1) At any regular meeting of the Council, no matter which is not on the
agenda of that meeting as previously published shall be considered,
except upon unanimous consent of the Council members present.
(2) On the Friday preceding each regular meeting of the Council, the
Clerk shall prepare, with the approval of the President, the agenda
for the ensuing meeting. Such agenda shall include all matters
proposed by any member of the Council not later than the
preceding work session and such other matters required by the
standing order of business. The agenda shall include a consent
agenda. The consent agenda shall include all resolutions deemed to
be routine or procedural in nature and/or resolutions pertaining to
related subjects. Those matters included within the consent agenda
shall be enacted by one resolution at the Council meeting. Any
member of the Council may cause any matter contained within the
consent agenda to be removed therefrom and acted upon
separately by giving notice to the City Clerk or to the Council prior
to formal action on the consent agenda. When a request is made to
remove a matter from the consent agenda, that matter shall not be
considered as part of the consent agenda and shall be acted upon
separately at the same meeting of the Council. In the event that the
President should add any matter to the agenda, he shall notify each
member of the Council immediately and in any event no later than
24 hours prior to the scheduled meeting. The Clerk shall forthwith
deliver a copy of the agenda to each Councilperson at his or her
place of residence or at such place as the Councilperson may
previously in writing designate. On Monday prior to each meeting,
the Clerk shall post the agenda in a prominent place near the
entrance to the Clerk's office.9 [Amended 11-10-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-039]
9. Editor's Note: Rule 6, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed.
§ 5-20 PATERSON CODE § 5-20
1:24
F. Rule 7, Mayor's attendance; vote. The Mayor may attend meetings of
the Council and may take part in discussions of the Council but shall
have no vote, except in the case of a tie on the question of filling a
vacancy in the Council, in which case he may cast the deciding vote.
G. Rule 8, The President; the Vice President: election, duties and absence.
[Amended 11-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-088; 10-13-2009 by Ord. No.
09-027]
(1) The presiding officer of the Council shall be the President, who
shall be elected at the organization meeting for one year, and he
shall preside at its meetings and perform such other duties as the
Council may prescribe.
(2) At the first regular meeting in July of each following year, a new
President shall be elected for the ensuing year, except in election
years when the election for the new President shall be held at the
organization meeting on July 1. At the same time, the Council shall
also elect a Vice President who shall preside over the Council in the
absence of the President.
(3) In the absence of the President and Vice President, the Council
shall elect a Temporary President, who shall then preside over said
Council.
(4) The President shall assume the chair of the presiding officer
immediately after his election. The President shall preserve strict
order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the
Council. He shall state every question coming before the Council
and announce the decision of the Council on all matters coming
before it. The President may vote on all questions, his name being
called last. The President shall sign all ordinances and resolutions
adopted by the Council during his presence.
(5) In the event of the absence of the President and Vice President,
such ordinances and resolutions shall be signed by the Temporary
President.
(6) In the event that the President should become incapacitated or
disabled or unable to attend the meetings for a period of 60 days,
the President shall immediately forfeit his office, and at the next
regular meeting thereafter, the Council shall declare the office of
President vacant and shall immediately proceed to the election of a
new President.
(7) Leave of absence. The Council President shall be entitled to take a
leave of absence from the Office of Council President for a stated
period not to exceed 59 days. The Council President shall serve a
signed, written notice of leave on the City Clerk by personal
delivery, by mail or by telephone facsimile, setting forth the dates of
the leave of absence. The Council President shall resume the duties
of office at 12:01 a.m. on the day following the last day of leave
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20
1:25
stated in the notice of leave. Taking a leave of absence from the
Office of Council President shall not prevent a member of the
City Council from participating in City business as a member of
the governing body, but the duties of the office of City Council
President shall be administered by the Vice President. Salaries
shall be adjusted to provide any additional compensation due to the
office holder to that person actually fulfilling the duties of the office
of Council President.
(8) Suspension or removal from office. For good cause, the City
Council President may be suspended or removed according to the
rules set forth herein.
(a) Suspension. In view of the fact that the City Council President
is an important representative of the City of Paterson, both in
his or her public and private functions, the City Council may
suspend the City Council President from office for a period of
time not to exceed 59 days, after affording an opportunity to be
heard, for acts or omissions, either of a public or private
nature, which demonstrate a failure to fulfill high ethical
standards in matters public or private if such matters involve
an important responsibility, trust or matter of integrity. The
proceedings may be conducted in a peremptory manner, but
the Council President shall be entitled to written notice of such
proceedings not less than 24 hours prior to the vote, unless the
public health, safety or welfare are at imminent risk. After
providing an opportunity to be heard consistent with due
process rights, and upon proof by a preponderance of evidence
that good cause has been shown to suspend, the Council
President may be suspended by a two-thirds majority of the full
authorized membership of the City Council. The City Council
President shall be entitled to vote in the matter.
(b) Removal. In view of the fact that the City Council President is
an important representative of the City of Paterson, both in his
or her public and private functions, the City Council may
remove the City Council President from office, after affording
an opportunity to be heard, for acts or omissions, either of a
public or private nature, which demonstrate a failure to fulfill
high ethical standards in matters public or private if such
matters involve an important responsibility, trust or matter of
integrity. The proceedings may be conducted in a peremptory
manner, but the Council President shall be entitled to written
notice of such proceedings not less than seven days prior to the
vote. After providing an opportunity to be heard consistent
with due process rights, and upon proof by a preponderance of
evidence that good cause has been shown to remove, the
Council President may be removed from office by a two-thirds
majority of the full authorized membership of the City Council.
The City Council President shall be entitled to vote in the
§ 5-20 PATERSON CODE § 5-20
1:26
matter. In the event of removal, the Vice President shall serve
the balance of the unexpired term of office.
(c) The suspension or removal of the Council President from that
office shall not affect said Councilperson's right to continue as
an elected member of the City Council.
(d) The revised provisions of this subsection shall take effect upon
passage and publication as required by law and these revisions
shall govern the office holder then in place upon the effective
date of this legislation.
H. Rule 9, Call to order. The President of the Council shall take the chair at
the hour appointed for the meeting and shall immediately call the
Council to order. In the absence of the President, the Vice-President
shall call the Council to order. In the absence of both the President and
the Vice President, the Clerk or the designee of the Clerk shall call the
Council to order. The Clerk shall then, in the absence of both the
President and the Vice President, determine whether a quorum is
present and in that event shall call for the election of a Temporary
President. Upon the arrival of the President or Vice President, the
Temporary President shall forthwith relinquish the chair upon
conclusion of the business immediately before the Council.
I. Rule 10, Opening roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the
Council, the Clerk or his designee shall call the roll of the members in
alphabetical order, and the names of those present shall be entered in
the minutes.
J. Rule 11, Quorum; vote.
(1) A majority of the full membership of the Council shall constitute a
quorum. Should no quorum attend within 10 minutes after the hour
appointed for the meeting of the Council, the President, or, in his
absence, the Vice President, or, in the absence of both the
President and Vice President, the Clerk or his designee may
thereupon adjourn the meeting until the next day, unless, by
unanimous agreement, those members present select another hour
or day.
(2) No ordinance shall be adopted by the Council without the
affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership thereof, except
as otherwise provided by law (e.g., Local Budget Law,10 Local
Public Contracts Law,11 etc.). All other matters may be adopted by a
majority of the members present.
(3) The names of the members present and their action at such
meetings shall be recorded in the minutes by the Clerk.
10.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:4-1 et seq.
11.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20
1:27
K. Rule 12. Open meetings; order of business. All regular and special
meetings of the Council shall be open to the public. Promptly at the
hour set for each meeting, the members of the Council and the Clerk
shall take their regular stations in the Council chamber, and the
business of the Council shall be taken up for consideration and
disposition in the following order, unless otherwise ordered by the
Council: [Amended 8-11-1998 by Ord. No. 98-056; 10-27-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-072]
(1) Prayer.
(2) Pledge of allegiance.
(3) Roll call.
(4) Hearing of citizens.
(5) Reports and recommendations of City officers, boards and
commissioners.
(6) Reports of committees.
(7) Ordinances, appropriations, bills and claims.
(8) Resolutions and motions.
(9) Communications and petitions.
(10) Pending business on the calendar.
(11) New business on the calendar.
(12) Miscellaneous.
(13) Adjournment.
L. Rule 13, Reading of minutes. Unless a reading of all or a portion of the
minutes of a previous Council meeting is requested by a majority of the
Council, such minutes when signed by the President of the Council and
the Clerk of the Council shall be considered approved without reading,
provided that the Clerk of the Council shall deliver to each member of
the Council minutes of the previous Council meeting at the same time
that a copy of the agenda is delivered pursuant to provisions of
Subsection E of this section, Rule 5.
M. Rule 14, Rules of debate.
(1) Question under consideration. When a question is presented and
seconded, it is under consideration and no motion shall be received
thereafter, except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone or to
amend, until the question is decided. These motions shall have
preference in the order in which they are mentioned, and the first
two shall be decided without debate. Oral amendments to a
resolution may be adopted, but the Clerk shall, after the meeting
§ 5-20 PATERSON CODE § 5-20
1:28
and as soon as possible thereafter, reduce the amendment to
writing, in order that the minutes may reflect the oral amendment.
When the resolution, as amended, is so reduced to writing, it shall
be appended to and become a part of the original resolution.
(2) As to the President or presiding officer. The President of the
Council, or such other member of the Council as may be
temporarily presiding, may vote from the chair, subject only to such
limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed upon all
members, and he shall not be deprived of any of the rights and
privileges of a Councilman by reason of his being the presiding
Chairman.
(3) Getting the floor. A member of the Council desiring to speak for any
purpose whatsoever shall address the presiding officer and, upon
recognition, shall confine himself to the question under debate. A
member may only speak once on the same subject but may again
speak to clear up a matter of fact or explain a material part of his
speech. A member after moving a question may once again speak
on the same subject as the last speaker closing the debate.
(4) Interruptions. A member once recognized shall not be interrupted
when speaking unless it is to call him to order or as herein
otherwise provided. If a member while speaking is called to order,
he shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined by
the presiding officer, and if in order, he shall be permitted to
proceed.
(5) Privilege of closing debate. The Councilman moving the adoption of
an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the
debate, although he may have already spoken thereon at its
moving.
(6) Roll call. Upon any roll call, any member of the Council may explain
his vote. Each member of the Council shall be allowed two minutes
for the purpose of explaining his vote if he should so desire. A
member of the Council may abstain from voting on any matter. An
abstention for all purposes shall be legally deemed to be and be
counted as an "Aye" or affirmative vote.
N. Rule 15, Votes to be taken by roll call; signing of resolutions and
ordinances. The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall
be taken by roll call in alphabetical order except that the President shall
be the last member called, and the vote by "yeas" and "nays" shall be
entered upon the minutes. Resolutions and ordinances shall be signed
by the presiding officer at such meeting and by the Clerk of the Council
before they are entered upon the minutes; and the votes of the
members of the Council shall be recorded on the original copies to be
filed with the Clerk.
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20
1:29
O. Rule 16, Manner of addressing Council; time limit. [Amended
4-9-2013 by Ord. No. 13-013]
(1) Each person addressing the Council shall:
(a) Step up to the microphone in front of the rail.
(b) Give his name and address and speak in a moderate tone of
voice.
(c) Unless further or lesser time is granted by the Council, be
limited to three minutes of speech.
(d) Address all remarks to the Council as a body and not to any
member thereof.
(2) No person other than members of the Council and the person
having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion,
either directly or through a member of the Council, without the
permission of the presiding officer. No question shall be asked a
Councilman except through the presiding officer.
P. Rule 17, Decorum.
(1) By Council members. While the Council is in session, the members
shall observe order and decorum and shall not delay or interrupt
the proceedings or the peace of the Council, disturb any member
while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the Council or its
presiding officer.
(2) By other persons. Any person who shall become disorderly and
boisterous or who shall make impertinent or slanderous remarks
shall forthwith be barred by the President from the Council
chambers, unless permission to remain or address the Council be
granted by majority vote of the Council.
Q. Rule 18, Enforcement of decorum. The Chief of Police, or such member
or members of the Police Division as the Chief may designate, shall be
the sergeant at arms at the Council meetings. He or they shall carry out
all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose
of maintaining order and decorum at the Council meetings.
R. Rule 19, Persons authorized to be within the Council rail. No person
except City officers shall be permitted within the rail in front of the
Council or be permitted to disturb any Councilman while on the dais,
during any meetings without the express permission of the President of
the Council.
S. Rule 20, Special committees.
(1) All special committees and the chairmen thereof shall be appointed
by the presiding officer of the Council at a regular or special
meeting.
§ 5-20 PATERSON CODE § 5-20
1:30
(2) A special committee shall consist ordinarily of no more than four
members of the Council, including the President, who shall be a
member ex officio of all special committees. The President may,
whenever he deems it necessary, appoint a special committee
consisting of all or fewer of the members of the Council. A quorum
of each special committee appointed shall consist of a majority of
the members thereof.
(3) Meetings of special committees shall not be held during Council
meetings.
T. Rule 21, Standing committees. [Amended 12-2-1980 by Ord. No.
80-058]
(1) At the annual reorganization of the Council, the presiding officer of
the Council shall appoint all standing committees and the chairmen
thereof. The standing committees shall consist of the following:
Community Development/Economic Development Committee,
Finance and Personnel Committee, Health and Human Services
Committee, Municipal Services/Statutory Agencies Committee,
Public Safety Committee and Public Works Committee. [Amended
11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078; 8-21-2012 by Ord. No.
12-036]
(2) A standing committee shall consist ordinarily of no more than four
members of the Council, which may include the President. The
President may, whenever he deems it necessary, appoint a standing
committee consisting of all or fewer of the members of the Council.
A quorum of each standing committee appointed shall consist of a
majority of the members thereof. [Amended 8-21-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-036]
(3) Meetings of standing committees shall not be held during Council
meetings.
U. Rule 22, Ordinances, resolutions, motions and contract documents.
(1) Preparation of ordinances; adoption.
(a) The Corporation Counsel or his designee, when requested,
shall prepare ordinances or resolutions which shall be
delivered to the Clerk. A copy of the same shall be forthwith
furnished to each member of the Council by the Clerk.
(b) Ordinances may be introduced and adopted by title and shall
be read in full by the Clerk or his designee before
consideration by the Council on second and final reading
except as otherwise provided by law, including N.J.S.A.
40:49-2.
(c) Every ordinance after introduction and adoption or first
reading shall be published in full, together with a notice as
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20
1:31
required by law, and said publication shall be published as
required by law prior to the time fixed for further consideration
for second and final passage. At the same time and place so
specified in such notice, all persons interested shall be given
opportunity to be heard thereon.
(2) Prior approval by administrative heads of departments. All
ordinances and resolutions before presentation to the Council by
the Mayor or Business Administrator shall have been reduced to
writing. Prior to presentation to the Council, they shall first have
been referred for a report on the accuracy of facts to the director of
the department under whose jurisdiction the administration of the
subject matter of the ordinance or resolution would devolve. Said
report shall be in writing where practicable. Thereafter, but before
introduction by the Council, the same shall be approved, pursuant
to law, by the Corporation Council or his designee and the
appropriate committee of the Council. [Amended 9-1-1981 by
Ord. No. 81-057]
(3) Introducing for passage and approval. Ordinances, resolutions or
other matters requiring action by the Council shall only be
introduced by a member of the Council. When a Councilman
introduces an ordinance or resolution, his name shall appear on the
same.
(4) Period. All ordinances shall take effect 20 days after final passage
and approval by the Mayor. Two-thirds (2/3) of the Council may,
however, declare an emergency by written resolution to reduce this
twenty-day period except that the period for bond ordinances shall
not be reduced.
(5) Veto by Mayor. Ordinances vetoed by the Mayor shall require six
affirmative votes of the Council to override thereto. The Council
will reconsider any ordinance returned by the Mayor within the
time permitted by the charter, together with a statement setting
forth his objections thereto or to any item or part thereof. Such
reconsideration of the ordinance or any item or part thereof from
which the Mayor is constrained to withhold his approval shall be at
the next meeting of the Council which occurs not less than three
days following the return of the ordinance by the Mayor. Whenever
an ordinance has been reconsidered by the Council following a veto
by the Mayor, the City Clerk shall append to such ordinance a
certification of the action of the Council upon such reconsideration
in substantially the following form:
§ 5-20 PATERSON CODE § 5-20
1:32
"I hereby certify that the above ordinance adopted by the Council
of the City of Paterson on the ______ day of ______, 19___, was
delivered to me on the _______ day of ______, 19___, together with
the Mayor's statement of the reasons for which he was constrained
to withhold his approval of such ordinance, item or part thereof.
On reconsideration thereof, on the ______ day of ______, 19___,
(the Council duly resolved by the affirmative vote of two-thirds
of its members to enact such ordinance, item or part thereof
notwithstanding the Mayor's veto) or (the Mayor's veto was
sustained).
Dated:
City Clerk"
(6) Ordinance not returned by Mayor. Whenever an ordinance shall
take effect without the Mayor's signature by reason of his failure to
return it to the Council by filing it with the City Clerk within 10
days after it has been presented to him, the City Clerk shall append
to such ordinance as engrossed a certificate in substantially the
following form:
"I hereby certify that the above ordinance was adopted by the City
Council on the ______ day of ______, 19___, and was presented to
the Mayor duly certified on the ______ day of ______, 19___, and
upon his failure to sign it or to return and file it with the City
Clerk within ten days thereafter, said ordinance took effect in like
manner as if the Mayor has signed it.
Dated:
City Clerk"
(7) Preparation. Ordinances amending any existing ordinances shall
contain in brackets the part repealed, and the part to be inserted
shall be underscored.
(8) Emergency resolutions. Emergency resolutions shall require six
affirmative votes for adoption.
V. Rule 23, Nominations.
(1) Upon the receipt from the Mayor of his nomination to any office or
position, the same shall be read under "Communications" by the
Clerk or his designee and, unless otherwise ordered, shall be
considered by the Council under "New Business." When taken up
for action, the President shall put the question on each nomination
as follows: "Will the Council confirm the nomination?" On that
motion, a vote shall be ordered, and if a majority or more members
vote to confirm, the President shall announce: "The nomination is
confirmed." If less than a majority of the members vote to confirm,
the President shall announce: "The nomination is rejected."
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-20
1:33
(2) Action by confirmation or rejection upon a nomination made by the
Mayor shall not be postponed or delayed longer than for one
regular meeting.
(3) Within 24 hours after confirmation or rejection of a nomination, the
Clerk shall, in writing, notify the Mayor of that fact.
W. Rule 24, Reports and resolutions filed with City Clerk. All reports and
resolutions shall be filed with the City Clerk and entered in the minutes.
X. Rule 25, Adjournment. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and
decided without debate.
Y. Rule 26, Absences. [Added 8-20-2013 by Ord. No. 13-03712]
(1) Any member of the Municipal Council who fails to provide proper
and timely notice of anticipated absences shall have deducted from
their biweekly salary an amount indicated on the following
schedule for all absences that meet the following conditions:
(a) Three or more consecutive workshop, regular, and/or
committee meetings unattended per calendar year without
proper notice provided in writing or via email to the City Clerk,
Council President and or in cases of committee meetings the
Committee Chairperson.
(b) Five or more consecutive workshop, regular, and/or committee
meetings unattended per calendar year without proper notice
provided in writing or via email to the City Clerk, Council
President, and/or Committee Chairperson will receive in
addition to a reduction in salary a resolution of no confidence
by the Municipal Council.
(c) Seven or more consecutive workshop, regular, and/or
committee meetings unattended without proper notice
provided in writing or via email to the City Clerk, Council
President, and/or Committee Chairperson will result in the
Council member being considered to be on unpaid leave,
without salary until further notice.
(d) Absences of eight or more consecutive weeks are subject to the
Municipal Vacancy Act, N.J.S.A. 40A:16-3 (and any successor
statutes), which address the circumstances under which a
council seat may be deemed vacant.
(2) Schedule of payroll deductions:
(a) Three absences without the advance notice prescribed above
will result in a salary deduction of $473 credited against the
next pay period following the days absent.
12.Editor's Note: Mayoral veto of this ordinance was overridden on 9-24-2013.
§ 5-20 PATERSON CODE § 5-20
1:34
§ 5-21. Appointment of constables.13
The Council may, by resolution, appoint 50 constables who shall be
residents or qualified voters of Paterson for at least three years prior to
their appointment for such term as may be designated by the Council, not
in excess of three years.
§ 5-22. Award of contracts. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
Where contracts are let by competitive bidding pursuant to the charter, the
Council shall be the City's contracting agent for the purposes of N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq., or any amendment or supplement thereto. Bids shall
be delivered to and publicly opened by the Business Administrator or his
designee at the advertised time and place and shall be reported to the
Council at its next regular meeting. The contract shall be executed in the
manner provided in § 5-30.
(b) Each absence without the advance notice prescribed above
beyond three consecutive absences will result in an additional
salary deduction of $158 per occurrence credited against the
next pay period following the days absent.
(3) Notice requirement, regardless of reasons for absence: Regardless
of the reason for the absence, whether due to illness or other
reasons, the advance notice prescribed above is required unless
the illness or other circumstances are such that the member is
physically incapable of communicating his absence in advance.
(4) Enforcement, upon notice and resolution:
(a) Upon the occurrence of absences that facially trigger payroll
deductions under the above standards, the Council may
authorize notice to the Division of Personnel that the payroll
deduction described above shall be made.
(b) A resolution adopted by a majority of the full membership of
the Council shall be required in order to authorize such notice
to the Division of Personnel, of to rescind such authorization.
(c) No resolution to authorize such deduction of salary shall be
adopted unless written notice thereof is served upon the
Council member in question by hand delivery or regular and
certified mail, or the Council member otherwise gains actual
notice thereof, at least 48 hours before the start of the meeting
at which the deduction vote is taken.
13.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 21, Constables.
§ 5-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-23
1:35
§ 5-23. Requiring sworn statements from officers; removal of
officers.
As authorized by the charter, the Council may:
§ 5-24. Vacancies in elective offices.
Vacancies in elective offices shall be filled pursuant to the charter.
§ 5-25. Independent annual audits.
The Council shall cause to be made an annual audit of the City's accounts
and financial transactions as required by the charter. Such annual audit
shall be made by a registered municipal accountant of New Jersey selected
by the Council by a majority vote of its members.
§ 5-26. Designation of municipal vehicles; exceptions. [Added
6-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-036]
A. Require any municipal officer, in its discretion, to prepare and submit
sworn statements regarding his official duties in the performance
thereof and otherwise to investigate the conduct of any department,
office or agency of the municipal government.
B. Remove, by at least two-thirds' vote of the whole number of the Council,
any municipal officer, other than the Mayor or a member of the Council,
for cause, upon notice and an opportunity to be heard.14 [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
A. Any automobile or any other vehicle purchased with funds appropriated
by the municipality for the use of any department, employee, authority,
commission or any instrumentality thereof shall be plainly marked or
lettered "City of Paterson, for Official Use," together with the
abbreviated or complete name of the entity for the use of which the
automobile or other vehicle is purchased or assigned. The marking or
lettering shall be in letters at least one inch in height and conspicuously
placed on the side of the automobile or vehicle.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any automobile or
vehicle in the service of the City of Paterson Police Division or to any
automobile or vehicle used by any other department, employee,
authority, commission or instrumentality of the City strictly for
undercover investigative or inspection work.
14.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-24, Director of Council services: appointment; duties,
amended 2-3-1981 by Ord. No. 81-004, and original Sec. 2-24.1, Counsel to Council, added
10-27-1981 by Ord. No. 81-051 and amended 12-1-1982 by Ord. No. 81-087, both of which
immediately followed this section, were deleted 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068.
§ 5-23 PATERSON CODE § 5-26
1:36
ARTICLE IV
Office of the Mayor
§ 5-27. Mayor as chief executive and administrative officer; duties.
[Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
The Mayor shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the City.
He shall:
A. Enforce the charter and ordinances of the municipality and all general
laws applicable thereto.
B. Report annually to the Council and to the public on the state of the
municipality and the work of the previous year; he shall also
recommend to the Council whatever action or programs he deems
necessary for the improvement of the municipality and the welfare of its
residents. He may from time to time recommend any action or
programs he deems necessary or desirable for the municipality to
undertake.
C. Supervise, direct and control all departments of the municipal
government and require each department to make an annual and such
other reports on its work as he may deem desirable.
D. Require such reports and examine such accounts, records and
operations of any board, commission or other agency of municipal
government as he deems necessary.
E. Prepare and submit to the Council for its consideration and adoption an
annual operating budget and a capital budget, establish the schedules
and procedures to be followed by all municipal departments, offices and
agencies in connection therewith and supervise and administer all
phases of the budgetary process.
F. Supervise the care and custody of all municipal property, institutions
and agencies and make recommendations concerning the nature and
location of municipal improvements and execute improvements
determined by the governing body.
G. Sign all contracts, bonds or other instruments requiring the consent of
the municipality.
H. Review, analyze and forecast trends of municipal services and finances
and programs of all boards, commissions, agencies and other municipal
bodies and report and recommend thereon to the Council.
I. Supervise the development, installation and maintenance of centralized
budgeting, personnel and purchasing procedures as may be authorized
by ordinance.
J. Negotiate contracts for the municipality, subject to Council approval.
§ 5-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-27
1:37
§ 5-28. Acting Mayor.
§ 5-29. Office staff.
The Mayor shall have such administrative, secretarial, clerical and other
assistants as may be authorized within the limits of available
appropriations. They shall be removable at the pleasure of the Mayor, and
they shall serve in the unclassified service of the civil service of the City.
Said assistants shall be in addition to those assigned to the office staff of the
Mayor from within the classified service of the civil service of the City.
§ 5-30. Contracts. [Amended 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-089]
K. Assure that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the
municipality or its inhabitants in any statute, franchise or other
contract are faithfully kept and performed.
L. Serve as an ex officio, nonvoting member of all appointive bodies in
municipal government of which he is not an official voting member.
A. As provided by the charter, the Mayor shall designate the Business
Administrator or any department head or the City Clerk to act as Mayor
whenever the Mayor shall be prevented by absence from the
municipality, disability or other cause from attending to the duties of his
office. During such time, the person so designated by the Mayor shall
possess all the rights, powers and duties of the Mayor. As provided by
the charter, whenever the Mayor shall have been unable to attend to the
duties of his office for a period of 60 consecutive days for any of the
above-stated reasons, an Acting Mayor shall be appointed by the
Council who shall succeed to all the rights, powers and duties of the
Mayor or the then Acting Mayor. Such appointee shall have all of the
functions, powers and duties of the office.
B. Any such appointment shall terminate not later than 60 days after the
date of the appointment and shall not thereafter be renewable unless
the Council shall by resolution authorize one or more extensions of such
period.
A. Within the limits of available appropriations, the Mayor is authorized to
negotiate and execute contracts and other legally binding obligations of
the City, where the said execution is subject to Municipal Council
authorization as required by law. Any such contractual document shall
be signed by the Mayor, authorized as to available appropriation by the
Business Administrator and Comptroller and approved by the
Corporation Counsel as to legal form and sufficiency.
B. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, with regard to legal
claims against the City other than workers’ compensation claims, the
Mayor and Council hereby authorize and grant consent to an expedited
approval process for settlements of $5,000 or less, such that an
agreement approved as to terms by the Business Administrator and as
§ 5-27 PATERSON CODE § 5-30
1:38
§ 5-31. Administrative Division; Administrative Assistant.
Within the office of the Mayor, there shall be an Administrative Division, the
head of which shall be the Mayor's Administrative Assistant. The Division
shall be responsible for the discharge of all administrative functions of the
office of the Mayor, including secretarial support.
§ 5-32. Policy Planning and Management Division.
Within the office of the Mayor, there shall be a Policy Planning and
Management Division, the head of which shall be designated "Director." The
Division shall perform all functions and discharge all duties necessary to
assist the Mayor in formulating policy recommendations for all City boards
and agencies and the Council, including but not limited to coordination
of data collection activities of City departments, analysis of such data,
socioeconomic planning, coordination of federal grant applications and
federal program assignment and an analysis, from time to time, of the use
of federal and state revenue sharing, block grant aid programs and grant
funds.
to form and legality by the Corporation Counsel may be executed by
the Mayor without the need for an authorizing resolution, so long as
the Corporation Counsel and/or the Business Administrator report each
such settlement to the Municipal Council President.
C. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, with regard to workers’
compensation claims against the City, following the practice first
adopted by Resolution 15:786, the City Law Department is authorized
to enter into settlements of all workers’ compensation claims presented
by the third-party administrator. Claims Resolution Corporation, Inc., in
an amount equal to or less than $15,000, without the need to present
the request for authority to the City Council.
§ 5-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-32
1:39

ARTICLE V
Office of the City Clerk
§ 5-33. Appointment of Clerk; qualifications.
A City Clerk shall be appointed by the Council, pursuant to the charter,
for the term provided by law. Prior to his appointment, the Clerk shall be
qualified by training or experience, or a combination thereof, for the duties
of his office.
§ 5-34. Powers and duties of Clerk.
The Clerk shall:
§ 5-35. Deputy City Clerk.
The Council may appoint a Deputy Clerk who shall perform the functions,
powers and duties of a City Clerk in the absence or upon the direction of
the latter and who shall perform such other functions, powers and duties as
may be required by or pursuant to law or ordinance.
§ 5-36. Searches for municipal improvements authorized but not
assessed; certificates.
A. Serve as Clerk of the Council, keep its minutes and records of its
proceedings, maintain and compile its ordinances and resolutions as
required by the charter, general laws and ordinances.
B. Provide secretarial and clerical services for the Councilmen in the
discharge of their official duties.
C. Have custody of the City's Seal and affix it to such books, papers and
documents as may be authorized pursuant to law.
D. Have and take custody of all official books, papers and documents of the
City for which no other repository is provided by charter or ordinance
and preserve and keep them safely.
E. Perform all of the functions relating to elections required of a Municipal
Clerk by the General Election Law (Title 19 of the Revised Statutes) and
by the Optional Municipal Charter Law.15
F. Have such other, different and additional powers, functions and duties
as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
A. The City Clerk shall also issue Certificates as to Liability for Assessment
for Municipal Improvements in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 54:5-18.1 et seq.
15.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-1 et seq.
§ 5-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-36
1:41
§ 5-37. Licensing functions.
The City Clerk shall administer such licensing functions as are vested in the
City Clerk by state law or ordinance.
§ 5-38. Insurance, surety bonds and contracts.
The City Clerk, subject to the supervision of the Business Administrator,
shall:
§ 5-39. Annual report to Business Administrator on bonds,
insurance and leases.
The City Clerk shall report to the Business Administrator annually, at such
time as the Administrator may require, on the coverage, expiration date
and premium of each surety bond and contract of insurance, the nature and
terms of outstanding leases, the rent reserved by each and their respective
expiration dates.
§ 5-40. Recording, binding, certifying, publishing, filing and
codification of ordinances and resolutions.
B. Prior to the issuance of any such certificate, he shall secure from the
City Engineer his countersignature which shall indicate that, to the best
of his knowledge, information and belief, the certificate is correct.
A. Be the depository and custodian of:
(1) All official surety bonds furnished by or on account of any officer or
employee, except his own bond, which shall be placed in the
custody of the Comptroller.
(2) All insurance policies upon or with respect to risks insured for the
benefit of the City or to protect it against any claim, demand or
liability whatsoever.
(3) All formal contracts for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment
and materials to which the City may be a party.
(4) All performance bonds running to the City as obligee or any other
form of security given by any contractor, subdivision developer or
other persons on account of work done or to be done in or for the
City.
B. Have custody of all leases on property owned by the City.
A. The City Clerk shall cause all the ordinances and resolutions passed by
the Council to be recorded in bound books to be provided for that
purpose, and each ordinance and resolution shall be signed by the
presiding officer of the Council and the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall
certify the proof of the due publication of such ordinance, but his
§ 5-36 PATERSON CODE § 5-40
1:42
§ 5-41. City Code of Regulations.
At the close of each year, the City Clerk shall, with the advice and assistance
of the Corporation Counsel, bind, compile and codify all of the orders, rules
and regulations of the Council of a permanent character which then remain
in force and effect together with a proper index, which shall be known as
the "Code of City Regulations." The City Clerk may arrange for the printing
and sale of such code in the same manner as heretofore provided for the
printing and sale of the Code of the City of Paterson.
§ 5-42. Disposition of Council matters requiring further action.
omission to certify such ordinance or proof of publication thereof, as
hereby directed, shall not impair or affect the validity in any respect.
B. The City Clerk shall prepare a copy of all ordinances or proposed
ordinances which will require publication under the charter or general
law and cause the same, properly attested, to be published in any
newspaper legally qualified for the publication of official City
advertisements and shall file in his office the requisite proofs of such
publication.
C. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:69A-182, the City Clerk at the close of
each year shall compile or codify all ordinances and resolutions with the
advice and assistance of the Corporation Counsel. The Council may
engage a firm or other agency to compile and codify the ordinances as
an assistance to the City Clerk.
A. All matters acted upon by the Council at any duly called meeting which,
in the opinion of the Council, require further action shall be officially
communicated by the City Clerk to the officer, employee, board, body,
commission or other agency of the City for whatever action is to be
taken by such officer, employee, board, body, commission or other
agency.
B. Whatever action is taken in accordance with the direction of the
Council shall then be communicated to the City Clerk, unless otherwise
directed, for presentation to and information of the Council. Such
action shall become a part of the agenda for the next meetings or until
removed from the agenda by the Council.
§ 5-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-42
1:43

ARTICLE VI
Department of Administration
§ 5-43. Department establishment; Business Administrator as head.
There shall be a Department of Administration, the head of which shall
be the Business Administrator. Prior to his appointment, the Business
Administrator shall be qualified as provided by law. The Business
Administrator shall receive an annual salary as established by ordinance, to
be paid as all other salaries are paid.
§ 5-44. Deputy Business Administrator. [Added 1-26-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-002]
Within the Department of Administration, there shall be a Deputy Business
Administrator to assist in the administration of the Department of
Administration and perform such duties as the Business Administrator may
direct and prescribe and who, during the absence or disability of the
Business Administrator, shall possess all of the powers and perform all of
the duties of the Business Administrator.
§ 5-45. Divisions within Department of Administration.
The Department of Administration shall consist of the following Divisions:
§ 5-46. Budget Formulation Division; Budget Officer as head;
general duties.
A. Budget Formulation.
B. Personnel Administration.
C. Purchasing.
D. Information Technology.16 [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord. No.
10-076]
A. Within the Department of Administration, there shall be a Budget
Formulation Division, the head of which shall be known as the "Budget
Officer." [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
B. The positions within the Budget Formulation Division shall be as set
forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in Local Government, included at the
end of this chapter. [Added 11-26-1991 by Ord. No. 91-056;
amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
C. The Budget Formulation Division shall assemble for the Mayor for his
review all necessary budgetary information and which shall assist the
Mayor in the preparation of budget estimates, schedules, analyses and
16.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-44(e), Cable Communications, which immediately followed
this subsection, was deleted 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068. See now § 5-103, Cable
Communications Division; Public Works Director as head.
§ 5-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-46
1:45
§ 5-47. Budget preparation and adoption.
§ 5-48. Capital budgets.
exhibits. The procedures, form and administration of the budget shall
comply with the requirements of law and of the ordinances of the City.
A. Budget requests. Pursuant to the charter, during the month of May in
each year, all department heads shall submit to the Business
Administrator and the Budget Officer requests for appropriations for
the next ensuing budget year. Budget requests shall be in such form and
detail as the Administrator shall prescribe. Each department head shall
appear at a public hearing, pursuant to the charter, on his budget
requests and shall then justify the request in terms of work to be
performed, service to be rendered or programs to be administered.
[Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
B. Submission of budget to Council. On or before the 15th day of July in
each year, the Mayor shall submit to the Council his recommended
budget, together with such explanatory comment or statement as he
may deem desirable. The budget shall be in such form as is required by
law for municipal budgets. It shall, in addition, include a current
operating section and a capital section, together with detailed analyses
of the various items of expenditures and revenues and, to the extent
feasible, appropriate statements of the cost of performance of
functional programs and activities in terms of quantitative, countable
units of work for operating expenditures and projected annual costs of
operation, maintenance and debt service for capital expenditures.17
C. Capital projects. In the capital section of the budget document, the
Mayor shall include such capital projects and outlays as he may select
from the capital program, together with the relevant explanation and
justification.
A. 18Preparation. Each department head, the officer in charge of other
municipal agencies and the Planning Board shall prepare and submit to
the Business Administrator and the Budget Officer descriptions of its
immediate and contemplated capital projects for the ensuing year and
during the next five fiscal years. Capital projects requests shall be
prepared on forms prescribed by the Budget Officer or as otherwise
required by state law or regulation and shall contain preliminary cost
estimates and proposed methods of financing. From the information
submitted, the Business Administrator and Budget Officer, in
consultation with each requesting department, shall prepare and
submit to the Mayor a tentative capital budget and a tentative capital
program in such form and contents as may be required pursuant to law
and which, without limitation thereto, shall include:
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 5-46 PATERSON CODE § 5-48
1:46
§ 5-49. Budget operations.
§ 5-50. Personnel Administration Division; Personnel Director as
head; general duties.
(1) A clear summary of its contents.
(2) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be
undertaken during the six fiscal years next ensuing with
appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such
improvements and their relative priorities.
(3) Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time
schedules for each such improvement.
(4) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.
(5) The estimated effect of the proposed capital program for each year
on the tax rate, debt margin, borrowing capacity and general
financial structure of the City.
B. Adoption. Upon receipt of the tentative capital budget and program
from the Business Administrator, the Mayor shall review it and prepare
a final version of the capital budget for submission to the Council in
accordance with law. The Council shall then prepare a final version of
the capital budget, hold a public hearing thereon and adopt it as
provided by law.
C. Annual revisions. The capital program shall be reviewed, revised and
extended on an annual basis to assure that the capital program will
remain consistent with changing demands, changing patterns of cost
and changing financial resources. In aid of such review, progress and
performance reports shall be prepared annually by the individual
departments for each project authorized in the past budget period to
aid in bringing the program up to date. A final accounting shall be
provided for projects completed, and progress reports shall be
submitted for projects that will take a number of years to complete.
A. Budget appropriations shall be controlled by an encumbrance system
which shall be prescribed or approved by the Business Administrator.
Upon the approval of the Mayor, the Business Administrator shall
establish quarterly or such other periodic allotments of appropriations
as he may deem desirable.
B. Each department shall plan and administer its work program within the
limits of such allotments, and no commitments shall be incurred in
excess of such allotments except upon written authorization of the
Mayor.
§ 5-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-50
1:47
§ 5-51. Definitions. [Added 12-15-2015 by Ord. No. 15-09019]
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATOR — The Mayor, Business Administrator or
other officer vested with the executive powers of the City of Paterson.
CITY — The City of Paterson.
CITY COUNCIL — The Council of the City of Paterson.
CITY PURCHASING AGENT OR AGENT — The Purchasing Agent of the City
of Paterson.
SUPPLIES — Include all supplies, materials and equipment.
A. Within the Department of Administration, there shall be a Personnel
Administration Division, the head of which shall be known as the
"Personnel Director."
B. The Personnel Administration Division shall prepare, install and
maintain a complete system of personnel administration as prescribed
by the Business Administrator with the approval of the Mayor. Such
system shall include, without limitation thereto, a job classification and
pay plan, uniform rules for the administration of employee benefit
programs, a personnel file for each employee, including his initial
application, all civil service and other administrative actions relating to
the individual, and a record of an annual performance evaluation and
rating, all of which shall comprise a permanent record which shall at no
time be removed from the Department offices.
C. The Division shall supervise all manpower training, development and
personnel-related programs operated and/or funded through or by the
City and shall be responsible for the formulation and implementation of
affirmative action programs for the City.
D. The Division shall install, operate and maintain a central payroll system
and all social security, pension and insurance records for personnel of
all departments. All records as to earnings shall be accumulated, and
payment shall be authorized only on an actual time earned basis. No
payment shall be authorized by the Division until such time as it has
been earned by employees.
E. The positions within the Personnel Administration Division shall be as
set forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in Local Government, included at
the end of this chapter. [Added 6-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-016;
amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
19.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 5-51
through 5-54 as §§ 5-52 through 5-54.1, respectively.
§ 5-50 PATERSON CODE § 5-51
1:48
USING AGENCY — Any department, agency, commission, bureau or other
unit in the City government using supplies or procuring contractual services
as provided for in this chapter.
§ 5-52. Purchasing Division; Purchasing Agent as head; general
duties. [Amended 3-27-1990 by Ord. No. 90-007; 6-9-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-016; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 12-20-2005 by Ord. No.
05-084; 7-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-020; 12-15-2015 by Ord. No.
15-090]
A. Within the Department of Administration, there shall be a Purchasing
Division, the head of which shall, subject to the direction and
supervision of the Business Administrator, administer the public
purchasing provisions of the Charter and ordinances. The title of the
position shall be the "City Purchasing Agent." The Purchasing Agent
shall report to the Director at least monthly on the number, distribution
and purchase price of all purchases made by or for the City during the
next preceding month. Whenever practicable and advantageous, the
Purchasing Agent shall employ the facilities of county and state
purchase contracts available to municipalities. It shall be the
responsibility of the City Purchasing Agent, when feasible, to store and
distribute all personal property to be procured with the funds from the
City Treasury for the purpose of exercising its procurement functions
efficiently and economically. The division shall classify all items of
personal property subject to procurement by it; adopt as standards the
minimum number of quantities, sizes and types of such items consistent
with efficient operation; and prepare, promulgate and enforce written
specifications for all such standard items. Whenever the Division
procures any item that is to be paid for out of any appropriation made to
another department, board or commission, purchase orders which do
not exceed $17,500 or for which a formal contract is not required by the
Charter may be authorized by the Business Administrator or the head of
the Purchasing Division within the limits of available appropriations.
(1) Position specifications. The Purchasing Agent shall:
(a) Experience requirement. Have had, prior to his appointment,
at least five years' experience in a purchasing office of a public
or private corporation in an executive capacity.
(2) Scope of purchasing authority. The Purchasing Agent shall have the
power and it shall be his duty:
(a) Purchase or contract. To purchase or contract for all supplies
and contractual services needed by any using agency which
derives its support wholly or in part from the City, in
accordance with purchasing procedures as prescribed by this
chapter and such rules and regulations as the Purchasing
Agent shall adopt for the internal management and operation
of the Purchasing Division and such other rules and
§ 5-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-52
1:49
regulations as shall be prescribed by the Business
Administrator and the City Council.
[1] Exceptions prohibited. The authority of the Purchasing
Agent to negotiate all purchases for all using agencies
shall not be abridged by excepting any particular using
agency.
[2] Unauthorized purchases. Except as herein provided, it
shall be unlawful for any City officer or officers to order
the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within
the purview of this chapter other than through Purchasing
Division, and any purchase ordered or contract made
contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved by
the City officials, and the City shall not be bound thereby.
(3) Other powers and duties. In addition to the purchasing authority
conferred in Subsection A(2) above and in addition to any other
powers and duties conferred by this chapter, the Purchasing Agent
shall:
(a) Minimum expenditure. Act to procure for the City the highest
quality in supplies and contractual services at least expense to
the City.
(b) Encourage competition. Discourage uniform bidding and
endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on
all purchases and sales.
(c) Rules and regulations. Establish, and amend when necessary,
all rules and regulations authorized by this chapter and any
others necessary to its operation.
(d) Purchasing analysis. Keep informed of current developments in
the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new
products, and secure for the City the benefits of research done
in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions,
national technical societies, trade associations having national
recognition, and by private businesses and organizations.
(e) Forms. Prescribe and maintain such form as he shall find
reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter.
(f) Standard nomenclature. Prepare and adopt a standard
purchasing nomenclature for using agencies and supplies.
(g) Vendors' catalog file. Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendors'
catalog file. Said catalog shall be filed according to materials
and shall contain descriptions of vendors' commodities, prices,
and discounts.
(h) Bulk purchases. Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as
to take full advantage of discounts.
§ 5-52 PATERSON CODE § 5-52
1:50
§ 5-53. Emergency purchases.
(i) Federal tax exemptions. Act so as to procure for the City all
federal tax exemptions to which it is entitled.
(j) Cooperation with Department of Finance. Cooperate with the
Department of Finance so as to secure for the City the
maximum efficiency in budgeting and accounting.
B. All purchases of any supplies, materials or equipment or contractual
services for a department shall be made by the Purchasing Agent
pursuant to a written requisition from the director of the department
whose appropriation will be charged, and the certification of the
Director of Accounts and Control that a sufficient unencumbered
balance of appropriation is available to pay therefore. All purchasing
shall comply with the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et
seq.) and any amendments or supplements thereto.
C. The director of each department shall designate by writing, filed with
the Business Administrator, the name or names of employees in the
department authorized to receive supplies, materials and equipment. A
person so designated shall accept deliveries and sign for them only
where the goods are in exact conformity with the order. Should there be
any doubt as to quantity or quality, the receiving employee shall
immediately notify the department director for appropriate action. If
any supplies, materials or equipment are rejected, the department
director shall immediately notify the Business Administrator.
D. Except as the Business Administrator may authorize in cases of
emergency, no purchase shall be made and no bill, claim or voucher
shall be approved unless the procedures prescribed by or pursuant to
the code have been followed.
E. The position within the Purchasing Division, Department of
Administration, shall be as set forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in Local
Government, included at the end of this chapter.
A. Where the Business Administrator determines that an emergency exists
within the meaning of applicable statutes, the purchase of any item may
be made without advertisement for bids, notwithstanding that the
amount involved exceeds $17,500. The Business Administrator shall
establish procedures, in compliance with state laws and regulations,
which will permit such emergency purchases to be made for specific
purposes in a manner other than that prescribed by this article.
B. Additional requirements.
(1) Emergency purchases by Purchasing Agent. In case of an apparent
emergency which requires immediate purchase of supplies or
contractual services, the Business Administrator shall be
empowered to authorize the Purchasing Agent to secure by open
market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable
§ 5-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-53
1:51
§ 5-54. Purchases by quotation.
price, any supplies or contractual services regardless of the
amount of the expenditure.
(a) Recorded explanation. A full report of the circumstances of an
emergency purchase shall be filed by the Purchasing Agent
with the City Council.
(2) Emergency purchases by head of using agency. In case of actual
emergency, and with the consent of the Purchasing Agent, and the
approval of the Business Administrator, the head of any using
agency may purchase directly any supplies whose immediate
procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the using
agency which may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of
citizens.
(a) Recorded explanation. The head of such using agency shall
send to the Purchasing Agent a requisition and a copy of the
delivery record together with a full written report of the
circumstances of the emergency. The report shall be filed with
the Council as provided in Subsection B(2)(a) above.
(b) Emergency procedure. The Purchasing Agent shall prescribe
by rules and regulations the procedure under which
emergency purchases by heads of using agencies may be
made.
A. All purchases of supplies, and contractual services, the value of which is
less than 15% of the City of Paterson's bid threshold shall be made in
the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without
observing the procedures prescribed by § 5-54.5 for the award of formal
contracts. A requisition for the goods/services shall be prepared by the
using agency and forwarded to the Purchasing Agent for processing. If
the value of the goods/services exceeds 15% of the City of Paterson bid
threshold but is less than the City of Paterson bid threshold, then the
goods/services may be procured through the solicitation of price
quotes.
B. Minimum number of price quotes. All purchases by quotation shall,
wherever possible, be based on at least three competitive quotes, and
shall be awarded to the vendor that submitted the lowest responsible
quote.
(1) Notice inviting quotes. The Purchasing Agent shall solicit quotes
by:
(a) Direct mail request to prospective vendors;
(b) By telephone;
§ 5-53 PATERSON CODE § 5-54
1:52
§ 5-54.1. Standards for requisitions and purchases; tests.
§ 5-54.2. Encumbrance of funds.
Except in cases of emergency, the Purchasing Agent shall not issue any
order for delivery on a contract or open market purchase until the Finance
Director shall have certified that there is to the credit of the using agencies
concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess of all
unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order.
§ 5-54.3. Prohibition of interest.
Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this chapter, in which
the Purchasing Agent or any officer or employee of the City is financially
interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void.
(c) By public notice posted on the bulletin board of the City Hall
lobby; or
(d) By posting notice on the City of Paterson website.
(2) Recording. The Purchasing Agent shall keep a record of all orders
obtained through price quotes and the quotes submitted in
competition thereon, and such records shall also be open to public
inspection.
A. The Business Administrator shall establish or approve uniform
standards for requisitions and purchases.
B. Requisition and estimates. All using agencies, either by or with the
authorization of the Department Director under which the using agency
operates, shall file with the Purchasing Agent detailed requisitions or
estimates of their requirements in supplies and contractual services in
such manner, at such times, and for such future periods as the
Purchasing Agent shall prescribe.
(1) Unforeseen requirements. A using agency shall not be prevented
from filing, in the same manner, with the Purchasing Agent at any
time a requisition or estimate for any supplies and contractual
services, the need for which was not foreseen when the detailed
estimates were filed.
(2) Revisory power in Purchasing Agent. The Purchasing Agent shall
examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the authority
to revise it as to quantity, quality, or estimated cost; but revision as
to quality shall be in accordance with the standards and
specifications established pursuant to this chapter.
A. Gifts and rebates. The Purchasing Agent and every officer and
employee of the City are expressly prohibited from accepting, directly
or indirectly, from any person, company, firm or corporation to which
any purchase order or contract is, or might be awarded, any rebate,
§ 5-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-54.3
1:53
§ 5-54.4. Competitive bidding required.
All purchases of and contracts for supplies and contractual services and
all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable
shall, except as otherwise provided by law, be based wherever possible on
competitive bids.
§ 5-54.5. Formal contract procedure.
All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided by law,
when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $40,000, shall be purchased
by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder, after due
notice inviting bid proposals.
gift, money, or anything of value whatsoever, except given for the use
and benefit of the City.
A. Notice inviting bids.
(1) Newspaper. Notice inviting bids shall be published once in at least
one official newspaper in the City and at least 10 days preceding
the last day set for the receipt of bid proposals.
(a) Scope of notice. The newspaper notice required herein shall
include a general description of the articles to be purchased or
sold, shall state where bid packages and specifications may be
secured and the time and place for opening bids.
(2) City of Paterson website. The Purchasing Agent shall also advertise
all pending purchases or sales by a notice posted on the City of
Paterson website.
B. Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the Purchasing Agent, bid
deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids.
Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of surety where the
Purchasing Agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit
any surety required by the Purchasing Agent upon failure on his part to
enter a contract within 10 days after the award.
C. Bid opening procedure.
(1) Sealed. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the Purchasing Agent and
shall be identified as bids on the envelope.
(2) Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated
in the public notices.
(3) Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for
public inspection and will be available no sooner than 48 hours
after the date of the bid opening.
D. Rejection of bids. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to
reject all bids, parts of all bids, or all bids for any one or more supplies
§ 5-54.3 PATERSON CODE § 5-54.5
1:54
or contractual services included in the proposed contract, when the
public interest will be served thereby.
(1) Bidders in default to City. The Purchasing Agent shall not accept
the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes,
licenses or other monies due the City.
E. Award of contract.
(1) Authority in agent. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority
to award contracts within the purview of this chapter.
(2) Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the
lowest responsible bidder. In determining "lowest responsible
bidder," in addition to price, the Purchasing Agent shall consider:
(a) The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required;
(b) Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, or within time specified, without delay or
interference;
(c) The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
(d) The quality of performance of previous contracts or services;
(e) The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract or service;
(f) The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
(g) The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, or
contractual services to the particular use required;
(h) The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract;
(i) The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
(3) Award to other than low bidder. When the award is not given to the
lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for
placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the agent and
filed with the other papers relating to the transaction.
(4) Tie bids.
(a) Local vendors. If all bids received are for the same total
amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the
contract shall be awarded to a local bidder.
§ 5-54.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-54.5
1:55
§ 5-54.6. Central warehousing.
The Purchasing Agent shall control and supervise storerooms and
warehouses.
§ 5-54.7. Price agreement contract procedures.
The head of the using agency shall have the authority to submit requisitions
to the Purchasing Agent for supplies available under the terms of a price
agreement contract made by the Purchasing Agent.
§ 5-54.8. Inspection and testing.
The Purchasing Agent shall inspect, or supervise the inspection of, all
deliveries of supplies or contractual services to determine their
conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract.
§ 5-54.9. Surplus stock.
All using agencies shall submit to the Purchasing Agent, at such times and
in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies
(b) Outside vendors. Where Subsection E(4)(a) is not in effect, the
Purchasing Agent shall award the contract to one of the tie
bidders by drawing lots in public.
(5) Performance bonds. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority
to require a performance bond, before entering a contract, in such
amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best
interests of the City.
F. Prohibition against subdivision. No contract or purchase shall be
subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section.
A. Inventory. The Purchasing Agent shall maintain a perpetual inventory
record of all materials, supplies or equipment stored in storerooms and
warehouses.
A. Inspection by using agency. The Purchasing Agent shall have the
authority to authorize using agencies having the staff and facilities for
adequate inspection to inspect all deliveries made to such using
agencies under rules and regulations which the Purchasing Agent shall
prescribe.
B. Tests. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to require
chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples
of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and
conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests,
the Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory
facilities of any agency of the City government or of any outside
laboratory.
§ 5-54.5 PATERSON CODE § 5-54.9
1:56
which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or
scrapped.
§ 5-54.10. Cooperative purchasing.
The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to join with other units of
government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the
City would be served thereby.
§ 5-55. Information Technology Division; Information Technology
Director as head; general duties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
Within the Department of Administration, there shall be a Division of
Information Technology, the head of which shall be known as the
"Information Technology Director." The Division shall program, compute,
process and store in an established area and order such data and
information pertinent and relative to the City’s operations. The Business
Administrator may prescribe, for reasons of efficiency and economy, such
other data and information relative to other departments as may prove to be
economically feasible. The Division shall use and operate such machinery,
equipment and computers and their peripheral equipment as may be made
available for the purpose of the City. All references to the "Division of
Data Processing" shall be deemed to refer to the "Division of Information
Technology," and all references to the "Data Processing Director" shall be
deemed to refer to the "Information Technology Director."
A. Transfer. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to transfer
surplus stock to other using agencies.
B. Sale. The Purchasing Agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies
which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same
for, or trade in the same on new supplies.
(1) Competitive bidding. If the estimated fair market value of the
property to be sold exceeds 15% of the City of Paterson bid
threshold in any one sale, it shall be sold at public sale to the
highest responsible bidder and in conformance with § 5-54.5.
§ 5-54.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-55
1:57

ARTICLE VII
Department of Finance
§ 5-56. Department establishment; Finance Director and Chief
Financial Officer as head. [Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord. No. 89-005;
6-13-1989 by Ord. No. 89-031]
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the
Finance Director and Chief Financial Officer. The Finance Director may also
serve as the City Treasurer. Prior to appointment, the Finance Director and
Chief Financial Officer shall be qualified by training and have at least four
years' experience in a responsible position in state, municipal, corporate
finance or public accounting or shall be a certified public accountant.
Commencing January 1, 1991, no person shall be appointed or reappointed
as Finance Director and Chief Financial Officer unless that person holds a
municipal finance officer certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1
et seq. (P.L. 1988, c. 110). In the event of a vacancy in this office, pursuant
to P.L. 1988, c. 110, a person who is otherwise qualified to serve as Finance
Director and Chief Financial Officer who also does not hold a municipal
finance officers certificate may nonetheless hold the position of Temporary
Finance Director and Temporary Chief Financial Officer for a period not to
exceed one year and commencing on the date of the vacancy. The person
holding the position of Temporary Finance Director and Temporary Chief
Finance Officer may nonetheless be reappointed following the termination
of initial temporary appointment for an additional one-year period.
However, all such temporary and interim appointments shall be subject to
the provisions of §§ 5-8 and 5-9 of this chapter.
§ 5-57. Powers and duties of Finance Director.
The Finance Director, subject to the direction and supervision of the Mayor,
shall:
A. Be the Chief Financial Officer of the City in accordance with the
provisions of P.L. 1988, c. 110.20 [Amended 2-14-1989 by Ord. No.
89-005]
B. Account for and preaudit and control all City revenues and
expenditures.
C. Prescribe, install and enforce a uniform system of accounts, including
forms, standards and procedures for the use of all departments of the
City government and of all agencies expending City funds.
D. Be responsible for the safety and investment of the City's funds; the
management of the City's debt; the development of financial policies for
recommendations to the Mayor; and the safeguarding of the City's
financial interests to the fullest extent.
20.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.1 et seq.
§ 5-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-57
1:59
§ 5-58. Divisions within Department of Finance.
The Department of Finance shall consist of the following Divisions:
§ 5-59. Treasury Division; Treasurer as head; general duties.
E. Be the custodian of City funds.
F. Be the custodian of school funds.
G. Perform the duties of City Treasurer with no additional compensation.
A. Treasury.
B. Accounts and Control.
C. Assessments.
D. Licensing.
E. Revenue Collections.
F. Sewer Billing. [Added 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
G. Internal Audit. [Added 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
H. Ambulance and Abatement Billing. [Added 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
A. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Treasury Division,
the head of which shall be known as the "City Treasurer." The Finance
Director shall act as City Treasurer.
B. The Treasurer shall receive daily all moneys/receipt of moneys
processed by the Revenue Collection Division from any source and shall
make daily deposits of such moneys in such banks and institutions as
may be designated by the Council. He shall be required to make specific
reports daily to the Business Administrator and Mayor concerning all
receipts and deposits and of all moneys withdrawn from the City's
accounts. Similar reports shall be made to each regular meeting of the
Council, as of the close of business on the Friday next preceding each
such meeting.21
C. All payments and withdrawals from City bank and institutional accounts
shall be by check or appropriate written instrument of withdrawal and
not in cash or its equivalent upon orders which indicate the purposes
for which the finance director is required to draw checks or instruments
of withdrawal and the appropriation or fund to which they are
chargeable.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 5-57 PATERSON CODE § 5-60
1:60
§ 5-60. Accounts and Control Division; Comptroller as head; general
duties. [Amended 2-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-004; 7-27-1993 by Ord.
No. 93-023]
A. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be an Accounts and
Control Division, the head of which shall be known as the "Comptroller."
B. Under the direction and supervision of the Comptroller, the Division
shall:
(1) Establish, maintain and operate the City's central bookkeeping and
accounting records according to sound accounting principles and
in accordance with the requirements of the Director of the State
Division of Local Government Services.
(2) Audit all receipts and disbursements of the City government and of
each of its departments and preaudit all bills, claims and demands
against the City, including payrolls, and require each department
director to certify that any materials, supplies or equipment have
been received and accepted as specified and that the services have
been duly rendered.
(3) Control all expenditures to assure that budget appropriations are
not exceeded and maintain such books and records as may be
required for the proper exercise of such budgetary control.
(4) Review each proposed expenditure and commitment to be made on
behalf of any department for conformity with state law, the charter
and ordinances of the City, and authorize only such expenditures
and commitments as conform to all the requirements of this
chapter.
(5) Assist the Finance Director in preparing a monthly report of
expenditures, balances and status of department budgets for
submission to the Business Administrator, Mayor and Council.
(6) Assist the Finance Director in preparing within 90 days of the close
of each fiscal year a statement as of the end of that year, showing
the balances in all funds of the City, the amounts of the City's
known liabilities and such other information as is necessary to
furnish a true picture of the City's financial condition, for
submission to the Business Administrator, Mayor and Council.
(7) Perform all other duties as set forth in the State of New Jersey
Department of Personnel County and Municipal Government
Services Descriptions and Specifications.
C. The positions within the Department of Finance, Division of Accounts
and Control, shall be as set forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in Local
Government, included at the end of this chapter.22
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 5-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-61
1:61
§ 5-61. Assessments Division; Chief Assessor as head; duties.23
§ 5-62. Licensing Division; Licensing Director as head; general
duties.
§ 5-63. Revenue Collections Division; Revenue Collections Director
as head; general duties.
A. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be an Assessments
Division, the head of which shall be the Chief Assessor. The Division
shall consist of such personnel as may be authorized by ordinance.
B. The Chief Assessor shall:
(1) Value all real and personal property in the City for the purpose of
assessment and taxation in accordance with general law and the
ordinances of the City and exercise all the powers of a municipal
assessor pursuant to law.
(2) Prepare the tax list and duplicate as required by law and maintain
adequate assessment records of each and every parcel of real and
personal property assessed.
(3) Have custody of and maintain an up-to-date Tax Map and provide
for the recording thereof of all changes in ownership or character
of the real property assessed.
(4) Make all special assessments of benefits for local improvements.
(5) Be responsible for all appraisals of property for any City purpose,
provided that he may, with the approval of the Mayor and within
the limits of available appropriations, retain outside experts for
appraisers whenever the public interest requires.
A. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Licensing Division,
the head of which shall be known as the "Licensing Director."
B. The Division shall administer and be responsible for the issuance of
licenses and permits and collection of fees therefor, except as otherwise
provided by ordinance or law.
A. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Revenue Collections
Division, the head of which shall be known as the "Revenue Collections
Director."
B. The Division shall be responsible for:
(1) The receipt and collection of all taxes and other moneys due the
City, including receipt of all funds collected by other agencies of the
City government.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 5-61 PATERSON CODE § 5-63
1:62
§ 5-64. Sewer Billing Division; Sewer Billing Director as head;
general duties. [Added 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 5-65. Internal Audit Division; Chief Internal Auditor as head;
general duties. [Added 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
(2) The preparation of all bills for property and other taxes as
stipulated by City ordinances.
(3) The issuance of official receipts for all moneys collected from
whatever source.
C. The Revenue Collections Division shall have the authority to assign its
employees to any department, department division, board or
commission which receives money due the City with regularity and in
such volume as to warrant such assignment, in the opinion of the
Finance Director.
D. The positions within the Department of Finance, Revenue Collections
Division, shall be as set forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in Local
Government, included at the end of this chapter. [Added 6-9-1993 by
Ord. No. 93-016; amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
E. A fee of $5 shall be charged for each handwritten duplicate of tax and
sewer bills. [Added 9-28-1993 by Ord. No. 93-033; amended
10-11-2016 by Ord. No. 16-065]
A. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Sewer Billing
Division, the head of which shall be known as the "Sewer Billing
Director."
B. Under the direction of the Sewer Billing Director, the Division shall be
responsible for:
(1) The preparation of all sewer bills as stipulated by City ordinances.
(2) The preparation of the inventory of property in sewer lien to be
provided to the Tax Collector for the annual statutory sales of
property in lien.
A. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be an Internal Audit
Division, the head of which shall be known as the "Chief Internal
Auditor."
B. Under the direction of the Chief Internal Auditor, the Division shall be
responsible for:
(1) The performance of internal audits of operations for operations for
all departments of the City government and of all statutory
agencies expending City funds.
§ 5-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-65
1:63
§ 5-66. Ambulance and Abatement Billing Division; Ambulance and
Abatement Billing Director as head; general duties. [Added
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 5-67. Signatures on checks; transfer of moneys.
(2) The annual examination of supporting documentation of all
recipients of moneys provided by the City of Paterson through
federal and state grant programs.
(3) The performance of special internal audit projects as assigned by
the Director of Finance.
(4) The audit of petty cash funds established by City Council
resolution.
(5) Review of the annual independent audits as required by abatement
agreements.
A. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be an Ambulance and
Abatement Billing Division, the head of which shall be known as the
"Director of Ambulance and Abatement Billing."
B. Under the direction of the Ambulance and Abatement Billing Director,
the Division shall be responsible for:
(1) The preparation and mailing of all bills for the ambulance service
provided by Division of Fire, EMTs, including self-pays, Medicare
and Medicaid.
(2) The receipt and recording of all ambulance payments received.
(3) Monitoring ambulance receivable balances and preparing
delinquent notices.
(4) The preparation of all bills for tax abate properties.
(5) The receipt and collection of all revenues generated from taxabated
properties for which an abatement agreement exists.
(6) The posting of revenues received from tax-abated properties to the
property owner's receivable ledger file.
A. All checks drawn on City bank and savings funds shall be signed by the
Mayor and by the Finance Director or one of his duly authorized
designees, who shall be appointed by the Director with the approval of
the Mayor. Said appointment and approval thereof shall be in written
form prescribed by the Corporation Counsel and shall be filed in the
office of the City Clerk. Said designees or any of them may be removed
in the same manner as they are designated.
B. Whenever the Finance Director deems it advisable to transfer moneys
from one legal depository of the City to another, the check shall be
§ 5-65 PATERSON CODE § 5-67
1:64
signed by him and made payable to the City, to be endorsed by the
Finance Director for transfer deposit only.
§ 5-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-67
1:65

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Law
§ 5-68. Department established; Director of Law as head.
§ 5-69. Powers and duties of Director of Law (Corporation Counsel).
A. There shall be a Department of Law, the head of which shall be the
Director of Law, also known as the "Corporation Counsel." Prior to his
appointment, the Director of Law shall have been admitted to the
practice of law in this state for at least five years.
B. The Director of Law and the professional assistants in the Department
shall receive annual salaries as established by ordinance, to be paid as
all other salaries are paid.
A. The Director of Law (Corporation Counsel) shall be the legal adviser to
the Mayor, the Council and all City departments, boards, commissions,
authorities and agencies except as may be otherwise provided by the
charter or ordinance.
B. He shall enforce all laws and protect the interests of the City and shall
prosecute and defend actions and proceedings by and against the City
and every City department, board, commission, authority and agency
thereof except as may be otherwise provided by the charter or
ordinance.
C. In furtherance of these general powers, and without limitation thereto,
he shall:
(1) Advise the Council or its committees or any City official, when
required, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of City
business.
(2) Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the Council or
any committee thereof.
(3) Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to
him by the Council or any of its committees or by any City officer.
(4) Personally or by a representative attend all Council meetings for
the purpose of giving the Council any legal advice requested by its
members.
(5) Prepare all contracts and instruments when the City is a party, and
approve all bonds to be submitted to the City.
(6) Prepare, when authorized by the Council or other City authority, all
charges or complaints against and shall appear in the appropriate
court in the prosecution of every person charged with a violation of
a City ordinance, statute, rule or regulation.
§ 5-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-69
1:67
§ 5-70. Professional assistants. [Amended 2-14-1986 by Ord. No.
86-009]
§ 5-71. Duties of Deputy Director of Law (First Assistant
Corporation Counsel).
The Deputy Director of Law (First Assistant Corporation Counsel) shall
perform such duties as the Director of Law may direct or prescribe and,
during the absence or disability of the Director of Law, shall possess all of
the powers and perform all the duties of the Director of Law.
§ 5-72. Special counsel.
Whenever he deems that the interests of the City so require, the Director of
Law may, with the approval of the Mayor and within the limits of available
appropriations, appoint special counsel to assist him in the handling of such
legal affairs of the City as he may determine. If the Director of Law and
his staff shall be disqualified with respect to any matter, the Mayor shall
appoint special counsel to represent the City for and with respect to such
matter.
(7) Immediately report the outcome of any litigation in which the City
has an interest to the Council and to the City official having control
of the subject matters of litigation.
(8) Make an annual report to the Council as of the second day of
January of each year of all impending litigation in which the City
has an interest and the condition thereof.
A. The Director shall appoint a Deputy Director, who shall be designated
as the First Assistant Corporation Counsel, a Second Assistant
Corporation Counsel, six Assistant Corporation Counsels and two legal
assistants, each of them to serve during the term of the Director
appointing them.
B. Prior to their appointment, each of them shall have been admitted to
the practice of law in this state for at least three years except that the
requirement for three years' admission to the practice of law in this
state may be waived by the Director with the approval of the Mayor for
the position of legal assistant.
C. The Director shall designate from and amongst the professional
assistants designated as Assistant Corporation Counsels a Chief
Municipal Prosecutor and such Assistant Municipal Prosecutors not in
excess of the total number of professional assistants authorized by the
ordinance codified in this section. Designation as Chief Municipal
Prosecutor or Assistant Municipal Prosecutor shall be pursuant to P.L.
1996, c. 95, § 14.24 [Amended 3-11-1997 by Ord. No. 97-012]
24.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 2B:12-27.
§ 5-69 PATERSON CODE § 5-72
1:68
ARTICLE IX
Department of Police
[Added 10-12-1984 by Ord. No. 84-092; 6-9-1993 by Ord. No.
93-016; 7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-023; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068; 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-060]
§ 5-73. Department established; Police Director as head.
There shall be a Department of Police, the head of which shall be the Police
Director. Prior to his appointment, the Police Director shall have at least
three years' experience in a responsible/supervisory capacity at a rank of
at least Captain, or the equivalent thereof, in a law enforcement related
field. The Police Director shall receive an annual salary as established by
ordinance, to be paid as all other salaries are paid.
§ 5-74. Divisions within Department of Police.
The Department of Police shall consist of the following divisions and
agencies:
§ 5-75. Rules and regulations governing Department; enforcement;
reports to Council.
A. Police Division.
B. Animal Control Division.
C. Taxi Division.
A. The Police Chief shall administer and enforce the rules and regulations
of the Department of Police.
B. The Police Director shall enforce rules and regulations as promulgated
by the Municipal Council dealing with the recurrent and routine
operations of the Department and the daily conduct of the police in the
performance of their duties pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
C. Upon request of either the Mayor or Council, the Director shall from
time to time give a report on the activities of his Department so long as
it is not of a confidential nature.
D. The City Council shall retain the power, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118, to provide for the appointment of committees or
commissions to conduct investigations of the operation of the police
force and the delegation to such committees or commissions of such
powers of inquiry as the governing body deems necessary or to conduct
such hearing or investigation authorized by law. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the appropriate authority, or any executive or
administrative officer charged with the general administrative
responsibilities within the municipality, from examining at any time the
operations of the police force or the performance of any officer or
member thereof. In addition, nothing herein contained shall infringe on
§ 5-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-75
1:69
§ 5-76. Police Division; Chief of Police as head; general duties.
§ 5-77. Police Division personnel.
The Police Division shall consist of such officers and men as have been
heretofore or may hereafter be authorized for the police force.
§ 5-77.1. Dog control and licensing.25
The Department of Police shall be responsible for the enforcement of all
laws, ordinances and regulations pertaining to the licensing and control of
dogs.
or limit the power or duty of the appropriate authority to act to provide
for the health, safety or welfare of the municipality in an emergency
situation through special emergency directives.
A. Within the Department of Police, there shall be the Police Division, the
head of which shall be the Chief of Police who shall be the head of the
police force and shall be directly responsible to the Police Director. The
Chief of Police shall be a bona fide resident of the City of Paterson.
B. Under the direction and supervision of the Police Director, the Police
Department shall:
(1) Preserve the public peace, prevent crime and detect and arrest
offenders against the penal laws and ordinances effective within
and throughout the City, including all housing projects to which
housing guards have been or may be assigned.
(2) Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct,
control and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, and the use of the streets by vehicles and persons generally.
(3) Remove all nuisances in the public streets, parks and other public
places.
(4) Inspect and observe all places of public amusement or assemblage
and all places of business requiring any state or municipal license
or permit and report thereon to the appropriate department.
(5) Operate a training program to maintain and improve the efficiency
of the members of the Division.
C. The positions within the Department of Police, Police Division, shall be
as set forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in Local Government, included
at the end of this chapter.
25.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 121, Animals.
§ 5-75 PATERSON CODE § 5-78
1:70
§ 5-78. Youth Guidance Commission.
The Youth Guidance Commission shall be maintained and operated in
accordance with law as an agency within the Department of Police.
A. Membership. The Municipal Youth Guidance Commission shall not
exceed seven voting members, all of whom shall be residents of the said
municipality. The membership of the Municipal Youth Guidance
Commission shall include at least one representative of the municipal
governing body, one representative of the school system, and one
representative of the municipal Police Department. In addition, the
Mayor and each City Council member shall appoint one youth
ambassador to the Commission for a total of 10 youth representatives.
The youth representatives shall: [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No.
09-014]
(1) Include representation from each of the six wards; and
(2) Be between the ages of 13 and 21 and a resident of the City of
Paterson; and
(3) Have demonstrated leadership in their community through
community service and involvement in extracurricular activities,
school organizations, or any other advocacy for the benefit of their
peers and community; and
(4) Provide two letters of recommendations from nonrelatives; and
(5) Have satisfactory school attendance.
B. Annual organization; meetings. The members of the Municipal Youth
Guidance Commission shall organize annually by selecting a chairman,
vice chairman and secretary. The Municipal Youth Guidance
Commission shall meet regularly, at least once each month and at such
other times as its chairman shall direct. The monthly meetings shall be
on the fourth Friday of every month at 7:00 p.m. in City Hall or such
other time and location as agreed upon by the Commission. The
Commission shall make quarterly reports to the Mayor and to the
Council. The meetings shall be open to the public and recorded
electronically and published on line for viewing or commenting.
[Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 09-014]
C. Term of office. Members of the Municipal Youth Guidance Commission
shall be appointed to serve for a term of three years or until their
successors be appointed. Youth ambassadors shall be appointed for a
period of one year. [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 09-014]
D. Duties. The Municipal Youth Guidance Commission is an advisory board
and shall be charged with responsibility to: [Added 5-26-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-014]
§ 5-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-78
1:71
(1) Assist in coordinating and integrating community plans and
services, governmental and voluntary, affecting the welfare of all
children and youth in the community.
(2) Assist in coordinating and integrating community plans and
services, governmental and voluntary, for protecting children who
are especially exposed to conditions conductive to delinquency.
(3) Assist in coordinating and integrating community plans for the
control of harmful influences in the community.
(4) To enhance the quality of life for youth in Paterson through
coordinating, networking, advocacy, reviewing and recommending
policies and legislation affecting youth in this City to the Mayor,
Municipal Council and the Administration.
(5) To provide input and advice to the City on programs which benefit
the City's gifted and talented youth.
(6) To encourage the Mayor and City Council to develop business
training and employment programs for youth.
(7) To provide input and advice on programs that serve the City's
youth.
(8) The planning of programs for youth in cooperation with existing
agencies in order to insure complete coverage of the problem and
avoid duplication.
E. Powers of Guidance Commission. Each Municipal Guidance
Commission shall have power to:
(1) Undertake, supervise or direct the making of studies and surveys of
all matters and things which are or may be related to or in the
interest of youth guidance.
(2) Create subcommittees, composed of members and nonmembers of
the Municipal Youth Guidance Commission, to aid and assist in the
work of the said Commission.
(3) Request and obtain such cooperation, assistance and data from
various municipal departments, boards, bureaus, commissions and
other agencies as may be reasonably necessary in order to carry
out its work.
(4) Make recommendations, devise plans and suggest ways and means
to meet the various problems having to do with youth guidance.
§ 5-78 PATERSON CODE § 5-78
1:72
ARTICLE IXA
Department of Fire
[Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-060]
§ 5-79. Department established; Fire Director as head.
There shall be a Department of Fire, the head of which shall be the Fire
Director. Prior to his appointment, the Fire Director shall have at least three
years' experience at a rank of at least Battalion Chief, or the equivalent
thereof, in a responsible/supervisory capacity in a field related to firefighting
or fire safety The Fire Director shall receive an annual salary as
established by ordinance, to be paid as all other salaries are paid.
§ 5-79.1. Divisions within the Department of Fire.
The Department of Fire shall consist of the following Divisions:
§ 5-80. Fire Division; Chief of Fire as head; general duties.
§ 5-80.1. Fire Division personnel.
The Fire Division shall consist of such officers and men as have been
heretofore or may hereafter be authorized.
§ 5-81. Hours of duty for Fire Division.
A. Fire Division.
B. Ambulance Service Bureau.
C. Bureau of Fire Prevention.
A. Within the Department of Fire, there shall be the Fire Division, the head
of which shall be the Fire Chief who shall be the head of the fire force
and shall be directly responsible to the Fire Director.
B. Under the direction and supervision of the Fire Director, the Fire
Division shall:
(1) Have exclusive jurisdiction over the control, fighting and
extinguishment of any conflagration which occurs within the City
limits.
(2) Provide fire-fighting services and facilities for the protection of life
and property within the City and in accordance with such mutual
aid agreements as may be in force.
(3) Investigate the cause, circumstances and origin of fires and report
to the County Prosecutor every case of suspicion of arson.
(4) Maintain and administer a fire prevention and fire safety inspection
service for the City.
§ 5-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-81
1:73
§ 5-82. (Reserved)
A. The schedule of the particular hours of each member of the Fire
Division shall be determined and posted in writing by the Fire Chief,
subject to the direction and approval of the Fire Director.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to mean that, in times of
emergency, the Fire Director, the Fire Chief or any other authorized
official shall be prohibited from summoning to and keeping on duty as
many firemen as may be necessary within the sole discretion of said
official to cope with such emergency.
§ 5-81 PATERSON CODE § 5-82
1:74
ARTICLE X
Department of Economic Development
[Amended 6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 88-018; 9-11-1990 by Ord. No.
90-031; 2-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-004; 6-9-1993 by Ord. No. 93-016;
4-26-1994 by Ord. No. 94-031; 10-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-060;
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 6-10-2003 by Ord. No. 03-025;
8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-026; 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-030]
§ 5-83. Department established; Economic Development Director as
head.
§ 5-84. Divisions within Department of Economic Development.
The Department of Community Development shall consist of the following
divisions:
§ 5-85. Planning and Zoning Division; City Planner as head; general
duties.
A. There shall be a Department of Economic Development, the head of
which shall be the Economic Development Director. Prior to his
appointment, the Economic Development Director shall be qualified by
education, training and at least three years of responsible experience
for the duties of his office. The Economic Development Director shall
receive an annual salary as established by ordinance, to be paid as all
other salaries are paid.
B. Any reference to powers or duties of the "Department of Community
Development" in any codified ordinance, uncodified ordinance,
resolution, executive order or agreement enacted prior to the 2014
effective date of the creation of the Department of Economic
Development shall be rebuttably presumed to refer to the Department
of Economic Development, unless the reference primarily addresses
activities of the Division of Housing, which shall remain within the
Department of Community Development.
A. Planning and Zoning Division.
B. Community Improvements Division.
C. Redevelopment Division.
D. Economic Development Division.
E. Cultural/Community Affairs Division.
F. Historic Preservation Division.
A. Within the Department of Economic Development, there shall be the
Planning and Zoning Division, the head of which shall be the City
Planner.
§ 5-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-85
1:75
§ 5-86. Community Improvements Division; Community
Improvements Director as head; general duties.
B. The Planning and Zoning Division shall:
(1) Provide staff services for the Planning Board.
(2) Provide staff services for the Board of Adjustment.
(3) Prepare and maintain maps, charts and data relating to the present
and proposed physical development of the City and present and
proposed uses of land therein and present and proposed population
densities, including, without limitation thereto, a Master Plan,
Official Zoning Map and a map of such waterways and subsurface
utilities as can be made available.
(4) Prepare proposed subdivision and zoning regulations and
amendments thereto.
(5) Prepare or assist in the preparation of loan and grant applications.
(6) Consult with the Planning Board with respect to proposals
developed under Subsection B(1), (3) and (4) of this section.
(7) Prepare, review, revise and modify a workable program as defined
by N.J.S.A. 40:55C-35 and 40:55C-37 for utilizing appropriate
private and public resources to eliminate and prevent the
development or spread of blight and deterioration, to encourage
needed conservation or rehabilitation, to provide for the
redevelopment of blighted, deteriorated or deteriorating areas or
to undertake such of these activities or other feasible activities as
may be suitably employed to achieve the objectives of such a
program, provided that the workable program may be adopted,
amended, revised or modified only with the approval of the Mayor.
A. Within the Department of Economic Development, there shall be the
Community Improvements Division, the head of which shall be the
Community Improvements Director.
B. The Community Improvements Division shall be responsible for:
(1) Conducting all inspections and enforcing all regulations pertaining
to zoning and building codes of the City, electrical requirements,
plumbing codes, elevator codes and housing maintenance
regulations.
(2) The issuance of building, plumbing, electrical, fire and elevator
permits.
C. The positions within the Department of Economic Development,
Community Improvements Division, shall be as set forth in Appendix A,
Active Titles in Local Government, included at the end of this chapter.
§ 5-85 PATERSON CODE § 5-87
1:76
§ 5-87. State Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency within
Community Improvements Division.
The State Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency, as provided in
Chapter 183, Construction Codes, Uniform, shall be a subdivision in the
Community Improvements Division of the Department of Economic
Development.
§ 5-88. Redevelopment Division; Redevelopment Director as head;
general duties.
§ 5-89. Economic Development Division; Economic Development
Director as head; general duties.
A. Within the Department of Economic Development, there shall be the
Redevelopment Division, the head of which shall be the Redevelopment
Director.
B. The Redevelopment Division shall:
(1) Administer and direct urban conservation, rehabilitation and
renewal activities of the City.
(2) Exercise the powers of the City as an authorized local public
agency for purposes of any federal urban renewal or
redevelopment program, provided that no project shall be
undertaken except upon the approval of the Council, and nothing in
this section shall be construed to authorize any expenditure except
pursuant to an appropriation made by the Council.
(3) With the approval of the Director of the Department, appoint or
contract with technical and professional advisers and assistance as
may be required and approved for any federally or state aided
planning, renewal, development or redevelopment project,
provided that nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the
making of any contract in excess of $2,500 without the approval of
Council.
(4) Constitute and appoint, with the approval of the Director of the
Department, advisory committees, neighborhood councils and
other forms of citizen participation in urban rehabilitation and
redevelopment.
A. Within the Department of Economic Development, there shall be the
Economic Development Division, the head of which shall be the
Economic Development Director.
B. The Economic Development Division shall:
(1) Be responsible for the preparation, formulation and
implementation of an overall economic development plan for the
City.
§ 5-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-89
1:77
§ 5-90. Staff assistance to be rendered.
The Department of Economic Development shall render staff assistance to
the Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 5-91. Planning Board review.
Whenever any project or course of action is related to or may affect the
Master Plan, the Department shall submit the matter to the Planning Board
for review and recommendation. Such recommendation shall be annexed to
and accompany any proposal transmitted to the Council with respect to any
such project or course of action.
§ 5-92. Responsibilities of Cultural/Community Affairs Division.
(2) Coordinate all program activities concerning the economic
development of the City.
(3) Formulate plans for attracting new business and industry into the
City so that jobs are made available to alleviate or prevent
conditions of unemployment, underemployment and economic
dislocation.
(4) Develop an ongoing program to improve utilization of industrial
and commercial space and to provide opportunities for industrial
and commercial expansion.
(5) Involve public officials and private citizens in analyzing local
economics, defining development goals, determining project
opportunities and formulating and implementing development
programs.
C. The positions within the Department of Economic Development,
Economic Development Division, shall be as set forth in Appendix A,
Active Titles in Local Government, included at the end of this chapter.
A. Within the Department of Community Development, there shall be the
Cultural/Community Affairs Division, the head of which shall be the
Cultural/Community Affairs Director.
B. The Cultural/Community Affairs Division shall:
(1) Assume responsibility for the development of programs and
activities aimed at meeting the needs of the community.
(2) Implement programs developed by the Mayor and City Council
designed to promote economic development and cultural services.
(3) Maintain liaison with citizen groups and agencies interested in
participating in programs and activities promulgated by the
Division.
§ 5-89 PATERSON CODE § 5-92
1:78
§ 5-93. Historic Preservation Division; Historic Preservation
Director as head; general duties.
(4) Maintain liaison with citizen programs interested in participating
in programs and activities promulgated by the division.
(5) Act as liaison to federal, state, county, local and private sector
agencies to ascertain the availability of funding for arts and
cultural programs within the City.
(6) Ascertain the cultural needs of the City and implement programs to
meet them.
(7) Act as an informal resource person for federal, state and local arts
organizations.
(8) Coordinate volunteer programs within the City for arts and cultural
activities.
(9) Assist local educational, cultural and charitable institutions
through cooperative programs to enhance membership, funding
and publicity.
(10) Coordinate requests by independent entities to obtain filming
permits within the City.
(11) Attempt to comply with HUD regulations mandating that 51% of
said activities benefit low/moderate-income residents.
A. Within the Department of Economic Development, there shall be the
Historic Preservation Division, the head of which shall be the Historic
Preservation Director.
B. The Historic Preservation Division shall:
(1) Provide professional staff services and guidance to the Historic
Preservation Commission in executing its duties and
responsibilities under the City of Paterson Zoning and Land
Development Ordinance, Chapter 483 of the Code of Paterson.
(2) Assist the Historic Preservation Commission to pursue and
implement programs designed by the Department of Community
Development to promote and coordinate historic preservation
activities and efforts throughout the City.
(3) Act and lead as liaison for administrative and executive
coordination of historic preservation planning, program
integration, reviews, application for specialized funding to federal,
state, county, City, not-for-profit and private sector agencies,
including the Historic Preservation Commission, Department of
Community Development and all other City departments as
necessary.
§ 5-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-93
1:79
(4) From time to time develop and administer programs and activities
for public engagement and participation in heritage and historic
preservation awareness efforts and to participate with other
agencies as necessary in joint programs to this end.
(5) Examine and report to the Department of Community Development
on opportunities for historic preservation practice, application,
efforts, programs and funding programs to participate in for
redevelopment, economic development, reuse planning and
heritage tourism planning to the benefit of the City, business
community and citizens.
(6) Identify, maintain and develop inventories, maps, records,
professional assessment reports, property-related data and
research of historic resources throughout the City necessary in all
aspects of the Division's responsibilities in pursuit of this section.
(7) Assist the City with historic preservation guidance for capital
improvement strategies and priorities, and for the ongoing
maintenance of its inventory of historic and landmarked buildings,
monuments, structures and open spaces.
§ 5-93 PATERSON CODE § 5-93
1:80
ARTICLE XI
Department of Public Works
§ 5-94. Department established; Public Works Director as head;
general duties.
§ 5-95. Divisions within Department of Public Works. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
The Department of Public Works shall consist of the following Divisions:
A. There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be
the Public Works Director.
B. The Department of Public Works shall:
(1) Be responsible for all matters relating to the construction,
management, maintenance and operation of the physical
properties of the City other than office supplies, furniture and
equipment.
(2) Direct and supervise the preparation of plans and specifications
and the letting and performance of contracts for all City public
works or improvements.
(3) Provide all engineering and mechanical services required by any
department, office or agency of the City government, except as
otherwise directed by the Mayor or Business Administrator.
(4) Make all inspections of buses and taxicabs required for issuance of
permits and licenses to operate the same within the City limits.
C. The positions within the Department of Public Works shall be as set
forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in Local Government, included at the
end of this chapter. [Added 6-26-1990 by Ord. No. 90-020B;
amended 7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-023; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No.
94-031; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
A. Engineering and Operations Division.
B. Traffic and Lighting Division.
C. Sewer Division.
D. Streets Division.
E. (Reserved)
F. Public Property Division.
G. Automotive Maintenance Division.
H. Cable Communications Division.
§ 5-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-95
1:81
§ 5-96. Engineering and Operations Division; City Engineer as head;
general duties. [Amended 6-23-1992 by Ord. No. 92-032;
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 5-97. Traffic and Lighting Division; Public Works Director as head;
general duties.
I. Parks and Shade Trees Division.
J. Recycling Division.
A. Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be the Engineering
and Operations Division, the head of which shall be the City Engineer.
B. With the approval of the Public Works Director, the City Engineer may
designate and appoint an Assistant City Engineer to serve as head of
the Division in the absence of the City Engineer.
C. Under the direction of the City Engineer, the Engineering and
Operations Division shall:
(1) Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs and specifications
for public works and improvements undertaken by the City, either
itself or by public contract.
(2) Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and
control records with respect to public works and facilities owned
and operated by the City.
(3) Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to other
City departments as needed.
(4) Supervise the performance of contracts for public works and certify
the amounts due and payable thereunder.
(5) Provide, operate and maintain facilities for the collection and
disposal of refuse and garbage at such time and in such manner as
may be authorized by ordinance.26
(6) Maintain and be responsible for technical liaison with Passaic
County Utilities Authority and all federal, state, county and
regional bodies dealing with the disposal of solid waste.
(7) Receive applications for and issue street opening permits.
D. The positions within the Department of Public Works, Engineering and
Operations Division, shall be as set forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in
Local Government, included at the end of this chapter.
A. Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be the Traffic and
Lighting Division, the head of which shall be the Public Works Director.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 427, Solid Waste.
§ 5-95 PATERSON CODE § 5-97
1:82
§ 5-98. Sewer Division; City Engineer as head; general duties.27
§ 5-99. Streets Division; Superintendent of Public Works as head;
general duties.
B. The Traffic and Lighting Division shall:
(1) Study problems of street traffic congestion and control and
streetlighting and recommend to the City Engineer appropriate
plans for street improvement and use to satisfy traffic
requirements.
(2) Construct, install, repair and maintain traffic control signals and
other electrically operated signals, excluding the police and fire
signal and radio systems.
(3) Install, repair and maintain street traffic signs, lines and markers,
and check for streetlight outages.
A. Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be the Sewer
Division, the head of which shall be the City Engineer.
B. The Sewer Division shall:
(1) Operate, maintain and repair the City's sanitary and storm sewer
system, pumping stations, treatment plants, if any, and
appurtenances.
(2) Maintain and be responsible for technical liaison with the Passaic
Valley Sewerage Commission and all federal, state, county and
regional bodies dealing with sewage.
A. Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be a Streets
Division, the head of which shall be the Superintendent of Public Works.
B. Under the direction and supervision of the Director, the Streets Division
shall:
(1) Maintain and repair all City streets, bridges, culverts and drains
within the City.
(2) Construct and reconstruct streets, roads, bridges, culverts and
drains.
(3) Treat road surfaces and resurface streets and roads according to
such standards and schedules as directed or approved by the City
Engineer.
(4) Maintain all City streets in a clean and safe condition free of
obstructions and hazards and remove snow and ice therefrom as
required.28
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 5-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-99
1:83
§ 5-100. (Reserved)
§ 5-101. Public Property Division; Director of Public Property as
head; general duties. [Amended 9-15-1981 by Ord. No. 81-070;
6-14-1988 by Ord. No. 88-01830]
§ 5-102. Automotive Maintenance Division; Public Works Director
as head; general duties.
(5) Inspect sidewalks and curbs for conditions requiring repair.29
A. Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be the Public
Property Division, the head of which shall be the Director of Public
Property.
B. Under the direction and supervision of the Public Works Director, the
Director of the Public Property Division shall:
(1) Operate, maintain and repair City-owned buildings and properties
and provide custodial and janitorial services therefor, including
office quarters, waterfront property and all other real estate.
C. The positions within the Department of Public Works, Public Property
Division, shall be as set forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in Local
Government, included at the end of this chapter.
A. Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be the Automotive
Maintenance Division, the head of which shall be the Public Works
Director.
B. Under the supervision and direction of the Public Works Director, the
Automotive Maintenance Division shall:
(1) Control the care, use and disposition of motor vehicles owned by
the City, other than fire engines and vehicles and other than all
police vehicles.
(a) Operate or supervise the operation of a garage or garages for
the storage, servicing, repair and maintenance of City-owned
motor vehicles other than fire engines and vehicles and other
than all police vehicles.
(b) Supervise any work done by contract for the storage, repair,
servicing and maintenance of City-owned motor vehicles or
28.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-95(b)(5), regarding street opening permits, which
immediately followed this subsection, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I.
29.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 2-96, Sanitation Division; Director as head; general duties,
and original Sec. 2-97(a) through (d), Recreation Division; superintendent as head;
general duties; charge and fees; rules and regulation, as amended 9-15-1981 by Ord. No.
81-070, which immediately followed this section, were deleted at time of adoption of Code;
see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 5-99 PATERSON CODE § 5-102
1:84
§ 5-103. Cable Communications Division; Public Works Director as
head. [Added 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-060]
§ 5-104. Parks and Shade Tree Division; Superintendent of Parks
and Shade Trees; general duties. [Added 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
§ 5-105. Recycling Division; Recycling Coordinator as head; general
duties. [Added 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
equipment other than fire engines and vehicles and other than
all police vehicles.
(c) Control the maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the City,
other than fire engines and vehicles and other than all police
vehicles by maintaining individual vehicle records of mileage,
costs of operation and maintenance and replacement
schedules.
(2) Establish standards and procedures for the control, use and care of
all City-owned equipment, materials and supplies in the custody of
the Department of Public Works.
A. Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be a Cable
Communications Division, the head of which shall be the Director of the
Department of Public Works.
B. Subsequent to the approval of Council of the necessary construction,
contracts and leases, the Cable Communications Division, under the
direction of the Director of the Department of Public Works, shall
supervise the construction and lease of a cable communications system
and all appurtenances thereto.
C. The positions within the Department of Public Works, Cable
Communications Division, shall be as set forth in Appendix A, Active
Titles in Local Government, included at the end of this chapter.
[Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
A. Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be a Parks and
Shade Tree Division, the head of which shall be the Superintendent of
Parks and Shade Trees.
B. Under the supervision and direction of the Superintendent of Parks and
Shade Trees, the Parks and Shade Tree Division shall:
(1) Trim, plant and care for trees in the public way.
(2) Maintain all playing fields, public parks, greens, playgrounds and
shade trees in the same and all recreational structures.
A. Within the Department of Public Works, there shall be a Recycling
Division, the head of which shall be the Recycling Coordinator.
§ 5-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-105
1:85
§ 5-106. (Reserved)32
§ 5-107. Clothing allowance. [Added 2-19-1985 by Ord. No. 85-017]
The following employees in the Department of Public Works shall receive
the same clothing allowance, if any, as provided to Department of Public
Works supervisors pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement:
B. Under the direction and supervision of the Recycling Coordinator, the
Recycling Division shall supervise and operate the recycling program of
the City of Paterson.31
A. The Department of Public Works Superintendent.
B. The Department of Public Works Deputy Director.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 427, Solid Waste, Art. IV, Recycling.
32.Editor's Note: Former § 5-106, Recreation Advisory Council; membership; appointments;
terms; operation, as amended, was repealed 9-30-2014 by Ord. No. 14-055.
§ 5-105 PATERSON CODE § 5-107
1:86
ARTICLE XII
Department of Health and Human Services
[Amended 2-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-005; 4-21-1981 by Ord. No.
81-020; 6-14-1988 by Ord; No. 88-018; 9-10-1991 by Ord. No.
91-046; 12-17-1991 by Ord. No. 91-057; 6-23-1992 by Ord. No.
92-032; 2-23-1993 by Ord. No. 93-004; 4-26-1994 by Ord. No.
94-031; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 11-26-2002 by Ord. No.
02-038; 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078]
§ 5-108. Department established; Health and Human Services
Director as head; general powers and duties.
§ 5-109. Divisions and agencies within Department of Health and
Human Services.
The Department of Health and Human Services shall consist of the following
Divisions and agencies:
A. There shall be a Department of Health and Human Services, the head of
which shall be the Health and Human Services Director.
B. The Department of Health and Human Services shall survey the quality
of human life in the City with particular reference to conditions
affecting health and welfare and the relationship of City services and
functions to needs of the community. Within the limits of its legal
authority and funds available to it pursuant to law, the Department of
Health and Human Services shall organize and administer programs
and activities designed to maintain and improve the quality of human
life for those who live, work and visit within the City.
C. The positions within the Department of Health and Human Services
shall be as set forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in Local Government,
included at the end of this chapter.
D. All references to the "Department of Human Services" or the
"Department of Human Resources" will all be deemed to be amended to
read "Health and Human Services."
E. The designation "Department of Health & Human Services" shall be an
acceptable abbreviation for "Department of Health and Human
Services" in any City of Paterson document.
A. Health Division.
B. Welfare Division.
C. Consumer Protection Division.
D. Rent Leveling Board.
E. Youth Services Division.
F. Division on Aging and Disabled Services.
§ 5-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-110
1:87
§ 5-110. Health Division; City Health Officer as head; general
powers and duties.
§ 5-111. Vital Statistics Bureau.
Within the Department of Health and Human Services, Division of Health,
there shall be a Vital Statistics Bureau to function pursuant to law.
§ 5-112. Welfare Division; Welfare Director as head; Local
Assistance Board; general duties.
A. Within the Department of Health and Human Services, there shall be
the Health Division, the head of which shall be the City Health Officer.
The Health Officer of the City shall devote his full time to the position of
Health Officer and shall not engage in any outside activities for
monetary gain during his tenure of office as Health Officer, except as
specifically provided by the Mayor and City Council from time to time
pursuant to intermunicipal agreements; provided, however, that the
foregoing provisions shall not prohibit the affiliation of such Health
Officer with a medical school or a recognized university or hospital.
B. Under the supervision of the Health and Human Services Director, the
Health Division shall:
(1) Have all the functions, powers and duties of a Local Board of
Health under Title 26 of the Revised Statutes, except that as
required by the charter, the Council shall have and exercise all
local legislation powers under that title.
(2) Act in conformity with and be subject to the recognized public
health authorities and the minimum standards of performance for
Local Boards of Health in New Jersey as set forth in N.J.A.C. 8:52-1
et seq.
(3) Plan and administer a comprehensive public health program,
including, without limitation thereto, environmental sanitation,
communicable disease control, child and adult health, health
education, laboratory services, prevention and control of
dangerous drugs and narcotic abuse and other services as may be
authorized by the charter or ordinance.
(4) Administer and enforce the local health ordinances.
(5) Plan, direct and administer all inspections and rodent control
activities of the City.
C. The positions within the Health Division, Department of Health and
Human Services, shall be as set forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in
Local Government, included at the end of this chapter.
§ 5-110 PATERSON CODE § 5-112
1:88
§ 5-113. Consumer Protection Division; Health and Human Services
Director as head; duties.
§ 5-114. Office of Rent Leveling; Rent Leveling Administrator as
head.
§ 5-115. Rent Leveling Board.
A. Within the Department of Health and Human Services, there shall be
the Welfare Division, the head of which shall be the Welfare Director
appointed by the Local Assistance Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 44:8-117.
B. Within the Welfare Division, there shall be a Local Assistance Board
consisting of five members, to be appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of Council.
C. The Welfare Director, under the supervision of the Local Assistance
Board and except as otherwise required by the charter or ordinance,
shall:
(1) Administer laws and ordinances relating to relief of the needy,
including the furnishing of all forms of public assistance to needy
persons who are eligible for assistance provided by law through
county and state agencies.
(2) Provide or arrange for shelter and custodial care to dependent and
homeless men and women.
(3) Furnish staff services to the Local Assistance Board.
A. Within the Department of Health and Human Services, there shall be
the Consumer Protection Division, the head of which shall be the Health
and Human Services Director.
B. The Consumer Protection Division shall:
(1) Furnish necessary staff assistance to the Rent Leveling Board.
(2) Publish and distribute, periodically, a directory of services.
(3) Operate the program for inspection of weights and measures in
accordance with law and ordinances therein provided.
(4) Supervise the Office of Rent Leveling.
A. Within the Department of Health and Human Services, Consumer
Protection Division, there shall be the Office of Rent Leveling, the head
of which shall be the Rent Leveling Administrator.
B. The appointment, powers and functions of the Rent Leveling
Administrator shall be as provided in Chapter 381, Rent Leveling, of
this Code of the City of Paterson.
§ 5-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-115
1:89
§ 5-116. Youth Service Division; Director of Youth Services as head;
general duties.
§ 5-117. Division on Aging and Disabled Services; Program
Development Specialist/Aging as head; general duties.
A. Within the Department of Health and Human Services, there shall be
the Rent Leveling Board.
B. The appointment, powers and functions of the rent leveling board shall
be as provided in Chapter 381, Rent Leveling, of this Code of the City of
Paterson.
A. Within the Department of Health and Human Services, there shall be
the Youth Services Division, which shall be known as the "Youth
Services Bureau," the head of which shall be the Director of Youth
Services.
B. The Director of Youth Services, under the supervision of the Director of
Health and Human Services, shall:
(1) Plan and administer a comprehensive youth services program that
will work to reduce the number of juvenile offenders within the
City, assist the juveniles already in the system and plan and
implement effective preventative strategies.
(2) Provide training to increase parents' ability to deal successfully
with demonstrative or emerging causes of delinquency.
(3) Provide leadership in the coordination of service delivery with
other youth service agencies within the community.
A. Within the Department of Health and Human Services, there shall be
the Division on Aging and Disabled Services, the head of which shall be
the Program Development Specialist/Aging. The Program Development
Specialist/Aging shall be responsible for the identification of persons
who are aged or have disabilities as well as the coordination and
procurement of services that will enhance their quality of life.
B. Under the supervision of the Health and Human Services Director, the
Division on Aging and Disabled Services shall:
(1) Enhance the quality of life of the elderly and disabled population of
the City of Paterson through the facilitation of direct services and
appropriate referrals.
(2) Coordinate all City programs and activities for the elderly and
disabled population of Paterson.
(3) Advocate and network with other local social services agencies and
other resources on behalf of the elderly and disabled of Paterson.
(4) Assist the elderly and disabled with needed services and benefits.
§ 5-115 PATERSON CODE § 5-117
1:90
(5) Develop and implement recreational and educational events that
fulfill the sociocultural and emotional needs of the elderly and
disabled.
C. Within the Division on Aging and Disabled Services, there shall be the
Council on Aging and the Council on the Disabled, Inc. The members of
said advisory Councils shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(1) The Council on Aging shall attempt to overcome, by decisive action,
aging-related problems and to set reasonable and reachable goals
that benefit the elderly of the City.
(2) The Council on the Disabled, Inc., shall provide the disabled
citizens of the City of Paterson a forum for expressing to the Mayor
and the municipality the concerns and needs of the disabled in the
areas of housing, transportation, recreation, employment,
education and legislation.
§ 5-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-117
1:91

ARTICLE XIII
Awarding of Public Professional Services Contracts
[Added 4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 10-021]
§ 5-118. (Reserved)
§ 5-118.1. Limitations on award of public contracts to contributors,
and limitation on contributions from recipients of public contracts.
A. The City of Paterson shall not enter into a "professional service
agreement" (as defined below) with a "professional business entity" (as
defined below) that has made a "local political contribution" (as defined
below) during the preceding one-year period, unless the contract is duly
awarded pursuant to a fair and open process.
B. No "professional business entity" (as defined below) that has entered
into a "professional service agreement" (as defined below) with the City
of Paterson shall make a "local political contribution" (as defined below)
during the term of the said "professional service agreement," unless the
contract was duly awarded pursuant to a fair and open process.
C. No local municipal committee of a political party that has any member
serving in an elective public office of the City of Paterson, nor any
candidate committee of any person serving in an elective public office
of the City of Paterson, shall accept a "local political contribution" (as
defined below) from a "professional business entity" (as defined below)
that has entered into a "professional service agreement" with the City
of Paterson during the term of the said agreement, unless the contract
was duly awarded pursuant to a fair and open process.
D. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LOCAL POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION — A contribution of more than
$300, or the equivalent in goods or commercial services, to a local
municipal committee of a political party having any member holding
elective public office of the City of Paterson, or to a candidate
committee of any person holding elective public office of the City of
Paterson, or more than two times the said maximum to the committees
of any combination of multiple such parties or candidates. However,
if the state raises or lowers its threshold of $300 for reportable
contributions pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:44A-7.2, 19:44A-8 or any
successor statute, then the maximums prescribed by this section shall
be equivalently raised or lowered automatically by operation of law.
PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS ENTITY — A professional business entity
seeking a public contract means an individual, including the
individual's spouse, if any, and any child living at home; person; firm;
corporation; professional corporation; partnership; organization; or
association. The definition of a business entity includes all principals
who own 10% or more of the equity in the corporation or business trust,
§ 5-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-118.1
1:93
§ 5-118.2. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, shall be deemed a violation of this section, nor shall an
agreement for property, goods, or services, of any kind whatsoever, be
disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made prior to the effective date
of this section.
§ 5-118.3. Contributions statement by professional business entity.
§ 5-118.4. Return of excess contributions.
§ 5-118.5. Breach of terms; violations and penalties.
partners, and officers in the aggregate employed by the entity as well
as any subsidiaries directly controlled by the business entity.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE AGREEMENT — An agreement addressing
payment for professional services having an anticipated value in excess
of $17,500, as determined in advance and certified in writing. However,
if the state raises or lowers its threshold of $17,500 pursuant to N.J.S.A.
19:44A-20.5 or any successor statute, then the said threshold
prescribed by this section shall be equivalently raised or lowered
automatically by operation of law.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services with
any "professional business entity" as defined above, the Council or any
of its purchasing agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall receive a
sworn statement from the professional business entity made under
penalty of perjury that the bidder or offeror has not made a contribution
in violation of § 5-118.1 hereof.
B. The "professional business entity" as defined above shall have a
continuing duty to report any violations of this section that may occur
during the negotiation or duration of a contract. The certification
required under this subsection shall be made prior to entry into the
contract or agreement with the City and shall be in addition to any
other certifications that may be required by any other provision of law.
A. One who has received a "local political contribution" as defined above
may cure a violation of § 5-118.1 if, within 30 days after the general
election, the party in question notifies the City of Paterson Council and
reimburses the party who made the contribution.
B. One who has made a "local political contribution" as defined above may
cure a violation of § 5-118.1 if, within 30 days after the general election,
the party in question notifies the City of Paterson Council and requests
reimbursement from the recipient. Thereafter, the recipient must
provide reimbursement within 30 days of receipt of the said request.
A. All City of Paterson "professional service agreements" as defined above
shall provide that it shall be a breach of the terms of the government
§ 5-118.1 PATERSON CODE § 5-118.5
1:94
§ 5-118.6. Construal of provisions.
No provision of this section shall be construed as an attempt to exempt any
party from any duties under any state or federal law.
contract for a "professional business entity" as defined above to violate
the City of Paterson Pay-to-Play Ordinance or any applicable state
Pay-to-Play law, or to knowingly conceal or misrepresent contributions
given or received, or to make or solicit contributions through
intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the
source of the contribution.
B. The penalties for violation of § 5-118.1 shall include all penalties set
forth in N.J.S.A. 19:44A-20.11, 19:44A-22.3 and any successor statutes
in effect as of the time of the violation or violations, except where any of
the said penalties is beyond the jurisdiction of a municipality to pursue
in Municipal Court or Superior Court.
C. In addition to any penalty set forth above, a "professional business
entity" as defined above who knowingly fails to reveal a contribution
made in violation of this section, or who knowingly makes or solicits
contributions through intermediaries for the purpose of concealing or
misrepresenting the source of the contribution, shall be disqualified
from eligibility for future municipal contracts for a period of four
calendar years from the date of the violation.
§ 5-118.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-118.6
1:95

ARTICLE XIV
Municipal Contracting for Insurance Services
[Added 8-23-2011 by Ord. No. 11-027]
§ 5-119. Procedures.
A. For purposes of this article, the term "insurance" shall include the
purchase of insurance coverages, alternatives to insurance such as selfinsurance
programs, as well as participation in a joint self-insurance
fund, risk management program or related services provided by a
contracting unit insurance group, or participation in an insurance fund
established by a local unit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-6, or a joint
insurance fund established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-36 et seq. The
term "insurance consulting services" shall include all services
associated with procuring, evaluating and administering insurance,
including but not limited to brokerage, risk management or
administrative services, and claims processing or administration
services, including such services provided by a contracting unit
insurance group, or an insurance fund established by a local unit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-6, or a joint insurance fund established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-36 et seq.
B. Prior to entering into any contract to obtain insurance or insurance
consulting services, the City shall secure full and open competition
among insurers and insurance consulting service providers, for the
City's business. The City is hereby authorized, and directed, to use the
competitive contracting process set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4.3,
40A:11-4.4 and 40A:11-4.5 to secure such competition, except to the
extent this article requires additional measures to better ensure
maximum competition and fairness to all interested parties.
C. This open competition shall provide that at least 60, but not more than
120, days prior to the contract commencement date, the City shall
advertise in the newspapers authorized to print legal notices for the
municipality, and in a newspaper circulated in at least five counties in
the state, and on the City's website, a request for proposals to provide
insurance and insurance consulting services. The notice shall advise the
reader that details of the City's insurance requirement are available
from the Municipal Clerk on request and shall include the phone
number of the Clerk.
D. The request for proposals shall be designed and drafted by the Business
Administrator, Purchasing Agent, or his designee, and shall set forth
such detailed information as may be required for all proposers to
understand and possess equal information concerning the City's
insurance or insurance consulting services needs, including the current
terms of, and fees or premiums paid for, such coverages or services,
current coverages, loss experience and anticipated or desirable needs
with respect to the relevant coverages or services sought. All request
for proposal information, including claims, expense and loss data, shall
§ 5-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-119
1:97
be made available to all proposers in both written and electronic
format.
E. Responses to the request for proposal shall be submitted to the City at
least 30 days prior to the anticipated commencement of the contract.
F. At no time during the proposal solicitation process shall any official or
employee of the City, or any officer, employee or representative of any
provider of insurance consulting services to the City convey
information, including price, to any potential proposer which could
confer an unfair advantage upon that proposer over any other potential
proposer.
G. A provider of insurance consulting services to the City shall be
compensated for its services to or on behalf of the City solely by the
City. Compensation shall be set on a fixed fee or hourly basis, or on such
other common and readily comparable basis applicable to all proposers
and set forth in the request for proposal documents, provided that
compensation shall not be determined as a percentage of premium
costs.
H. No provider of insurance or of insurance consulting services to the City
shall pay to any insurance consulting service provider to the City, or to
any other third party, any form of compensation, including but not
limited to commissions, fees, incentives, bonuses, rebates or any other
thing of value, in consideration of obtaining the City's insurance or
insurance consulting business.
I. No provider of insurance consulting services to the City shall accept
any form of compensation, including but not limited to commissions,
fees, incentives, bonuses, rebates or any other thing of value, from any
provider of insurance, other insurance service provider, or any other
third party, in consideration of obtaining or servicing the City's
insurance or insurance consulting business.
J. Any person or entity proposing to provide insurance or insurance
consulting services to the City shall certify in its proposal that it shall
neither pay nor accept any form of compensation, including but not
limited to commissions, fees, incentives, bonuses, rebates or any other
thing of value, in consideration of obtaining or servicing the City's
insurance or insurance consulting business from any party other than
the City.
K. Any person or entity selected to provide insurance or insurance
consulting services to the City shall certify at least annually and prior to
any renewal of its contract that it has not paid nor accepted any form of
compensation, including but not limited to commissions, fees,
incentives, bonuses, rebates or any other thing of value, in
consideration of obtaining or servicing the City's insurance or
insurance consulting business from any party other than the City.
§ 5-119 PATERSON CODE § 5-119
1:98
L. Any provider of insurance consulting service that assists the City in
soliciting, evaluating, or selecting any provider of insurance or other
insurance consulting services to the City shall disclose to the City the
aggregate compensation, including but not limited to commissions,
fees, incentives, bonuses, rebates or any other thing of value it has
received in each of the prior three years from each provider of
insurance or insurance consulting services solicited or evaluated by the
City. Such disclosure shall be made as soon as practicable, but in no
event later than the date of the evaluation report recommending an
award by the governing body.
M. The request for proposals for any insurance or insurance consulting
services for the City shall clearly establish the compensation
restrictions and the certification and disclosure requirements
established by this article as mandatory, nonwaivable terms, the
violation of which shall be grounds for:
(1) Terminating any contract resulting therefrom; and
(2) Requiring the insurer or insurance service provider to disgorge to
the public entity any compensation, including but not limited to
commissions, fees, incentives, bonuses, rebates or any other thing
of value, paid or received in violation of this article, and
commensurate reduction in premiums to be paid by the public
entity for the affected coverage(s) in the future.
N. Whenever soliciting quotations for insurance coverage, the Business
Administrator, Purchasing Agent, or his designee, shall obtain at least
three quotations and shall submit the request for proposals to at least
one joint insurance fund, and with respect to health insurance, to the
State Health Benefits Plan, at the same time it is published, and shall
determine if the SHBP and/or joint insurance fund can provide the same
or similar coverages. The evaluation report shall include an analysis
and discussion of the availability, terms and price of comparable
coverage from such joint insurance fund and the SHBP as part of its
award recommendation.
§ 5-119 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-119
1:99

ARTICLE XV
Department of Community Development
[Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-030]
§ 5-120. Department established; Community Development Director
as head.
There shall be a Department of Community Development, the head of which
shall be the Community Development Director. Prior to his appointment, the
Community Development Director shall be qualified by education, training
and at least three years of responsible experience for the duties of his office.
The Community Development Director shall receive an annual salary as
established by ordinance, to be paid as all other salaries are paid.
§ 5-121. Divisions within Department of Community Development.
The Department of Community Development shall consist only of the
Housing Division, where additional divisions may be added by ordinance.
§ 5-122. Housing Division; Housing Director as head; general
duties.
§ 5-123. Community development block grant budget amendments.
Subsequent to the annual approval of the Community Development Block
Grant Budget by the Municipal Council, no amendment or transfer within
the Community Development Block Grant Budget shall be made without
formal approval of said amendment or transfer by resolution of the
Municipal Council.
A. Within the Department of Community Development, there shall be the
Housing Division, the head of which shall be the Housing Director.
B. The Housing Division shall:
(1) Be responsible for the development of an overall housing plan for
the City. The plan shall be devised in accordance with the
requirements of federal and state legislation pertaining to grants
for housing assistance to the City and so-called block grants for
community development.
(2) Coordinate all program activities concerning housing in the City,
whether administered by private or local agencies.
(3) Relocation activities of the City.
C. The positions within the Department of Community Development,
Housing Division, shall be as set forth in Appendix A, Active Titles in
Local Government, included at the end of this chapter.
§ 5-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-123
1:101
Chapter 9
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 113.
§ 9-1. Board continued.
The Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control, as heretofore established, is
hereby continued.
§ 9-2. Membership; appointment.
§ 9-3. Terms of members; vacancies.
§ 9-4. Compensation; reimbursement for expenses.
Members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
§ 9-5. Removal of members.
Any member may be removed by the Mayor for cause, after reasonable
notice and an opportunity to be heard.
§ 9-6. Secretary.
A. The Board shall be comprised of three (3) members, not more than two
(2) of whom shall be of the same political party.
B. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council.
A. Each member shall serve for a term of three (3) years, provided that of
those first appointed, one (1) shall be appointed to a term of one (1)
year, (1) one for two (2) years and one (1) for three (3) years.
B. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term.
A. The Board, with the approval of the Council, shall appoint a Secretary,
who shall hold office during good behavior.
B. Before entering upon the duties of his office, the Secretary shall furnish
a bond to the city in the sum of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.)
for the faithful performance of his duties. The bond shall be approved
by the Corporation Counsel as to form and by the Board as to
sufficiency and filed with the City Clerk.
§ 5-123 PATERSON CODE § 9-6
9:102
§ 9-7. Inspector of Alcoholic Beverage Licenses.
Chapter 15
(R E S E R V E D)
Chapter 21
CONSTABLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Division — See Ch. 81.
§ 21-1. Eligibility for the office of constable; appointment.
[Amended 1-24-2006 by Ord. No. 06-001]
Eligibility for the office of constable requires the appointment by a member
of the City Council, which shall lapse if the appointee has not qualified
within 30 days after his or her appointment. No person shall be considered
C. The Secretary of the Board shall:
(1) Keep an accurate record of the proceedings of the Board and enter
the same upon the minutes.
(2) Receive all applications for alcoholic beverage licenses and
transfers and accept the lawful fees therefor.
(3) Remit all fees received by him to the City Treasurer at the close of
each day and obtain a receipt therefor.
(4) Issue such licenses as the Board may direct and keep a record of
the same in appropriate books.
(5) Perform such other duties as the Board may direct.
A. The position of Inspector of Alcoholic Beverage Licenses, as heretofore
created, is hereby continued.
B. The Inspector of Alcoholic Beverage licenses shall:
(1) Make a personal inspection of each licensed premises for which an
application for a transfer has been made.
(2) Report any violation of city ordinances and any rules and
regulations adopted by the Board governing the conduct of
licensed premises which his inspection may disclose.
(3) Perform such other duties as may from time to time be assigned to
him by the Board.
§ 9-6 (R E S E R V E D) § 21-1
15:103
for the office of constable unless he or she has been a resident and a
qualified voter of the City of Paterson for at least three years preceding
his or her nomination. No more than 50 and not fewer than two individuals
shall hold the office of constable at any one time. Prior to an appointment
as constable, any interested applicant must provide to the City Clerk's
office, at the applicant's expense, a state police record check indicating said
applicant's qualification pursuant to § 21-3F.
§ 21-2. Duties of the City Clerk's office.
The City Clerk's office shall process the applications for constable and shall
do such other matters as are set forth in this chapter.
§ 21-3. Qualifications for constable.
Each applicant shall:
A. Be at least 18 years of age.
B. Be of sound mind and body, with good eyesight and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble, drug or alcohol addiction or any other
infirmity which might render him or her unfit to hold the position of
constable.
C. Be able to read and write English.
D. Be clean in dress and person.
E. Be of good character.
F. Not have the following: [Amended 1-24-2006 by Ord. No. 06-002]
(1) A conviction of any crime or offense entered under the Prevention
of Domestic Violence Act;
(2) Any individual who is subjected to the terms of a domestic violence
restraining order (TRO/FRO) which prohibits the possession or
control of a firearm;
(3) Any conviction or PTI for a crime committed with the unlawful
possession of a weapon;
(4) Serious violations of CDS offenses or repeat minor offenses;
(5) Convictions for criminal offenses (first, second, third or fourth
degree);
(6) A history of arrests for any criminal or disorderly persons offense,
even if charges are later dropped;
(7) Recent arrests or negative police encounters;
§ 21-1 PATERSON CODE § 21-3
21:104
(8) Poor motor vehicle history record, including; numerous
suspensions. failures to appear, DWI, repetitive and/or recent
violations not including parking violations);
(9) Falsifying or providing misinformation on application.
(10) Poor conduct or dishonorable discharge from military service.
(11) A history of any illegal drug use while employed in any law
enforcement or prosecutorial position, or while employed in a
position which carries with it a high level of responsibility or public
trust;
(12) Any misrepresentation of drug history in completing the
application.
(13) A history of the sale of any illegal drug for profit at any time;
(14) A history of the use of any illegal drug (including anabolic steroids
after February 27, 1991,) other than marijuana, within the last 10
years or more than five times in one's life.
(15) A history of the use of marijuana within the past three years or
more than a total of 15 times in one's life.
(16) Any individual adjudicated delinquent as a juvenile for any crime or
offense involving the unlawful possession of a weapon. (Under
Chapter 73 of the Laws of 2003, weapon is deemed to include any
weapon and is not limited to a firearm).
(17) Any individual adjudicated delinquent as a juvenile for one of the
enumerated crimes established by the No Early Release Act
(NERA). A listing of said crimes is as follows:
Murder
Aggravated manslaughter/manslaughter
Vehicular homicide
Aggravated assault
Disarming a law enforcement officer
Kidnapping
Sexual assaults
Robbery/carjacking
Aggravated arson
Robbery/carjacking
Aggravated arson
Extortion
Liability for drug-induced deaths
Booby traps in CDS manufacturing/distribution
§ 21-3 CONSTABLES § 21-3
21:105
§ 21-4. Application for appointment; accompanying items.
Burglary
Terrorism/producing or possessing chemical weapons
G. Be a citizen of the United States or legal alien thereof.
H. Submit his or her completed application to the City Clerk's office within
30 days after being appointed by a member of the City Council.
A. The applicant's written appointment by a member of the City Council
shall be submitted to the City Clerk's office along with the application
for constable.
B. Every application and application for renewal shall be filed with the
City Clerk's office on forms provided by it and shall be retained on file
as a permanent record.
C. Every application and every application for renewal shall be verified
under oath and shall truthfully and accurately contain the following
information:
(1) The applicant's full name and address.
(2) The applicant's date of birth.
(3) The applicant's social security number.
(4) The applicant's driver's license number.
(5) The applicant's residences for the preceding five years.
(6) The applicant's age, height, weight, hair and eye color.
(7) The applicant's United States citizenship status.
(8) The applicant's employment history for the preceding five years.
(9) The applicant's official criminal history which shall be determined
via the applicant's fingerprints submitted to the Paterson Police
Division.
(10) The applicant's badge number.
(11) Any other information required by the City Clerk's office.
D. Each application and each application for renewal shall be
accompanied by two 2 1/2 x 2 1/2 inches, recent front-view photographs
of the applicant. One of said photographs shall be attached to the
application maintained in the City Clerk's office.
E. The applicant shall submit with his or her application two notarized
affidavits regarding the applicant's good character from two reputable
citizens of Paterson who have known the applicant and observed his or
§ 21-3 PATERSON CODE § 21-4
21:106
§ 21-5. Bond and insurance requirement.
Each application and each application for renewal shall be accompanied by
an indemnification and hold-harmless agreement for the benefit of the City
of Paterson secured with a surety bond from a private bonding company in
the amount of $25,000. Each application and each application for renewal
shall also be accompanied by a certificate of liability insurance covering
the constable either individually or as part of a group insurance plan in an
amount of not less than $25,000. Said insurance certificate shall include
the City of Paterson as an additionally insured party, and said certificate
shall also contain a provision whereby the insurance company agrees to
immediately notify the City of Paterson's City Clerk's office, in writing, in
the event that the policy is changed, canceled or for any other reason does
not remain in full force and effect.
§ 21-5.1. Failure to qualify. [Added 11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-066]
The failure of any Constable appointment to properly qualify for same
within 90 days of the date of the resolution appointing him shall
automatically void that appointment without further action on the part
of the Municipal Council. Qualification by a Constable appointment shall
include compliance with all of the documentation, information, and
authorization requirements set forth in this chapter, including but not
limited to proof of compliance with the insurance requirements set forth in
§ 21-5.
§ 21-6. Term of office.
The term of office of a constable shall be for a period of three years, unless
the City Council by resolution of appointment fixes a term of one year.
§ 21-7. Registration fee.
her conduct during the previous 12 months. Affidavits are not required
for renewal applications.
F. Each application and each application for renewal shall be
accompanied by a letter from a physician duly authorized to practice
medicine in the State of New Jersey, certifying that he or she has
examined the applicant and the applicant has been found to be
physically fit and, in his professional opinion, medically able to perform
the duties of a constable. Such examination shall not exceed 60 days
prior to the date from the filing of the application.
G. Any false statement contained in the application will be grounds for
rejection of the application and shall promptly be reported to the City
Council and may subject the applicant to prosecution by the Passaic
County Prosecutor's office, in addition to any penalties which may be
imposed under this chapter.
§ 21-4 CONSTABLES § 21-7
21:107
§ 21-8. Oath of office.
Every person appointed as a constable shall upon entering the office of
constable take, subscribe and file with the City Clerk's office the following
oath:
"I, _______________________________, constable of the County of Passaic, do
solemnly swear (or affirm) to support the Constitution of this State and
of the United States and to perform the duties of my office as constable,
faithfully, impartially and justly, to the best of my ability."
§ 21-9. Notification of change of address.
A constable shall notify the City Clerk's office of his or her new address, in
writing on forms provided by the City Clerk's office, within three days after
he or she changes residences.
§ 21-10. Uniform requirements; badge.
§ 21-11. Restrictions on outside employment.
A constable shall not be employed in any capacity in an establishment which
serves alcoholic beverages, in compliance with N.J.A.C. 13:2-23.31.
§ 21-12. Obligation to produce credentials.
A constable shall, upon demand of a police officer or other authorized
person, exhibit his or her constable identification card, badge and his or her
gun permit for inspection.
§ 21-13. Suspension or removal of constables.
A. A registration fee of $50 shall be paid by the applicant at the time the
applicant is sworn in by the City Clerk.
B. The fee due is as follows:
(1) For a period of one year, the fee shall be $50.
(2) For a period of three years, the fee shall be $150.
A. A constable shall wear a uniform approved by the City Council for
constables at all times while he or she is on duty, and such uniform shall
include a badge.
B. Each constable shall be issued a numbered badge, which shall be
returned to the City Clerk's office immediately upon his or her leaving
office for any reason.
C. A constable shall not wear his or her uniform or any part thereof while
off-duty, except while he or she is en route to or from a location where
he or she is employed as a constable.
§ 21-7 PATERSON CODE § 21-13
21:108
A. A constable shall be deemed suspended pending a hearing before the
City Council or its designee where:
(1) He or she has been arrested and charged with a criminal offense.
(2) He or she is drug or alcohol dependent.
(3) He or she is suffering from a mental disease or defect which
renders the applicant unable to perform his or her duties or would
make it unsafe for him or her to do so.
(4) He or she is suffering from a physical or medical condition which
renders the applicant unable to perform his or her duties or would
make it unsafe for him or her to do so.
(5) He or she is under 18 years of age.
(6) Allowing him or her to remain as a constable would not be in the
interest of the public health, public safety or the general welfare.
(7) He or she fails to maintain either the bond or the insurance
required in § 21-5 of this chapter.
B. Where a constable is suspended pending a hearing, the hearing shall be
held no later than 30 days after the suspension became effective. Where
the hearing is not held within this period, through no fault or
acquiescence of the constable in question, then the suspension shall be
rescinded, unless good cause has been shown for an extension of the
thirty-day time period.
C. Where a constable is suspended from office or his or her appointment is
rescinded, he or she shall immediately deliver to the City Clerk's office
his or her constable identification card, badge and gun permit.
D. Following a hearing, before the City Council or its designee, a constable
may be suspended or removed from office for any violation of this
chapter.
E. Any suspension or revocation shall be noted in the City Clerk's office file
on the constable in question, together with the reasons for such action.
F. Where a constable has been suspended for the same reason as a
previous suspension or a constable has been suspended for the third
time for any reason, his or her appointment shall be revoked.
G. Where a constable is suspended or removed from office, the City Clerk's
office shall give written notice of the suspension or removal to the
constable and shall retain a copy of this notice on file.
H. A suspension or removal from office of a constable shall become
effective immediately upon actual receipt of notice by the constable or
his or her agent or, where notice is sent by ordinary mail, the
suspension or revocation shall become effective five days after notice of
the suspension or revocation was sent.
§ 21-13 CONSTABLES § 21-14
21:109
§ 21-14. Constable reports.
§ 21-15. Violations and penalties.
Except as provided by law, any person who violates or permits, aids or abets
in the violation of any provision of this chapter may be suspended from the
office of constable, may have his or her appointment revoked and shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 and shall be
subject to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. A separate
offense is deemed to arise on each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 23
CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pay to play — See Ch. 5, Art. XIII. Municipal contracting for insurance
services — See Ch. 5, Art. XIV.
A. A constable shall submit a true and accurate report on or before the
first Wednesday following the first Monday of each month to the City
Clerk's office, and such reports shall contain the following information:
(1) The constable's name, address, phone number and badge number.
(2) The name and address of each person contacted by the constable in
his official capacity, together with the date, time and purpose of the
contact.
(3) An accurate statement of all fees collected by the constable and
from whom and for what service each fee was collected.
B. Once a constable report is submitted, the City Clerk's office shall
forward a copy of each constable report to the Chief of Police. Failure
by a constable to file a report for two consecutive months, unless he or
she was prevented from doing so by physical incapacity, shall result in
his or her removal from office in compliance with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-126.1.
§ 21-14 PATERSON CODE § 21-15
21:110
ARTICLE I
Awarding of Public Contracts
[Adopted 2-8-2011 by Ord. No. 11-006]
§ 23-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS ENTITY — For purposes of this article, a business entity whose
contributions are regulated by this article means:
CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE —
A. An individual, including the individual's spouse, and any child/children;
A firm, corporation, professional corporation, partnership, limited
liability company; organization, association, and any other manner and
kind of business entity;
B.
Any person who owns 10% or more of the equity or ownership or
income interests in a person or entity as defined in Subsections A and
B above and their spouses and child/children;
C.
All partners or officers of such an entity, in the aggregate, and their
spouses and child/children;
D.
Any person, subcontractor, subsidiary, corporation, firm, partnership,
limited liability company, organization or association who has received
or indefeasibly acquired the right to receive, from a person described
in Subsection A above, more than $100,000 in compensation or income
of any kind (including, by way of illustration, and not limitation, wages,
salaries, sums paid to independent contractors, benefits, dividends,
profit-sharing, pension contributions, deferred contributions, stock,
stock options or gifts), in any twelve-month period prior to the award
of, or during the term of, a contract subject to this article; and
E.
Any person who is an "affiliate" of a business entity as defined in
Subsections A, B and D above, as such term is used in 11 U.S.C.
§ 101(2).
F.
A. Every candidate for City of Paterson elective municipal office;
Every candidate committee established by or for the benefit of a
candidate for City of Paterson elective municipal office;
B.
Every joint candidates committee established in whole or in part by or
for the benefit of a candidate for City of Paterson elective municipal
office;
C.
D. Every political party committee of the City of Paterson;
E. Every political party committee of the County of Passaic; and
§ 23-1 CONSTABLES § 23-1
21:111
CONTRACT FOR PROFESSIONAL OR EXTRAORDINARY SERVICES —
All contracts for "professional services" and "extraordinary unspecifiable
services" as such terms are used in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5.
CONTRIBUTION — Has the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7. By
way of illustration, and not limitation, this definition includes pledges, loans,
and in-kind contributions.
§ 23-2. Prohibition on awarding public contracts to certain
contributors.
Every political committee, continuing political committee, or other form
of association or organization that regularly engages in the support of
candidates for the City of Paterson municipal or Passaic County elective
offices or City of Paterson municipal or Passaic County political parties
or political party committees. The terms in the foregoing paragraph
have the meaning prescribed in N.J.A.C. 19:25-1.7.
F.
A. To the extent that it is not inconsistent with state or federal law, the City
of Paterson and any of its departments, instrumentalities or purchasing
agents shall not enter into any agreement or otherwise contract to
procure "professional services" as such term is defined at N.J.S.A.
40A:11-2(6) and used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(i) and/or banking,
insurance or other consulting services (hereinafter "professional
services"), nor "extraordinary unspecified services" as such term is
defined at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2(7) and used at N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5(1)(a)(ii)
and/or media, public relations, lobbying, parking garage management
or other consulting and/or management service (hereinafter
"extraordinary unspecified services") from any business entity if such
business entity has solicited or made any contribution to a candidate,
candidate committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for
elective municipal office in Paterson or a holder of public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract; or to any Paterson or
Passaic County political committee or political party committee; or to
any continuing political committee or political action committee that
regularly engages in the support of Paterson municipal or Passaic
County elections and/or Paterson municipal or Passaic County
candidates, candidate committees, joint candidates committees,
political committees, political parties, political party committees,
(hereinafter "PAC"), in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection
C within one calendar year immediately preceding the date of the
contract or agreement.
B. No business entity which submits a proposal for, enters into
negotiations for, or agrees to any contract or agreement with the City of
Paterson or any of its departments or instrumentalities, for the
rendition of professional services or extraordinary unspecified services
shall knowingly solicit or make any contribution to a candidate,
candidate committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for
elective municipal office in Paterson or a holder of public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract; or to any Paterson or
§ 23-1 PATERSON CODE § 23-2
21:112
§ 23-3. Contributions made prior to effective date.
No contribution or solicitation of contributions made prior to the effective
date of this article shall be deemed to give rise to a violation of this article.
Passaic County political committee or political party committee; or any
PAC between the time of first communication between that business
entity and the municipality regarding a specific agreement for
professional services or extraordinary unspecified services, and the
later of the termination of all negotiations or rejection of any proposal,
or the completion of the performance or specified time period of that
contract or agreement.
C. The monetary thresholds of this article are a maximum of $300 per
calendar year each for any purpose to any candidate or candidate
committee for mayor or governing body; or $500 per calendar year to
any joint candidates committee for mayor or governing body; or $300
per calendar year to a political committee or political party committee
of the City of Paterson; maximum of $500 per calendar year to a Passaic
County political committee or political party committee; and maximum
of $500 per calendar year to any PAC. However, for each business entity
party to a contract for professional or extraordinary unspecified
services as described in Subsection A, when such business entity's
contribution is aggregated with all "persons" defined in the definition of
"business entity" in § 23-1, Definitions, above, by virtue of their
affiliation to that business entity party, a maximum of $2,500 to all City
of Paterson candidates, candidate committees, joint candidates
committees, and holders of public office having ultimate responsibility
for the award of a contract, all City of Paterson or Passaic County
political committees and political party committees as described herein
combined, without violating Subsection A of this section.
D. For purposes of this section, the office considered to have ultimate
responsibility for the award of the contract shall be the governing body,
if the contract requires approval or appropriation from the governing
body; or the Purchasing Agent if the amount of the contract is less than
$17,500.
E. Rules regarding subcontractors. No person may be awarded a
subcontract to perform under a contract subject to this article, if the
subcontractor would be disqualified by this section from receiving the
contract at the time that the subcontract is awarded. Nor may any
person who would be disqualified by Subsection A from receiving the
contract perform substantially all of the obligations described in a
contract for professional or extraordinary unspecifiable services that is
subject to this article.
§ 23-2 CONSTABLES § 23-4
21:113
§ 23-4. Contract renewal.
No contract subject to this article may be renewed, extended, or materially
modified unless the resulting renewal, extension, or modification would be
allowable under the provisions of this article if it were an initial contract.
§ 23-5. Contribution statement by business entity.
§ 23-6. Return of excess contributions.
A business entity that is a party to a contract for professional services or
extraordinary unspecified services may cure a violation of § 23-2 of this
article, if, within 30 days after the date on which the applicable ELEC report
is published, said business entity notifies the municipality in writing and
seeks and receives reimbursement of the contribution from the recipient of
such contribution.
§ 23-7. Exemptions.
The contribution limitations prior to entering into a contract in § 23-2A do
not apply to contracts which are awarded to the lowest responsible bidder
after public advertising for bids and bidding therefor within the meaning of
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4; or are awarded in the case of emergency under N.J.S.A.
40A:11-6.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure professional
services or extraordinary unspecifiable services from any business
entity, the City of Paterson or its purchasing agents and departments,
as the case may be, shall receive a sworn statement from said business
entity which is the intended recipient of said contract that he/she/it has
not made a contribution in violation of § 23-2 of this article. The City of
Paterson, its purchasing agents and departments shall be responsible
for informing the City Council that the aforementioned sworn statement
has been received and that the business entity is not in violation of this
article, prior to awarding the contract or agreement.
B. A business entity shall have a continuing duty to report to the City of
Paterson any contribution that constitutes a violation of this act that is
made during the negotiation, proposal process or the duration of a
contract. The City of Paterson, its purchasing agents and departments
shall be responsible for informing the governing body within 10
business days after receipt of said report from the business entity, or at
the next City Council meeting following receipt of said report from the
business entity, whichever comes first.
C. The certification required under this section shall be made prior to
entry into the contract or agreement with the City of Paterson, or prior
to the provision of services or goods, as the case may be, and shall be in
addition to any other certifications that may be required by any other
provision of law.
§ 23-4 PATERSON CODE § 23-8
21:114
§ 23-8. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be a material breach of the terms of a City of Paterson
agreement or contract for professional services or extraordinary
unspecifiable services when a business entity that is a party to such
agreement or contract has:
(1) Made or solicited a contribution in violation of this article;
(2) Knowingly concealed or misrepresented a contribution given or
received;
(3) Made or solicited contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Made or solicited any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be recontributed to a candidate, candidate
committee or joint candidates committee of any candidate for
elective municipal office in Paterson, or a holder of public office
having ultimate responsibility for the award of a contract, or any
Paterson or Passaic County political committee or political party
committee, or any PAC;
(5) Engaged or employed a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution, which if made or solicited by the
professional business entity itself, would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this article;
(6) Funded contributions made by third parties, including consultants,
attorneys, family members, and employees;
(7) Engaged in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this article; or
(8) Directly or indirectly, through or by any other person or means,
done any act which if done directly would subject that entity to the
restrictions of this article.
B. Furthermore, any business entity that violates § 23-8A(1) through (8)
shall be disqualified from eligibility for future City of Paterson contracts
for a period of four calendar years from the date of the violation.
C. Any person who knowingly, purposely, or recklessly violates any
provision of this article, or who conspires with another person to violate
any provision of this article, or who, with the purpose of promoting or
facilitating a violation of this article, solicits another person to commit
it, or aids or agrees, or attempts to aid another person in planning or
committing it, shall be subject to punishment, including fines and/or
imprisonment as fixed by law for violations of the ordinances of the City
of Paterson.
§ 23-8 CONSTABLES § 23-9
21:115
§ 23-9. Citizens' private right of action.
In addition to any rights that were heretofore available, or which may
hereafter be available, to citizens, taxpayers, or associations, to challenge
violations of this article, every person aggrieved by a violation of this article,
or any taxpayer or resident of the City of Paterson has the right, consistent
with the Rules of Court, to file charges in a court of competent jurisdiction,
and/or to pursue a civil action for a violation of this article in a court of
competent jurisdiction, and to seek and obtain declaratory, injunctive, or
other legal or equitable relief, including but not limited to, attorneys' fees
and costs, arising from or related to a violation of this article.
§ 23-10. Indexing.
The monetary thresholds of the "Definitions" section and the other sections
of this article shall be increased effective March 1 of each calendar year
by the percentage increase in the prior calendar year of the consumer
price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U) for the New York-Northern New
Jersey-Long Island region, rounded to the nearest $10. The Clerk of the City
of Paterson shall, by no later than April 1 of each calendar year, prepare
and publish the revised thresholds on the office municipal website and in an
official municipal newspaper.
§ 23-9 PATERSON CODE § 23-10
21:116
Chapter 25
COURT, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
§ 23-10 CONSTABLES § 23-10
21:117

ARTICLE I
Municipal Court Continued
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 7, Art. 6, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 25-1. Court and Judges continued.
The Municipal Court and the Judges thereof, as heretofore constituted and
appointed pursuant to law, are continued.
§ 25-1 CONSTABLES § 25-1
21:119

ARTICLE II
Organization; Judges; Staff
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 19 of the 1979
Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 25-2. Court continued; composition of Court.
§ 25-3. Municipal Court seal.
The official seal of the court shall bear the impress "Municipal Court of the
City of Paterson" and may contain the arms of the City.
§ 25-4. Jurisdiction. [Amended 3-6-1984 by Ord. No. 84-021]
The Municipal Court of the City and the Judges thereof shall have general
criminal jurisdiction as conferred by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2A:8-19 to
2A:8-33 and amendments thereof and supplements thereto,33 as provided by
any other law or ordinance and the Rules Governing the New Jersey Courts.
§ 25-5. Appointment of Judges; qualifications.
The Presiding Judge and the Judges shall be appointed by the Mayor, with
the advice and consent of the Council. The Judges shall each have the
qualifications required by law.
§ 25-6. Term of Judges.
The Judges shall each serve for a term of three years from the date of their
appointments and until their successors are appointed and qualified.
A. The Municipal Court of the City, known as the "Municipal Court of the
City of Paterson," as heretofore established, is hereby continued.
B. The Municipal Court shall consist of a Presiding Judge and four Judges.
[Amended 3-6-1984 by Ord. No. 84-021; 4-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-020; 8-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-057]
C. In addition, the Court shall consist of any temporary Judge appointed as
an additional Judge of the Municipal Court to meet a special need of
limited duration pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-5(b). [Added 6-13-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-034]
33.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:8-19 to 2A:8-33 was repealed by Chapter 293 of the Laws of
1993. See now N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 25-2 CONSTABLES § 25-7
21:121
§ 25-7. Compensation of Judges. [Amended 9-15-1981 by Ord. No.
81-062A; 3-6-1984 by Ord. No. 84-021; 7-12-1988 by Ord. No.
88-026; 4-10-1990 by Ord. No. 90-008; 1-22-1991 by Ord. No.
91-005; 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-010; 4-13-1999 by Ord. No.
99-019]
The Presiding Judge and Judges shall be compensated by an annual salary
to be fixed by ordinance. Compensation so paid to the Presiding Judge and
Judges shall be in lieu of any and all other fees. The annual salary and
compensation for the Presiding Judge shall be $60,000. The annual salary
and compensation for the Judges other than the Presiding Judge shall be
between $35,000 and $50,000, depending on level of experience and to be
set by individual resolution with regard to each such Judge.
§ 25-8. Powers and duties of Judges. [Amended 3-6-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-021]
§ 25-9. Employees of the Court. [Amended 7-23-1991 by Ord. No.
91-042; 5-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-019]
A. The Presiding Judge shall be the administrative head of the Municipal
Court and shall be responsible for the orderly administration thereof in
accordance with applicable statutes, Rules Governing the New Jersey
Courts, directives of the Chief Justice, the Assignment Judge of the
county and the administrative director of the courts. The Municipal
Court shall sit in such parts as designated by the Presiding Judge who
shall assign all cases for trial.
B. The Judges of the Municipal Court shall perform such duties and
functions as shall be prescribed for them by law, by the Rules Governing
the New Jersey Courts and the Presiding Judge.
A. 34The Presiding Judge shall designate a Municipal Court Administrator
to supervise all Deputy Municipal Court Administrators, accept all
complaints filed by any person, the preparation of the Court Calendar,
overall supervision of the criminal section and such other duties as may
be assigned by the Presiding Judge. The Municipal Court Administrator
shall be supervised by and report to the Municipal Court Director.
B. The Presiding Judge shall designate a Municipal Court Director
responsible for the preparation of all monthly reports, purchasing,
supervision of personnel and all other such duties as may be assigned
by the Presiding Judge. The Municipal Court Director shall report
directly to the Presiding Judge. The Presiding Judge may also designate
and appoint a Deputy Municipal Court Director, whose duties and
responsibilities shall be as defined by law.
34.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 19-8(a) and (b), regarding the Clerk of the Court, Deputy
Clerks, Violations Clerk and Deputy Violations Clerks, which immediately preceded this
subsection, was deleted 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068.
§ 25-7 PATERSON CODE § 25-9
21:122
§ 25-10. Bonds of Judges and other employees. [Amended 3-6-1984
by Ord. No. 84-021; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
The Presiding Judge, Judges, Administrator of Court, Deputy Administrator
of Court, Violations Clerk and Deputy Violations Clerk, before entering upon
the duties of their office, shall enter into a bond as required by law.
C. Within the Municipal Court, there shall be created the position of
Violations Clerk. The duties of the Violations Clerk shall be as set forth
in the State of New Jersey Department of Personnel County and
Municipal Government Service Descriptions and Specifications.
[Added 8-9-1994 by Ord. No. 94-054]
§ 25-9 CONSTABLES § 25-10
21:123

ARTICLE III
Fee for Discovery
[Adopted 11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-061]
§ 25-11. Fee established.
The fee for discovery requested for a matter pending before the Paterson
Municipal Court shall be $10 per request.
§ 25-11 CONSTABLES § 25-11
21:125

ARTICLE IV
Public Defender Fee
[Adopted 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-049]
§ 25-12. Fee for use of Public Defender. [Amended 6-23-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-018; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-053]
Any person applying for representation by the Municipal Public Defender
shall pay an application fee of $200 to the Municipal Court. The Municipal
Court may waive the application, in whole or in part, if the Court
determines, in its discretion, that the application fee represents an
unreasonable burden on the person seeking the representation.
§ 25-12 CONSTABLES § 25-12
21:127
Chapter 31
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN CERTIFICATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Division — See Ch. 39. Police Division — See Ch. 81.
§ 31-1. Purpose; amount and payment of additional compensation.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide compensation to all firefighters
who have volunteered and have received an emergency medical technician
certification; they shall be paid the sum of $500 per year in two payments:
$250 in March and $250 in September payable by voucher to those
employees who have satisfactorily completed and have received emergency
medical technician certificates.
§ 31-2. Courses for certification.
§ 31-3. Certified officers performing emergency ambulance services.
A. Firefighters who volunteer to take the emergency medical technician
certification course shall take that course during their regular working
hours and shall be paid for that time. If a firefighter taking the course is
not on duty during the taking of the course, he shall receive
compensatory time off for all such time of the course. The City shall
bear the expense of the course.
B. Every three years, an emergency medical technician refresher course
must be taken to maintain the emergency medical technician
certificate. The cost of said refresher course will be paid by the
employee. If said refresher course is not satisfactorily completed, the
employee will no longer receive additional compensation.
A. All firefighters who have satisfactorily completed and have received an
emergency medical technician certificate may be assigned to drive an
ambulance or perform the duties of an ambulance attendant in an
emergency situation.
B. All firefighters who are asked to perform any duties related to
emergency ambulance service will be covered by the same liability
insurance as ambulance attendants.
C. All firefighters who are asked to perform any duties related to
emergency ambulance service shall be allowed to wear customary
uniform.
§ 25-12 PATERSON CODE § 31-4
31:128
§ 31-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREFIGHTERS — Includes all sworn officers of the Fire Division.
Chapter 35
ENTERPRISE ZONE
§ 31-4 ENTERPRISE ZONE § 31-4
35:129

ARTICLE I
Zone Development Corporation; Designation of Enterprise Zone
[Adopted 4-12-1994 as Ord. No. 94-026]
§ 35-1. Zone development corporation designated.
The Municipal Council of the City of Paterson hereby authorizes the
Paterson Restoration Corporation to act as the zone development
corporation for the City of Paterson. Said corporation, with the assistance of
the city's Department of Community Development, shall ensure adherence
to the purposes and provisions of the Act,35 finalize and sponsor the zone
development plan and receive financial and technical assistance from the
state in carrying out its function.
§ 35-2. Enterprise zone designated and approved; maps.
The Municipal Council of the City of Paterson hereby authorizes the
designation of the enterprise zone within the city and covering thirty and
three-tenths percent (30.3%) of the city's area, as established on maps
on file in the City Clerk's office bearing designations EZ-1A (Enterprise
Zone Boundary Map), EZ-1B (Enterprise Zone Census Block Map), EZ-1C
(Enterprise Zone Development Plan) and EZ-1D (Enterprise Zone Zoning
District).
35.Editor's Note: See the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zones Act, P.L. 1983, c. 303 (N.J.S.A.
52:27H-60 et seq.).
§ 35-1 ENTERPRISE ZONE § 35-2
35:131

ARTICLE II
Acceptance of Enterprise Zone
[Adopted 8-9-1994 as Ord. No. 94-055]
§ 35-3. Council approval and acceptance of enterprise zone.
The Municipal Council of the City of Paterson hereby approves and accepts
the Urban Enterprise Zone Authority's designation of the city's enterprise
zone as previously approved by the City Council pursuant to Article I of this
chapter.
§ 35-4. Council approval and acceptance of zone development plan.
The Municipal Council of the City of Paterson hereby approves and adopts
the city's zone development plan and accepts the Urban Enterprise Zone
Authority's approval and designation of said plan. The plan and zone are on
file in the office of the City Clerk of the City of Paterson.
§ 35-3 ENTERPRISE ZONE § 35-4
35:133
Chapter 37
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood Control Commission — See Ch. 41.
Historic Preservation Commission — See Ch.
45.
Air pollution — See Ch. 105.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 219.
Green Team — See Ch. 257.
Littering — See Ch. 313.
§ 37-1. Creation.
The City of Paterson hereby establishes an Environmental Commission
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq., as amended.
§ 37-2. Members.
A. The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the
Mayor, one of whom shall also be a member of the Planning Board and
all of whom shall be residents of the City of Paterson. The members
shall serve without compensation. The Mayor shall designate one of the
members to serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the Commission.
The terms of the office of the first commissioners shall be for one, two
or three years, to be designated by the Mayor in making his
appointments, and their successors shall be appointed for terms of
three years and until the appointment and qualification of their
successors. The first members of the Commission shall be appointed for
the following terms:
(1) Two members for the one-year term expiring December 31, 2011.
(2) Two members for the two-year term expiring December 31, 2012.
(3) Three members for the three-year term expiring December 31,
2013.
B. A member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in which he has
either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest. The
Mayor or Municipal Council may remove any member of the
Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member,
and after a hearing before the Municipal Council if the member
requests one within five days of the service of written charges, at which
time the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel. A
member may be removed only by the affirmative vote of a majority of
the full authorized membership of the Council. A vacancy on the
Commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
§ 35-4 PATERSON CODE § 37-3
35:134
§ 37-3. Alternate members.
§ 37-4. Powers and priorities.
A. The governing body may by resolution appoint not more than two
alternate members, to be designated "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate
No. 2."
B. The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years, except that
the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be through
December 31, 2011, for Alternate No. 1 and through December 31,
2012, for Alternate No. 2. A vacancy among the alternate members
occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled by
resolution of the Municipal Council for the unexpired term only.
C. An alternate member shall not be permitted to act on any matter in
which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. An alternate member may, after public hearing if he or she
requests one, be removed by the Municipal Council for cause.
D. An alternate member may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote first.
A. The Commission is established for the protection, development or use
of natural resources, including air and water resources, located within
the territorial limits of the City of Paterson. The Commission shall have
power to conduct research into the use and possible use of the open
land areas of the municipality and may coordinate the activities of
unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes, and may advertise,
prepare, paint, and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets
which in its judgment it deems necessary for its purposes. It shall keep
an index of all open areas, publicly or privately owned, including open
marshland, swamps and other wetlands, in order to obtain information
on the proper use of such areas and may from time to time recommend
to the Planning Board, subject to the approval of the Municipal Council
by resolution, plans and programs for inclusion in the Master Plan and
the development and use of such areas.
B. The said powers shall not include the power to make recommendations
or otherwise address site remediation, which is already addressed by
the Paterson Environmental Revitalization Committee, nor shall it
include the power to make recommendations or otherwise address the
Sustainable Jersey Certification, which is already addressed by the
Green Team. The Environmental Commission shall have only the
powers expressly set forth in this chapter, and no additional powers
shall be construed to arise by implication.
§ 37-3 ENTERPRISE ZONE § 37-4
35:135
§ 37-5. Minutes and annual report.
The Environmental Commission shall keep minutes of its meetings and
activities and make an annual report. Copies of the said minutes and annual
report shall be provided to the Mayor, Municipal Council and Planning
Board, as well as to the Paterson Environmental Revitalization Committee
and the Green Team.
§ 37-6. Appropriations.
The Environmental Commission shall have no power to receive or expend
funds unless approved by the Municipal Council. Any grant funding
applications must be approved by resolution of the Municipal Council, and
the use of any such funding must be specifically approved by the Municipal
Council and expended only by the Finance Department.
§ 37-7. Studies and recommendations.
The Environmental Commission shall have power to study and make
recommendations concerning open space preservation, water resources
management, air pollution, solid waste management, noise control, soil
and landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources and
protection of flora and fauna.
§ 37-8. Meetings.
A regular meeting of the Commission shall be held no fewer than six
times annually, at a time to be fixed by its members and shall be held in
accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act.36
C. Within the overall powers of the Environmental Commission, the
Commission shall establish its priorities with due consideration of the
City's needs for:
(1) An open space plan proposal for adoption by the Planning Board
and accompanying grant strategy; and
(2) A Green City Plan which addresses the need for sustainable
development and improvement of air quality in the City.
36.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 37-4 PATERSON CODE § 37-8
35:136
Chapter 39
FIRE DIVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Emergency medical technician
certification — See Ch. 31.
Police Division — See Ch. 81.
Fire safety — See Ch. 215.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 283, Art. I.
§ 37-8 FIRE DIVISION § 37-8
39:137

ARTICLE I
Establishment, Organization and Administration
§ 39-1. Fire Division established; Fire Chief as head.
Within the Department of Fire, there shall be the Fire Division, the head of
which shall be the Fire Chief as provided in § 5-80.
§ 39-2. Personnel.
§ 39-3. Fire Chief as executive officer of Fire Division.
The Fire Chief shall be the executive officer of the Fire Division, subject to
the rules, regulations and orders as may be prescribed by the Fire Director.
The Fire Chief shall be a bona fide resident of the City of Paterson.
§ 39-4. Acting Fire Chief.
One of the Deputy Fire Chiefs of the Fire Division, designated by the Fire
Chief, shall, in the absence of the Fire Chief, perform all the duties of the
Fire Chief. If both the Fire Chief and the designated Acting Fire Chief shall
be absent, then the ranking commanding officer of the Division shall be the
Acting Chief.
A. The Fire Division shall consist of the following: [Amended 9-28-2004
by Ord. No. 04-074]
(1) One Fire Chief.
(2) Seven Deputy Fire Chiefs. [Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord. No.
06-017]
(3) Sixteen Battalion Chiefs.
(4) Seventy-five Captains. [Amended 4-26-2005 by Ord. No.
05-037; 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 06-017]
(5) Two hundred thirty fire fighters. [Amended 2-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-017]
(6) (Reserved)
(7) One Assistant Master Mechanic U.P.F.P.D.
B. The Fire Division shall consist of such other employees as the Municipal
Council may from time to time authorize.
§ 39-1 FIRE DIVISION § 39-4
39:139

ARTICLE II
Appointments
§ 39-5. Appointments; required examination.
All appointments to the Fire Division shall be made by the Fire Director
from a list prepared by the Civil Service Commission of the state after
competitive examination and with special reference to the fitness of the
candidates. Before any permanent appointments are made, the candidates
shall submit themselves to such examination as may be required by the
State Civil Service Commission.
§ 39-6. Eligibility for appointment; certification.
§ 39-7. Examination by Fire Examining Board; certificate issued.
A. To be eligible for appointment to the Fire Division, a candidate shall:
(1) Be a citizen of the United States.
(2) Be of good moral character.
(3) Have a high school diploma or an equivalency certificate and be
able to read and write the English language well and intelligently.
(4) Be sound in mind and body.
(5) Be of good health sufficient to satisfy the Board of Trustees of the
Police and Firemen's Retirement System of New Jersey that such
person is eligible to membership in the retirement system.
(6) Not have been convicted of an indictable offense, nor convicted of
any crime or offense involving moral turpitude.
B. The candidate shall obtain a certificate from the Fire Examining Board
as provided in § 39-8.
A. It shall be the duty of the Fire Examining Board, consisting of the City
Physician and the Assistant City Physician, to examine carefully the
educational, mental, moral and physical fitness of any person who may
be a candidate for appointment to the Fire Division and who may be
recommended for such examination by the Fire Director, provided that
such candidate has been first certified for appointment by the State
Civil Service Commission.
B. A certificate, signed by the Fire Examining Board and attesting to the
educational, mental, moral and physical capacity of the candidate to
discharge the duties of the position to which he is seeking appointment
and for which he has been certified, shall be considered and taken by
the Fire Director as sufficient evidence of such examination.
§ 39-5 FIRE DIVISION § 39-8
39:141
§ 39-8. Affidavit of candidate.
Upon appointment to the Fire Division, each candidate, before being sworn
into office, shall make an affidavit, under oath, that he has truthfully
answered all questions of the State Civil Service Commission and the Fire
Examining Board.
§ 39-9. Uniform required.
Each member of the uniformed Fire Division shall be required to wear a
uniform in the performance of his duties.
§ 39-8 PATERSON CODE § 39-9
39:142
ARTICLE III
Rules and Regulations
§ 39-10. Adoption of rules and regulations.
§ 39-11. Distribution of rules and regulations to members;
compliance required.
A. The City Council shall make and adopt such rules and regulations
concerning the conduct and duties of the officers and men of the Fire
Division, the kinds of uniforms and insignia to be worn by them, the
markings and insignia on marked fire vehicles and such other matters
as may be necessary for the proper government, control, discipline and
regulation of the Fire Division.
B. Such rules and regulations adopted by the Director shall be known as
the "Rules and Regulations for the Government of the Fire Division of
the City of Paterson, New Jersey," and shall be binding upon each
member and employee of the Fire Division.
C. The rules and regulations of the Fire Division heretofore adopted are
hereby continued until altered or amended.
A. Every member of the Fire Division shall be presented with a copy of the
rules and regulations referred to in § 39-13.
B. It shall be the duty of each member of the Division to comply with every
requirement thereof applicable to him.
§ 39-10 FIRE DIVISION § 39-11
39:143

ARTICLE IV
Ambulance Service Bureau
§ 39-12. Bureau established; responsibilities.
§ 39-13. Bureau head.
§ 39-14. Emergency medical technicians.
§ 39-15. Garaging of ambulances.
Ambulances owned or leased and operated by the Bureau shall be garaged
in and shall operate from such firehouses as the Bureau head shall
designate in conjunction with the Fire Chief.
§ 39-16. Fees; disposition.
The Bureau is authorized and empowered to charge and collect such fees
for ambulance service as shall be fixed from time to time by resolution
of the Council. The money so collected shall be paid over to the Revenue
Collections Division of the Department of Finance.
A. There is hereby established an Ambulance Service Bureau under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Fire, Fire Division.
B. The Ambulance Service Bureau shall be responsible for the
procurement, operation, maintenance and manning of ambulances to
meet the present need in the city for emergency transportation of
persons who require emergency treatment at hospitals operating in or
pursuant to arrangement made with the city.
A. There shall be a Bureau head, who shall be a superior officer of the Fire
Division who has had training in first aid and in light rescue work and
has some degree of administrative experience. Said officer shall be
assigned as Bureau head by the Fire Chief.
B. In addition thereto, there shall be a Captain of the Fire Division, an
unspecified number of civilian supervisors and an emergency medical
technician records clerk as part of the Ambulance Service Bureau.
A. There shall be in said Bureau both full-time and part-time emergency
medical technicians (EMT).
B. The emergency medical technicians shall meet the requirements and
qualifications for permanent appointment as civilian employees in the
Bureau as established by the Council, by resolution.
§ 39-12 FIRE DIVISION § 39-16
39:145
Chapter 41
FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 219. Stormwater control — See Ch. 433.
§ 41-1. Agreement to participate.
The City of Paterson agrees to participate in the creation and operation
of the Central Passaic River Basin Flood Commission, pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:14-16, et seq.
§ 41-2. Participants.
The following municipalities and counties shall be invited to participate in
said Commission: County of Passaic; County of Essex; County of Morris;
Township of Little Falls; Township of Pequannock; Township of Montville;
Borough of North Caldwell; Township of West Caldwell; Borough of
Pompton Lakes; Township of Wayne; Township of Livingston; Borough of
West Paterson; Borough of Lincoln Park; Township of Parsippany; Township
of East Hanover; Township of Chatham; Borough of Totowa; Township of
Nutley; Borough of Morris Plains; Township of Fairfield; Borough of
Riverdale; Township of Hanover; Borough of Florham Park; Borough of
Roseland; City of Newark; Borough of Hawthorne; Borough of Oakland.
§ 41-3. Duties and functions.
The Central Passaic River Basin Flood Commission shall:
A. Collect, study and analyze data on flooding, past floods and the causes
of floods in the area;
B. Make such data and studies available to the participating members, to
the Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water Supply,
the Army Corps of Engineers, local and county planning boards and
officials concerned with subdivisions and development of properties
within the floodway and drainage area;
C. Keep itself informed as to the available state and federal funds and
grants and the procedures for applying therefor and shall make such
information available to participating members;
D. Coordinate the activities of the participating members relating to
flooding, flood prevention, brook cleaning and the like;
E. Encourage the acquisition of lands within the floodway and low-lying
areas by appropriate county park commissions, counties or
§ 39-16 PATERSON CODE § 41-3
39:146
§ 41-4. Quorum.
Any number of members of the Commission shall have the right to meet at
regularly scheduled meetings. Any action taken involving the expenditure
of funds other than clerical and mailing connected with the usual business
of the Commission shall be adopted only at a meeting at which there
are at least two counties represented and at least three municipalities
represented.
§ 41-5. Withdrawal.
Each member municipality and county reserves the right to withdraw from
the Commission; provided, however, that at least 90 days' notice of such
intention is given to the Commission, and provided further that such
withdrawal, after the adoption of the Commission budget for a given year,
shall not abrogate the responsibility of the municipality or county to meet
its responsibility and obligation under the budget for such year.
§ 41-6. Appropriations.
The general, administrative and other expenses of the Commission affecting
the Commission as a whole shall be apportioned among the members as
follows:
participating municipalities and all federal and state agencies that have
jurisdiction in matters concerning the floodway and low-lying area;
F. Publicize methods of flood control and flood prevention;
G. Encourage its participating members to support other programs
designed or intended to alleviate flooding;
H. Lobby federal and state legislators and federal and state agencies to
promote legislation favorable to the Central Passaic River Basin and
also to make available increased funding for flood control measures in
the Central Passaic River Basin;
I. Perform such other acts and fulfill such other functions as may be
permitted by law and as determined by members, subject to the
limitations in this section and subject to limitations set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:14-16.
A. One-fourth thereof to be apportioned among the member counties as
follows:
(1) County of Passaic;
(2) County of Essex;
(3) County of Morris.
§ 41-3 FIRE DIVISION § 41-6
39:147
B. Three-fourths thereof to be apportioned to other municipalities
according to a formula taking into account population and frontage
along the Passaic River, and resulting in the following:
(1) Wayne;
(2) Little Falls;
(3) Pequannock;
(4) Montville;
(5) North Caldwell;
(6) West Caldwell;
(7) Pompton Lakes;
(8) Paterson;
(9) Livingston;
(10)West Paterson;
(11) Lincoln Park;
(12) Parsippany;
(13) East Hanover;
(14) Chatham;
(15) Totowa;
(16) Nutley;
(17) Morris Plains;
(18) Fairfield;
(19) Riverdale;
(20) Hanover;
(21) Florham Park;
(22) Roseland;
(23) Newark;
(24) Hawthorne; and
(25) Oakland.
C. In the event any of the foregoing municipalities do not join, the formula
used to obtain the foregoing percentages shall be reapplied to
§ 41-6 PATERSON CODE § 41-6
39:148
§ 41-7. Apportionment of costs.
Whenever a specific project is to be undertaken involving less than the
interests of all of the participating members, the apportionment of the
costs thereof shall be agreed upon by the participating members specially
benefited thereby in advance of authorization of such project.
§ 41-8. Change of apportionment.
The apportionments set forth herein may be changed by agreement among
the participating municipalities and counties; provided, however, that there
shall be no increase in the percentage to be contributed by any participant
in the expenses set forth in § 41-6 above without the consent of the
governing body of such participating member.
§ 41-9. Budget.
Any budget proposed by the Commission must be submitted to the
governing bodies of the participating municipalities and shall become
effective only upon the adoption of resolutions by a majority of the
participating municipalities approving the budget.
§ 41-10. Appointment of representatives.
The Mayor shall appoint two representatives to the Commission. Either or
both of said representatives may be a member of the Township Council or
other elective or appointive office in the Township.
§ 41-11. Term of representatives.
Each representative shall serve for a term of five years or until his/her
successor has been appointed and qualified, except that any appointed
representative who holds another elective or appointive public office shall
serve as such representative for the term of his/her elected or appointed
office and only so long as he/she shall hold such elected or public office,
notwithstanding his/her term of appointment as such representative.
Appointments to vacancies shall be filled for the balance of the term only.
§ 41-12. Alternate representatives.
In addition to such representatives, the Mayor may appoint two alternate
representatives to the Commission who shall serve for a term of one year
each or until the appointment and qualification of their successors. Such
alternates shall have the right to attend all meetings of the Commission
and take part in all discussions. The alternates shall be designated as
first alternate and second alternate, and in such order may represent the
Township Council and vote in the event of the absence or disability of
one or both of the representatives. No alternative representative shall
determine the apportionment among the remaining and participating
municipalities.
§ 41-6 FIRE DIVISION § 41-12
39:149
automatically succeed to a representative position upon a vacancy
occurring in a regular position.
Chapter 43
GRASS ROOTS CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION
§ 43-1. Authorization.
The Municipal Council hereby authorizes the establishment of the Grass
Roots Cultural Arts Commission of the City of Paterson.
§ 43-2. Establishment; composition; terms.
There is hereby established the Grass Roots Cultural Arts Commission of
the City of Paterson, which shall be composed of 18 residents of the City,
who shall serve without compensation, plus that member of the City Council
serving as liaison from year to year. All 18 citizen members shall serve, on
a staggered basis, for a term of three years. With respect to the citizen
members added by this chapter, six shall be appointed for one year, six shall
be appointed for two years and six shall be appointed for a three-year term,
all terms to expire on December 31.
§ 43-3. Nomination and consent of members.
All 18 resident members shall be nominated by the Mayor and confirmed
with the advice and the consent of the City Council.
§ 43-4. Powers and responsibilities.
The Commission shall have the following powers and responsibilities:
A. To establish, amend and supplement its own bylaws to the extent not
inconsistent with this article or with any other municipal, state or
federal regulation or law.
B. To cooperate with all other agencies within and without the City of
Paterson, both public and private, in the encouragement of any and all
existing commercial facilities already established in the City and to
create a climate in the City that will attract other enterprises and
stimulate further development throughout the community.
C. To annually elect one of its citizen members to serve as Chairperson of
the Commission.
D. To make an annual report of its activities and recommendations to the
City Council and at such other times as the City Council shall request or
the Commission deems desirable.
§ 41-12 PATERSON CODE § 43-5
39:150
§ 43-5. Human Relations Initiative.
There is hereby established a Human Relations Initiative with the Board
of Education, City of Paterson, New Jersey. Three students will be selected
from the following high schools: Eastside, JFK and Rosa Parks. All students
must be in their sophomore year and must not exceed their senior year.
The students will be selected from the following subjects: Eastside: United
States history; JFK: language arts; and Rosa Parks: the performing/fine arts.
§ 43-6. Liaison; Chairperson; vacancies.
The Council liaison shall be annually selected by the City Council at the
reorganization meeting of the City held in January of each year. The
members of the Commission shall annually select one of its members as
Chairperson. Vacancies occurring on the Commission, other than by
expiration of their term of office, shall be filled for the unexpired portion of
the term in the same manner as an original appointment.
Chapter 45
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 45, Historic Preservation Commission, adopted
12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 7, Art. 11, of the 1979 Revised
General Ordinances of Paterson, as amended, was superseded
5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 14-022. See now Ch. 483, Zoning and Land
Development, § 300.13, which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk.]
Chapter 49
HOUSING AUTHORITY
§ 49-1. Housing Authority continued.
The Housing Authority, as heretofore constituted and empowered pursuant
to law, is continued.
§ 49-2. Appointments.
Appointments to the Housing Authority shall be made by the Council.
Chapter 53
INSURANCE FUND COMMISSION
§ 53-1. Commission established; functions, powers and duties.
There shall be an Insurance Fund Commission established within the
Department of Finance. The Commission shall be constituted and shall have
such functions, powers and duties as provided by general law.
§ 43-5 HOUSING AUTHORITY § 53-2
49:151
§ 53-2. Purpose of fund.
Pursuant to P.L. 1979, c. 230,37 and such other laws as may be applicable,
the City of Paterson ("city") hereby establishes an insurance fund for the
following purposes:
§ 53-3. Amount of fund; disposition of excess funds, interest and
profits.
The minimum amount of the insurance fund hereby established shall be four
hundred thousand dollars ($400,000.) and the maximum amount shall be
two million dollars ($2,000,000.). The Municipal Council, from time to time,
shall provide for the disposition of any excess over and above the maximum
amount fixed or of the interest or profits arising therefrom when the fund
shall reach the maximum limit.
§ 53-4. Membership; appointment; terms.38
The Insurance Commission so established within the Department of Finance
shall consist of three (3) officials of the local unit, who may be members of
the governing body, who shall be appointed by the Mayor as provided by
law. The terms, powers and the authority of the Commissioners shall be in
accordance with the applicable general laws.
§ 53-5. Secretary.39
A Secretary may be appointed if necessary.
§ 53-6. Vacancies.40
Vacancies are filled pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:10-8.
A. To insure against any loss or damage however caused to any property,
motor vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by the city, or under the
control of any of the city's departments, boards, agencies or
commissions.
B. To insure against liability resulting from the use or operation of motor
vehicles, equipment or apparatus owned by or controlled by the city or
owned by or under the control of any of the city's departments, boards,
agencies or commissions.
C. To insure against liability for the city's negligence and that of its
officers, employees and servants, whether or not compensated or parttime,
who are authorized to perform any act or services, but not
including an independent contractor within the limitations of the New
Jersey Tort Claims Act (N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et seq.).
37.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40A:10-6 et seq.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
39.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
40.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 53-2 PATERSON CODE § 53-6
53:152
Chapter 59
LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Library — See Ch. 305.
§ 59-1. Library Board of Trustees continued.
The Board of Trustees of the free public library, as heretofore constituted
and empowered pursuant to law, is continued.
§ 59-2. Membership; appointment; qualifications.
Said Library Board of Trustees shall consist of nine (9) members, whose
appointment and qualifications shall be governed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:54-9 and any amendment thereto.
Chapter 65
(RESERVED)
[Former Ch. 65, Municipal Utilities Authority, adopted 6-29-1981
by Ord. No. 81-040A, was repealed 10-28-2014 by Ord. No. 14-059.
This ordinance also provided that Municipal Utilities Authority
operations would be moved into the Department of Public Works.]
Chapter 71
PARKING AUTHORITY
§ 71-1. Authority continued.
The Parking Authority of the city, as heretofore established and empowered
pursuant to law (N.J.S.A. 40:11A-1 et seq.), is hereby continued.
§ 71-2. Appointment of members.41
The members of the Parking Authority shall be appointed pursuant to state
statute.
§ 71-3. Number of members.
The number of Commissioners of the Parking Authority of the city is
increased to seven (7).
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 53-6 LIBRARY BOARD OF TRUSTEES § 71-3
59:153
Chapter 75
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 77.
§ 71-3 PATERSON CODE § 71-3
71:154
ARTICLE I
Defined Contribution Retirement Program
[Adopted 7-29-2008 by Ord. No. 08-024]
§ 75-1. Designation of Pension Certifying Official.
The Business Administrator shall be the local Pension Certifying Official in
the City of Paterson.
§ 75-2. Positions eligible for participation.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program ("DCRP") when the individuals are employed as bonafide
legitimate employees and not employed pursuant to a professional services
resolution:
§ 75-3. Exceptions from enrollment.
Exceptions from enrollment in the DCRP program shall be as provided in
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007, N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et. seq. and shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
A. Business Administrator.
B. Department heads, including Corporation Counsel.
C. Municipal Engineer.
D. Municipal Court Judge.
E. Appointed members of local authorities, boards and commissions
requiring Municipal Council approval.
F. Gubernatorial appointees requiring Municipal Council approval who
serve in the City government for a fixed term.
A. Any public employment, office or position if the base salary is less than
$1,500 per year.
B. Persons otherwise eligible for membership in the Teacher's Pension and
Annuity Fund or the Police and Fireman's Retirement System.
C. Individuals holding professional licenses or certificates to perform and
serving in any of the following capacities, regardless of the position
held:
(1) Certified Health Officer.
(2) Tax Collector.
(3) Chief Financial Officer.
(4) Construction Code Official.
§ 75-1 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-3
71:155
§ 75-4. Implementation; construal of provisions.
This article shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007, N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et. seq., as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
(5) Qualified Purchasing Agent.
(6) Tax Assessor.
(7) Municipal Planner.
(8) Registered Municipal Clerk.
(9) Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
(10) Certified/Principal Public Works Manager.
D. Other exceptions as provided by law.
§ 75-3 PATERSON CODE § 75-4
71:156
Chapter 77
PERSONNEL POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Division — See Ch. 39.
Police Division — See Ch. 81.
Payment of salaries — See Ch. 89.
§ 75-4 PARKING AUTHORITY § 75-4
71:157

ARTICLE I
Longevity Pay
[Adopted as Sec. 3 of an ordinance adopted 6-15-1976;42 amended
7-20-1976]
§ 77-1. Percentage of salary for longevity pay. [Amended 9-6-1983
by Ord. No. 83-073]
Except as otherwise provided for in approved collective bargaining
agreements, in addition to the regular salary or wage rates, all city officers
and employees, without regard to civil service status, shall be paid longevity
pay as follows:
§ 77-2. Adjustments in longevity pay.
Adjustments in longevity pay shall be made effective the next full pay period
following the employee's and city officer's anniversary date. In the case
of city officers and employees not heretofore receiving longevity pay, the
effective date of this provision shall be in the first complete pay period
of 1976. For purposes of this article, years of service shall include all
employment and service by city officers and employees in state, county or
local government.
A. For over five years of service and less than 10 years of service: 2% of
the regular annual salary.
B. For over 10 years of service and less than 15 years of service: 4% of the
regular annual salary.
C. For over 15 years of service: 6% of the regular annual salary.
D. For over 20 years of service: 10% of the regular annual salary.
E. For over 25 years of service: 12% of the regular annual salary.
42.Editor's Note: The remainder of this ordinance contained titles and schedules of salary
ranges. For current salary provisions, contact the office of the City Clerk.
§ 77-1 PARKING AUTHORITY § 77-2
71:159

ARTICLE II
Payments for Unused Sick and Personal Days
[Adopted 2-25-2014 by Ord. No. 14-008]
§ 77-3. Payments to elected officials for unused sick or vacation
days prohibited.
Given the unique nature of public service as an elected official, and
notwithstanding any general provision of the City of Paterson Personnel
Policies and Procedures Manual or other such local internal regulation, as
of the effective date of this article, the City of Paterson shall not award any
Mayor or member of the Municipal Council payment for unused sick days or
unused vacation days.
§ 77-3 PARKING AUTHORITY § 77-3
71:161
Chapter 81
POLICE DIVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration of government — See Ch. 5.
Constables — See Ch. 21.
Emergency medical technician
certification — See Ch. 31.
Fire Division — See Ch. 39.
Housing Authority — See Ch. 49.
Parking Authority — See Ch. 71.
Copies of public records from Police Division;
fingerprinting — See Ch. 377, Art. II.
Fees for police motor vehicle accident
reports — See Ch. 377, Art. III.
§ 77-3 PATERSON CODE § 77-3
71:162
ARTICLE I
Establishment and Organization
§ 81-1. Police Division established; Chief of Police as head.
[Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-059]
Within the Department of Police there shall be the Police Division, the head
of which shall be the Chief of Police as provided in § 5-76.
§ 81-2. Police Division personnel. [Amended 2-5-1985 by Ord. No.
85-002; 5-19-1992 by Ord. No. 92-021; 2-15-1994 by Ord. No.
94-014; 3-8-1994 by Ord. No. 94-020; 3-22-1994 by Ord. No. 94-025;
3-28-1995 by Ord. No. 95-021; 8-13-1996 by Ord. No. 96-050;
8-19-2003 by Ord. No. 03-035; 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-062;
5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-051; 1-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-002;
9-30-2014 by Ord. No. 14-049]
The Police Division may consist of up to the following:
§ 81-3. Police Division organized.
The Police Division shall be organized as follows:
A. One Chief of Police.
B. Three Deputy Chiefs.
C. Eleven Captains of Police. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No.
16-076]
D. Thirty-two Lieutenants of Police. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No.
16-076]
E. Sixty-two Sergeants of Police. [Amended 11-22-2016 by Ord. No.
16-076]
F. Four hundred seventy-five police officers.
G. Eighteen police assistants.
H. Fifty special police officers (Class One).
I. Such other employees as the Municipal Council may from time to time
authorize.
A. Office of the Chief of Police.
B. Field Operations Bureau.
C. Criminal Investigations Bureau.
D. Support Services Bureau.
§ 81-1 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-3
71:163
§ 81-4. Office of the Chief of Police. [Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-059]
The office of the Chief of Police shall consist of such administrative staff
deemed necessary by the Chief of Police and approved by the Police
Director.
§ 81-5. Chief of Police as executive officer of Police Division.
[Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-059]
The Chief of Police shall be the executive officer of the Police Division,
subject to the rules, regulations and orders as may be prescribed by the
Public City Council pursuant to § 5-75.
§ 81-6. Acting Chief of Police. [Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No.
03-059]
One of the Deputy Chiefs of the Division, or in their absence a Captain
designated by the Chief of Police, shall, in the absence of the Chief of Police,
perform all the duties of the Chief of Police.
§ 81-7. Powers and duties of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police, in addition to his other duties and powers provided by
law, ordinance or order, shall have the following duties and powers:
E. Communications Bureau. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
A. Cause the public peace to be preserved and cause all laws and
ordinances relating thereto to be properly enforced.
B. Faithfully and promptly obey and cause all personnel under him to obey
all the rules and regulations and orders from time to time prescribed by
the Council. [Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-059]
C. Take personal command, subject to the orders of the Police Director, of
the members of the Police Division and direct their movements and
operations in case of tumult, riot, insurrection or threats thereof.43
[Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-059]
43.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 20-12, Designation by Public Safety Director of members for
certain special detail, and original Sec. 20-13, Headquarters of Division; establishment of
precinct police stations, both of which immediately followed this section, were deleted
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068.
§ 81-3 PATERSON CODE § 81-7
71:164
ARTICLE II
Appointments; Qualifications
§ 81-8. Appointments; required examination. [Amended 10-28-2003
by Ord. No. 03-059]
All appointments to the Police Department shall be made by the Police
Director from a list prepared by the New Jersey Department of Personnel
after competitive examination and with special reference to the fitness
of the candidates. Before any permanent appointments are made, the
candidates shall submit themselves to such examination as may be required
by the New Jersey Department of Personnel.
§ 81-9. Eligibility for appointment to Police Division; certification.
§ 81-10. Examination by Police Examining Board; certificate issued.
[Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-059]
A. To be eligible for appointment to the Police Division, a candidate shall:
(1) Be a citizen of the United States.44
(2) Be of good moral character;
(3) Be able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068;
10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-059]
(4) 45Be sound in mind and body.
(5) Be of good health sufficient to satisfy the Board of Trustees of the
Police and Firemen's Retirement System of New Jersey that such
person is eligible to membership in the retirement system.
(6) Not have been convicted of any criminal offense involving moral
turpitude. [Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-059]
B. The candidate shall obtain a certificate from the Police Examining
Board as provided in § 81-10.
A. It shall be the duty of the Police Examining Board, consisting of the City
Physician and the Assistant City Physician, to examine carefully the
educational, mental, moral and physical fitness of any person who may
be a candidate for appointment to the Police Division and who may be
recommended for such examination by the Police Director, provided
44.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 20-15(a)(1), which contained age requirements and
immediately preceded this subsection, and original Section 20-15(a)(3), which contained a
residency requirement and immediately followed this subsection, were deleted 12-19-1995
by Ord. No. 95-068.
45.Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(4), regarding height and weight requirements, was
repealed 10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 03-059. This ordinance also provided for the
redesignation of former Subsections A(5) through (7) as Subsections A(4) through (6),
respectively.
§ 81-8 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-10
71:165
§ 81-11. Affidavit of candidate. [Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No.
03-059]
Upon appointment to the Police Department, each candidate, before being
sworn into office, shall make an affidavit, under oath, that he has truthfully
answered all questions of the New Jersey Department of Personnel and the
Police Examining Board.
§ 81-12. Uniform required. [Amended 10-28-2003 by Ord. No.
03-059]
Each member of the uniformed Police Division shall be required to wear a
uniform in the performance of his duties.
§ 81-12.1. Classifying qualified applicants. [Added 9-23-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-052]
that such candidate has been first certified for appointment by the New
Jersey Department of Personnel.
B. A certificate, signed by the Police Examining Board and attesting to the
educational, mental, moral and physical capacity of the candidate to
discharge the duties of the position to which he is seeking appointment
and for which he has been certified, shall be considered and taken by
the Police Director as sufficient evidence of such examination.
A. All duly qualified applicants for the position of police officer shall be
classified in the following classes:
(1) Class I: resident of City of Paterson.
(2) Class II: other residents of Passaic County.
(3) Class III: other residents of the State of New Jersey.
(4) Class IV: all other qualified applicants.
B. All appointments to the position of police officer shall be made in
accordance with the N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1a, with all those in Class I to
be appointed first and then those in each succeeding class in the order
above listed.
C. All applicants classified as Class I must be residents of the City of
Paterson as of the announced closing date of the civil service
examination for the position and must maintain such residency
continuously up to and including the date of appointment.
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to individuals hired
through the Department of Personnel Intergovernmental Transfer
Program.
E. A copy of this section shall be forwarded to the New Jersey Department
of Personnel.
§ 81-10 PATERSON CODE § 81-12.1
71:166
§ 81-13. (Reserved)46
§ 81-14. (Reserved)47
§ 81-15. (Reserved)48
F. This section shall take effect 20 days following adoption thereof.
46.Editor's Note: Former § 81-13, Payroll, payment of salary, was repealed 10-28-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-059.
47.Editor's Note: Former § 81-14, Longevity pay; computation, was repealed 10-28-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-059.
48.Editor's Note: Former § 81-15, Sick leave; leave for funerals, was repealed 10-28-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-059.
§ 81-12.1 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-15
71:167

ARTICLE III
(Reserved)49
§ 81-16. (Reserved)
§ 81-17. (Reserved)
§ 81-18. (Reserved)
§ 81-19. (Reserved)
49.Editor's Note: Former Art. III, Rules and Regulations; Discipline, was repealed 10-28-2003
by Ord. No. 03-059.
§ 81-16 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-19
71:169

ARTICLE IV
(Reserved)50
§ 81-20. (Reserved)
§ 81-21. (Reserved)
§ 81-22. (Reserved)
§ 81-23. (Reserved)
§ 81-24. (Reserved)
§ 81-25. (Reserved)
50.Editor's Note: Former Art. IV, Overtime Work, was repealed 10-28-2003 by Ord. No.
03-059.
§ 81-20 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-25
71:171

ARTICLE V
Housing Police Officers
§ 81-26. Title of housing police officer created.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.2, there is hereby created
the title of housing police officer.
§ 81-27. Appointments; qualifications.
§ 81-28. Housing police personnel. [Added 11-12-1985 by Ord. No.
85-097; amended 5-19-1992 by Ord. No. 92-023; 8-11-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-043; 1-23-1996 by Ord. No. 96-003]
The housing police shall consist of the following:
A. The Public Safety Director is hereby authorized to appoint any person
who is eligible under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.2 as a
housing police officer.
B. No person shall be appointed unless he:
(1) Is a citizen of the United States.
(2) Is a resident of the city.
(3) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently.
(4) Is sound in body and mind and of good physical and mental health
as evidenced by favorable results of medical and psychological
examinations. The provisions of this subsection relative to physical
and psychological examinations shall not be applicable to any
housing guard who shall have been appointed to the position of
housing guard from a civil service list upon adoption.
(5) Is of good moral character.
(6) Has not been convicted of any criminal offense involving moral
turpitude.
(7) Has successfully completed a police training course or program
approved by the Police Training Commission.
(8) Is a high school graduate or has received a high school equivalency
certificate or diploma.
A. Two (2) Captains of Housing Police.
B. Five (5) Lieutenants of Housing Police.
C. Five (5) Sergeants of Housing Police.
D. Thirty-five (35) housing police officers.
§ 81-26 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-29
71:173
§ 81-29. Additional eligibility requirements. [Amended 12-19-1995
by Ord. No. 95-068]
Any person who may be appointed as a housing police officer who was
not holding the position or employment of a housing guard or housing
patrolman on August 16, 1975, must fulfill all eligibility requirements that
may be established by the Civil Service Commission for appointment to
the title of housing police officer and all of the requirements set forth in
§ 81-27B.
§ 81-30. Police powers conferred on housing police officers.
Housing police officers appointed in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.2 shall have all the powers conferred by law upon police
officers in the enforcement of the laws of this state or municipal ordinances,
including the power to apprehend offenders.
§ 81-31. Duties of housing police officers.
Housing police officers shall perform the following duties:
§ 81-32. Housing police officers not considered members of Police
Division.
None of the housing police officers appointed in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.2 shall be considered to be a member or officer of the Police
Division.
§ 81-33. Supervision by Chief of Police; compliance with
regulations.
All housing police officers appointed pursuant to this Article shall be under
the supervision of the Chief of Police and shall comply with all the rules
and regulations applicable to the conduct and decorum of the regular police
officers of the city.
A. Tour of duty which shall be limited to patrolling the grounds, buildings
and other areas and facilities of public housing projects in the city in
order to protect persons and designated buildings, grounds and
property from trespass, damage and theft.
B. Maintain orderly conditions within the housing projects.
C. Give first aid in case of accidents.
D. When necessary, apprehend, warn and take into custody violators of the
law.
E. Give testimony in court.
F. Prepare reports.
G. Do related work as required.
§ 81-29 PATERSON CODE § 81-34
71:174
§ 81-34. Defense of housing police officers. [Added 6-26-1990 by
Ord. No. 90-025]
A. Whenever an officer of the Paterson housing police force is a defendant
in any action or legal proceeding arising out of and directly related to
the lawful exercise of police powers in the furtherance of his/her official
duties, said officer shall be provided with the necessary means of the
defense of such action or proceeding, but not for the defense of said
officer in any disciplinary proceeding instituted against him/her by the
city or in a criminal proceeding instituted as a result of a complaint filed
by the city. If any such disciplinary or criminal proceeding instituted by
or on complaint of the city shall be dismissed or filing determined in
favor of the officer, he/she shall be reimbursed for the expense of his/
her defense in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
B. Procedure.
(1) A Paterson housing police officer who is named as a defendant in an
eligible criminal proceeding which is tried and disposed of in the
Municipal Court shall obtain the services of any attorney to
represent said officer in those proceedings, provided that within
ten (10) days of the time said officer is served with a copy of the
complaint, said officer provides the Corporation Counsel with a
copy of said complaint. The city will pay such attorney fees as are
authorized by the most current fee schedule promulgated by the
Municipal Council for representation of police officers in the
Municipal Court.
(2) In all other eligible civil and/or criminal proceedings, the housing
police officer shall be permitted to select any attorney to represent
said officer in those proceedings unless the city has previously
arranged for representation. Prior to the housing police officer
entering into any agreement for representation with any attorney,
the attorney so designated must provide the Corporation Counsel,
in writing, with a fair estimate of the anticipated costs of services
and must further agree, in writing, to charge the city only those
fees which are authorized by the most recent fee schedule adopted
by the Municipal Council. No agreement between the housing
police officer, the attorney and the city shall be considered binding
unless and until a resolution adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5
has been approved by the Municipal Council and a written contract
has been executed by the city and the attorney.
(3) In the event that the housing police officer is subject to disciplinary
actions or criminal proceedings commenced by the municipality,
the housing police officer so charged shall select such attorney as
he/she deems appropriate without prior approval of the city.
However, if any such disciplinary or criminal proceeding instituted
by or on complaint of the city shall be dismissed or finally
determined in favor of the officer, the city shall pay only such fees
§ 81-34 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-34
71:175
as are set forth in the most recent fee schedule adopted by the
Municipal Council.
C. This section shall apply to any and all eligible civil or criminal cases
pending against housing police officers as of December 1, 1989.
§ 81-34 PATERSON CODE § 81-34
71:176
ARTICLE VI
School Crossing Guards
§ 81-35. Appointments.
The Public Safety Director shall appoint as many school crossing guards,
also known as "traffic guards," as the Director shall deem necessary.
§ 81-36. Duties; hours of duty.
§ 81-37. Salary; uniform supplied.
The salary of the school crossing guards shall be as provided by ordinance,
in addition to which a uniform shall be supplied.
§ 81-38. Qualifications of school crossing guards.
In order to be eligible for appointment, the prospective school crossing
guards shall possess the following qualifications:
A. It shall be the duty of the school crossing guards to maintain the orderly
movement of vehicular traffic consistent with the safety of children
attending school in the city.
B. The school guards shall perform said duties during the following hours:
(1) Morning: commencing fifteen (15) minutes before the opening of
and ending fifteen (15) minutes after the commencement of the
school session.
(2) Lunch: ten (10) minutes before dismissal of school children for
lunch until ten (10) minutes after dismissal; and ten (10) minutes
before the commencement of the afternoon school session until ten
(10) minutes after the commencement of said session.
(3) Afternoon: ten (10) minutes before the dismissal of school children
for the day until twenty (20) minutes after the time for such
dismissal.
A. Be not less than eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Be a resident of the city.
C. Be of good moral character.
D. Be a citizen of the United States.
E. Be at least five (5) feet two (2) inches in height, and weight to be in
accord with that fixed by medical standards.
F. Be in good health and sound in body and mind.
G. Certification by the City Physician or the Assistant City Physician as
being physically capable of performing the duties required of them.
§ 81-35 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-39
71:177
§ 81-39. Examination by City Physician; certification.
§ 81-40. Compliance with rules and regulations.
School crossing guards shall be governed by all the rules and regulations
laid down for the guidance of the Police Division members insofar as such
rules and regulations are applicable and consistent with the special class
of duty prescribed for school crossing guards. In addition, school crossing
guards shall comply with all other rules and regulations adopted for school
crossing guards by the Public Safety Director.
§ 81-41. Service at will of Public Safety Director.
School crossing guards shall serve at the pleasure of the Public Safety
Director. The Director may summarily dismiss any member of the school
crossing guards for any reason deemed sufficient by the Public Safety
Director.
A. It shall be the duty of the City Physician or Assistant City Physician to
carefully examine the educational, mental, moral and physical fitness of
any person applying for appointment as a school crossing guard.
B. A certificate signed by the examining physician shall be considered and
taken as sufficient evidence of the applicant's educational, mental,
moral and physical capability.
§ 81-39 PATERSON CODE § 81-41
71:178
ARTICLE VII
Parking Violation Officers
§ 81-42. Appointment of metermen; term; supervision; compliance
with statutes. [Amended 3-20-1984 by Ord. No. 84-026]
§ 81-43. Powers and duties of parking violation officers; no police
powers.
§ 81-44. Salary; uniform supplied.
The salary of parking violation officers shall be as provided by ordinance. In
addition, uniforms shall be supplied as prescribed by the Chief of Police.
A. The Executive Director of the Parking Authority of the city shall appoint
from among the employees of the Parking Authority as many employees
as he shall deem necessary in and for the city, within the limits of the
appropriation therefor, to act as special metermen.51
B. Each appointment shall be for a term of one (1) year. It shall be the duty
of the metermen to patrol assigned areas under the supervision of the
Parking Authority, including off-street parking facilities owned or
operated by the Parking Authority of the city and on-street parking
meters owned and maintained by the Parking Authority of the city to
check for parking violations and issue summons or violation tickets to
parking violators. The special metermen are not police officers and
have no powers to arrest.
C. The above special metermen shall remain under the supervision of the
Parking Authority of the city and be employees thereof.
D. Each employee appointed as special metermen must comply with any
and all state statutes regulating special metermen.
A. It shall be the duty of the parking violation officers to patrol, either on
foot or on such motorized vehicle as shall be practicable, assigned areas
in order to check for parking violations or any nonmoving traffic
violations, to issue violation tickets or notices on forms prescribed by
the Police Division, to answer inquiries and give directions to the public
and to be of service within the range of the job assignment, to observe,
record and report defective or damaged parking meters and to perform
such other duties as are related to those enumerated, at such hours and
times as may be assigned by the Chief of Police of the Police Division.
B. Said parking violation officers shall not be police officers and shall have
no police powers to arrest.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 81-42 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-45
71:179
§ 81-45. Qualifications of parking violation officers.
Said parking violation officers shall possess the following qualifications in
order to be eligible for appointment:
§ 81-46. Examination by City Physician; certification.
§ 81-47. Compliance with rules and regulations.
Parking violation officers shall be governed by all the rules and regulations
laid down for the guidance of the Police Division members insofar as such
rules and regulations are applicable and consistent with the special class of
duty prescribed for parking violation officers. In addition, parking violation
officers shall comply with all other rules and regulations promulgated by
the Public Safety Director.
§ 81-48. Officers under jurisdiction of State Civil Service
Commission.
Parking violation officers shall be under the jurisdiction of the New Jersey
State Civil Service Commission, and appointments shall be made from
eligible certification lists submitted.
A. Be not less than eighteen (18) years of age.
B. Be a resident of the city.
C. Be a citizen of the United States.
D. Be of good moral character.
E. Be in good health, sound in body and mind.
F. Be certified by the City Physician as being physically capable of
performing the duties required of them.
G. Must possess valid New Jersey driver's license.
H. Be a high school graduate or equivalent.
A. It shall be the duty of the City Physician or Assistant City Physician to
carefully examine the physical fitness of any person applying for
appointment as a parking violation officer, also known as "metermen."52
B. A certificate signed by the City Physician or Assistant City Physician
shall be considered and taken as sufficient evidence of the applicant's
physical capability.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 81-45 PATERSON CODE § 81-48
71:180
ARTICLE VIII
Police Escort Services
§ 81-49. Escort services provided.
The Police Division shall provide escort services to any business or industry
in the city at the request of said business or industry in the transportation
of money or other valuables.
§ 81-50. Scheduling of escort service.
The escort service described in § 81-49 shall be provided as scheduled and
directed by the Chief of Police.
§ 81-51. Fees and charges for escort services; exceptions.
§ 81-52. Payment of fees; disposition.
All fees for escort services shall be paid to the Police Division and shall be
deposited with the Revenue Collections Division within the Department of
Finance.
A. Each business or industry shall be entitled to escort service within the
confines of the city without charge once in each week. For any
additional escort service provided, the fee shall be the sum of twelve
dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) for each additional service.
B. For each escort service requiring travel beyond the confines of the city
but not beyond contiguous municipalities, the fee shall be the sum of
twenty-five dollars ($25.) for each escort service.
C. There shall be no fee charged for escort service provided to charitable
or religious associations or corporations.
§ 81-49 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-52
71:181

ARTICLE IX
Contracted Off-Duty Employment
[Added 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-052; amended 1-20-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-005]
§ 81-53. Purpose
For the convenience of those persons and entities which utilize the services
of off-duty law enforcement officers of the City of Paterson Police Division
and to authorize the outside employment of City of Paterson police while
off-duty, the City of Paterson establishes a policy regarding the use of said
officers.
§ 81-54. Escrow accounts.
A. Members of the Police Division shall be permitted to accept police
related employment for private employers or school districts only
during off-duty hours and at such times as will not interfere with the
efficient performance of regularly scheduled or emergency duty for the
City of Paterson.
B. Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty police shall first obtain
the approval of the Chief of Police, which approval shall be granted if, in
the opinion of the Chief, such employment would not be inconsistent
with the efficient functioning and good reputation of the Police Division
and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety of the
officer or officers who are to perform the work. The manner of
assignment of said jobs and the regulation of same shall be governed by
a policy and regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police.
A. Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty law
enforcement officer in the Paterson Police Division shall estimate the
number of hours such law enforcement services are required, which
estimate shall be approved in writing by the Chief of Police, and shall
establish an escrow account with the City of Paterson Treasurer by
depositing an amount sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and
administrative fees set forth in § 81-56 for the total estimated hours of
service.
B. Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law enforcement
officers, the Chief of Police or his designee shall verify that the balance
in the escrow account of the person or entity requesting services is
sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for the number of hours
specified in the request for services. The Chief of Police shall not post a
request for services from any person or entity unless all fees and
compensation required in the manner described above have been
deposited with the City of Paterson Treasurer. No officer shall provide
any such services for more hours than are specified in the request for
services.
§ 81-53 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-54
71:183
§ 81-55. Requests for services.
All requests to the City of Paterson for the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers in the City of Paterson Police Division for a period of
one week or longer shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police for posting
at least 10 days before such services are required. Any law enforcement
officers, when so employed by the City of Paterson, shall be treated as an
employee of the City of Paterson; provided, however, that wages earned
for outside employment shall not be applied toward the pension benefits of
law enforcement officers so employed nor shall hours worked for outside
employment be considered in any way compensable as overtime.
§ 81-56. Rates of compensation; administrative fee; payment of
services. [Amended 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-094]
The rate schedule for off-duty law enforcement officers with the City of
Paterson shall be established on an annual basis by the collective
bargaining unit representing those officers. Said rates shall be reduced to
writing and available on request. An administrative charge of $10 per hour
shall be added to said rates. Police vehicles will be billed at an additional
charge of $20 per hour per vehicle.
§ 81-57. Disclaimer.
All ordinances, codes or parts thereof inconsistent with any of the
provisions of this new section are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency. If any section or provision of this chapter shall be held
invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the same shall not affect the
other sections or provisions of this chapter, except so far as the section
or provision so declared invalid, which shall be inseparable from the
remainder of any portion thereof.
C. In the event the funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, services of off-duty law enforcement officers shall cease and
requests for further or future services shall not be performed or posted
until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow account in the
manner prescribed above.
D. The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible for
ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in order to
avoid any interruption of services.
E. The person or entity requesting same shall be required to execute a
contract with the City of Paterson for said services in a form approved
by Corporation Counsel.
§ 81-54 PATERSON CODE § 81-57
71:184
ARTICLE X
Special Police Officers
[Added 9-30-2014 by Ord. No. 14-049]
§ 81-58. Title established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq., there is hereby created the title
of Special Police Officer (Class One).
§ 81-59. Qualifications; residency; training; appointment.
§ 81-60. Term of appointment.
All initial appointments shall be for a term of four months. Thereafter, any
reappointment shall be for a term of one year.
§ 81-61. Duties; powers; assignments.
In addition to performing routine traffic details, crowd control, other
routine patrols and similar duties as may be prescribed by the Chief of
Police or his or her designee, such Special Police Officers (Class One) are
hereby specifically authorized to issue summonses for disorderly persons
offenses, petty disorderly persons offenses, violations of municipal
ordinances and violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. Under no
circumstances will such a Special Police Officer (Class One) be assigned
any duties that may require the carrying or use of a firearm. The duties,
assignments, responsibilities and scheduling of hours of service of such
A. Prior to the formal appointment of any candidate, and prior to
commencement of the required training, the Police Director shall name
up to 50 persons for potential appointment as Special Police Officer
(Class One). The Chief of Police shall then ascertain the eligibility of
each said prospective appointee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-146.10, regarding required criminal records check and other
appointment criteria.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.18, all such prospective appointees
shall be residents of the City of Paterson at the time their eligibility is
ascertained and at the time of appointment. Written records of all
matters determining eligibility shall be retained by the Police
Department as required by law.
C. The Police Director may appoint up to 50 certified Class One Special
Police Officers, whose appointments are expressly contingent on
completion of the proper special law enforcement training course
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.11. If a prospective appointee is
serving as a member of the auxiliary police or is a constable, the
prospective appointee must resign from his or her position as a member
of the auxiliary police or as a constable upon successful completion of
the said special law enforcement training course in order to receive an
appointment under this section.
§ 81-58 PARKING AUTHORITY § 81-61
71:185
Special Police Officers (Class One) shall, consistent with the foregoing and
all applicable laws and regulations, be determined by the Chief of Police.
§ 81-62. Compensation; expenses; uniform; shield.
Such Special Police Officers (Class One) shall be compensated at a rate
whose range shall be set by ordinance. The City of Paterson will reimburse
a Special Police Officer (Class One) for costs incurred for the purchase of
any authorized uniforms or equipment that he or she is expressly required
to purchase by the Department of Police. Upon the resignation, removal, or
non-reappointment of a Special Police Officer (Class One), said officer shall
immediately surrender to the Department his or her shield and insignia of
office, together with any departmental property that may be in his or her
possession.
§ 81-61 PATERSON CODE § 81-62
71:186
Chapter 85
RECREATION COMMISSIONERS, BOARD OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 363.
§ 85-1. Creation; members; terms of office.
There shall be and hereby is established and created a Board of Recreation
Commissioners in the City of Paterson, which shall consist of seven persons,
including five regular members and two alternate members, who shall be
citizens and residents of the City of Paterson. The Mayor, as provided by
N.J.S.A. 40:12-1, shall appoint the regular members, with each appointment
subject to the advice and consent of the Council. The Council, consistent
with N.J.S.A. 40:12-1.1, shall appoint the alternate members.
§ 85-2. Vacancies; compensation.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. The members shall
serve until their respective successors are appointed and shall qualify. The
members shall receive no compensation for their services.
A. The commissioners first appointed shall be appointed as follows:
(1) A regular member for a term expiring on the 2015 anniversary of
the member's appointment;
(2) A regular member for a term expiring on the 2016 anniversary of
the member's appointment;
(3) A regular member for a term expiring on the 2017 anniversary of
the member's appointment;
(4) A regular member for a term expiring on the 2018 anniversary of
the member's appointment;
(5) A regular member for a term expiring on the 2019 anniversary of
the member's appointment;
(6) An alternate member for a term expiring on the 2015 anniversary
of the member's appointment; and
(7) An alternate member for a term expiring on the 2016 anniversary
of the member's appointment.
B. Thereafter, all appointments of regular and alternate members shall be
for the term of five years.
§ 81-62 PARKING AUTHORITY § 85-3
71:187
§ 85-3. Appointment of Chair.
The Mayor shall each year name one member of the Board of Recreation
Commissioners as Chair Person, to serve for one year.
§ 85-4. Powers and duties of Chair.
The powers and duties of the Chair Person shall be as follows:
§ 85-5. Alternate members; terms of office; vacancies; voting;
compensation.
The Municipal Council of the City of Paterson shall by resolution appoint
two alternate members. Alternate members shall be designated at the time
of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The terms of the
alternate members shall be for one year, except that one of the alternate
members initially appointed shall be for a term of two years. A vacancy shall
be filled for the expired term only. Alternate members may participate in
discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order
that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the
event a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote first. Furthermore, no alternate member shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which the alternate has either directly or
indirectly any personal or financial interest. The alternate members shall
receive no compensation for their services.
§ 85-6. Powers and authority.
Said Board, with the approval of the Mayor and Council of the City of
Paterson, may acquire lands for public playgrounds and recreation places,
by gift or purchase, and shall from time to time select lands for public
playgrounds and recreation places and, when deemed necessary or
advisable by such Board, select lands for an approach or approaches by way
of ingress thereto and egress therefrom, of such size and dimensions as it
shall think suitable, regard being had to the population of the neighborhood.
It shall, in addition to the foregoing powers, have, subject to the approval
A. To preside over all meetings of the Board.
B. To appoint a Vice Chair and Recording Secretary and an Acting Chair in
the event of the nonavailability of the Chair or Vice Chair.
C. To appoint such committees as may be authorized by the Board of
Recreation Commissioners to carry out the objects and purposes of said
Board.
D. To authorize the discharge or release for cause any employee upon
request and certification of the Executive Director.
E. To certify, together with the Executive Director, to the Finance Director
all expenditures of the Board of Recreation Commissioners.
§ 85-3 PATERSON CODE § 85-6
71:188
of the Mayor and Council of the City of Paterson, all the powers which
are granted to boards of recreation commissioners with respect to surveys,
maps, estimates, acquisition of lands and suitably equipping the same with
buildings, stands, seats and other structures and apparatus for such
playgrounds and recreation purposes as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:12-3 et seq.,
and N.J.S.A. 40:12-4 et seq.
§ 85-7. Authority to improve lands.
Said Board may cause any lands acquired for the purpose to be laid out and
improved as a public playground, recreation place or an approach thereto.
§ 85-8. Title of acquired lands; leases of land.
The title to all lands acquired or taken under the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:12-1 et seq., through N.J.S.A. 40:12-8 et seq., shall vest in the City of
Paterson, and all leases of land for such purposes shall be in the name of
the City of Paterson.
§ 85-9. Provisions of funds; collection of fees.
§ 85-10. Control of land; adoption of rules and regulations;
violations and penalties.
Said Board shall have full control of all lands, playgrounds and recreation
places acquired or leased under the provisions N.J.S.A. 40:12-1 et seq.,
through N.J.S.A. 40:12-8 et seq., and may adopt suitable rules, regulations
and bylaws for the use thereof and the conduct of all persons while on
or using the same, and any person who shall violate any of such rules,
regulations or bylaws shall be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly
person.
A. In order to provide the funds, in whole or in part, necessary to improve,
maintain and police the playgrounds or recreation places under its
control, the Board of Recreation Commissioners may arrange and
provide for the giving of outdoor exhibitions, concerts, games and
contests and may use and employ such playgrounds or recreation
places for the purpose of giving thereon outdoor exhibitions, concerts,
games and contests.
B. Said Board may charge and collect a reasonable admission fee for each
person entering such playground or recreation place during the time or
times when the same is being used or employed for such purposes but
shall not use or employ any such playground or recreation place for
such purpose for a greater period than eight hours in any week nor on
more than two days in any one week, and when any such playground or
recreation place is used for such purpose, no admission fee shall be
charged or collected from children under 12 years of age.
§ 85-6 PARKING AUTHORITY § 85-11
71:189
§ 85-11. Appointment of Recreation Executive Director and other
staff.
Said Board may appoint a staff to consist of an Executive Director and such
other staff, including a secretary or clerk and such number of custodians,
supervisors and assistants for the several playgrounds and recreation
places as it shall think necessary, but the salaries or other compensation of
all such officers, custodians and assistants shall be fixed and determined by
the Council of the City of Paterson.
§ 85-12. Preservation of order.
The appointed custodians, supervisors and assistants shall notify the Police
Department in situations requiring police assistance.
§ 85-13. Annual report.
Said Board shall make an annual report on or before the first day of January
and submit the same to the Council of the City of Paterson, which report
shall contain a comprehensive and detailed report covering operations,
receipts, disbursements and expenditures for the full year.
§ 85-14. Appropriations.
The Council of the City of Paterson shall annually fix, determine and
appropriate a sum sufficient for the care, custody, policing and maintenance
of such playgrounds and recreation places and for the expenses of said
Board, which shall be raised by taxation in the same manner as other taxes.
§ 85-15. Costs and expenses; bonds; special fund.
The money necessary to pay for lands purchased or condemned for such
playgrounds and recreation places, and for providing and equipping the
same, from time to time, may be raised and provided by the board or body
having control of the finances by general taxation, as other taxes are raised
and levied, or by the issuance of temporary loan bonds, or by the issuance
of permanent bonds. All such bond obligations shall be issued and paid in
the manner provided by N.J.S.A. 40:1-1 et seq.
Chapter 89
SALARIES, PAYMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Longevity pay — See Ch. 77, Art. I.
§ 85-11 PATERSON CODE § 89-1
89:190
§ 89-1. Designation of certifying and approval officer.
The Director of the Department of Finance is hereby designated as the
Certifying and Approval Officer for the approval and payment of salaries
and wages for the officers and employees of the City of Paterson as required
by N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17.
§ 89-2. Duties of Finance Director.
The Finance Director shall be charged with the duty of ascertaining the
existence of proper and sufficient appropriations for the payment of salaries
and wages of all municipal officers and employees for the biweekly payroll
and shall be charged with the duty of determining that there is legal
authority for such payments including determining that all claims for the
payment of salaries and wages for municipal officers and employees shall
carry an appropriate certification of the appropriate officer or designated
employee of the city having knowledge of the facts that the request for
payment of salaries and wages are in proper order, including the
determination that said salaries and wages have actually been earned by
the employees in question.
§ 89-3. Procedure for certifying and approving payment of salaries.
The procedure for certifying and approving payment of salaries and wages
for the officers and employees of the City of Paterson shall be as follows:
A. All municipal employees shall note the time of their arrival and
departure on workdays by either signing in on daily time sheets or
punching in on time clocks as the case may be established in each
division.
B. Each division director and department director shall cause to be
prepared biweekly time sheets which shall be approved as to form and
content by the respective directors of each division and department.
C. Each division and department director shall cause the biweekly time
sheets to be transmitted to the Division of Personnel, in the Department
of Administration, for the purposes of editing, processing and
verification of payrolls. The Director of Personnel shall certify, in
writing, the completeness and accuracy of said biweekly time sheets.53
D. The Division of Treasury, in the Department of Finance, shall cause
biweekly payroll for all officers and employees of the City of Paterson to
be prepared, based upon the payroll register as submitted from the
Division of Personnel. The Division of Treasury shall be responsible for
the distribution of payroll checks to the respective departments and
divisions.54
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 89-1 SALARIES, PAYMENT OF § 89-4
89:191
§ 89-4. Certification and approval of claims.
The certifying and approval officer shall certify, in writing, to the governing
body all the proof claims, and such claims shall thereafter be approved or
disapproved by resolution not later than the next regular scheduled meeting
of the Municipal Council after the disbursement of moneys for the payment
of salaries and wages.
§ 89-5. Signing of checks.
Checks issued for the payment of salaries and wages for municipal officers
and employees shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the
Director of Finance.
Chapter 90
SERVICE CHARGES
§ 90-1. Service charges; collection; exemptions.
A. The City Tax Collector shall impose the following service charges to be
added to any account owing to the City of Paterson:
(1) Twenty dollars ($20.) for any check or other written instrument
returned for insufficient funds.
(2) Ten dollars ($10.) for redemption statement.
(3) Two dollars ($2.) for issuance of duplicate tax and sewer bills.
(4) Ten dollars ($10.) for written responses to inquiries regarding tax
payments.
(5) Five dollars ($5.) for written responses, per block and lot, to
requests of the Tax Assessors' office for information available on
computer, i.e., ownership and assessments.
(6) Five dollars ($5.) for written responses to requests of the Tax
Assessors' office for information not on computer, i.e., per field pad
or property record card, etc.
B. If the payment for which a check or other written instrument has been
returned for insufficient funds is for a tax or special assessment, the
twenty-dollar service charge shall be included on any list of delinquent
accounts prepared for the enforcement of liens.
C. Any service charge authorized by Subsection A(1) shall be collected, in
cash or by certified or cashier's check, in the same manner prescribed
by law for the collection of the account for which the check or other
written instrument was tendered.
D. Persons aged sixty-five (65) and older shall be exempt from the fees
specified under Subsection A(2), (3) and (4).
§ 89-4 PATERSON CODE § 90-1
90:192
Chapter 92
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
§ 90-1 SERVICE CHARGES § 90-1
90:193

ARTICLE I
Bunker Hill Area
[Adopted 12-20-1994 by Ord. No. 94-078]
§ 92-1. Establishment of District.
The Bunker Hill Industrial Park Special Improvement District ("district")
is hereby established consisting of the properties designated and listed
on Schedule A annexed hereto55 by tax block and lot numbers and street
addresses.
§ 92-2. Assessments.
All costs of development, construction and acquisition relating to the
provision of improvements shall be financed by and assessed to properties
especially benefitted thereby. All costs of improvements and maintenance,
other than the costs of improvements and maintenance ordinarily incurred
by the city out of general funds, shall be determined and approved pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 or N.J.S.A. 40:56-85 as determined by the district
management corporation. The foregoing costs shall be collected as a special
assessment against properties which are benefitted thereby within the
district.
§ 92-3. Annual report; budgets; fiscal year; audit.
A. The Mayor, with the assistance and concurrence of the district
management corporation, shall submit an annual report to the
Municipal Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-80. Such reports shall
consist of an estimate of the cost of operating and maintaining and
annually improving the special improvement district.
B. The district management corporation shall submit a detailed annual
budget for approval by resolution of the Municipal Council, pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56-84. The budget shall be submitted with
a report which explains how the budget contributes to the goals and
objectives for the special improvement district.
C. The fiscal year of the district and of the management corporation shall
be January 1 to December 31. Within 30 days after the close of each
fiscal year, the district management corporation shall make an annual
report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year to the Municipal
Council.
D. The district management corporation shall cause an annual audit of its
books, accounts and financial transactions to be made and filed with the
Municipal Council. This audit shall be completed and filed with the
Municipal Council within four months after the close of the fiscal year of
the corporation. A certified duplicate copy of the audit shall be filed
with the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the
55.Editor's Note: Said Schedule A is on file in the City Clerk's office.
§ 92-1 SERVICE CHARGES § 92-3
90:195
§ 92-4. District management corporation designated; membership;
powers.
State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs within five days
of the filing of the audit with the Municipal Council.
A. The Municipal Council of the City of Paterson hereby designates the
Bunker Hill Industrial Park Special Improvement District Management
Corporation ("district management corporation"), a nonprofit
corporation, as the district management corporation for the district.
B. The corporation shall be composed of the following members: one
nonvoting Council representative to be appointed by the Municipal
Council; one nonvoting municipal agency head or designee, appointed
by the Mayor; and 11 Bunker Hill area business and/or property owners
to be appointed according to the bylaws of the district management
corporation.
C. This district management corporation, in addition to acting as an
advisory board to the Mayor and Council, shall have all powers
necessary and requisite to effectuate the purposes of this article and
the district, including but not limited to:
(1) Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its
business and prescribe rules, regulations and policies for the
performance of its functions and duties.
(2) Employ such persons as may be required and fix and pay their
compensation from funds available to the corporation.
(3) Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements
respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of
property or money.
(4) Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or
convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the
corporation, including contract with any person, firm, corporation,
governmental agency or other entity.
(5) Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own
obligations.
(6) Borrow money from private lenders or governmental entities for
periods not to exceed 180 days.
(7) Fund the improvement of the exterior appearance of properties in
the district through grants or loans.
(8) Fund the rehabilitation of properties within the district.
(9) Accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease or manage property in
the district.
§ 92-3 PATERSON CODE § 92-4
90:196
§ 92-5. Municipal powers retained.
Notwithstanding the creation of the special improvement district, the City
of Paterson expressly retains all its powers and authority over the area
designated as within the special improvement district.
§ 92-6. Debt obligations.
This Article obligates the Bunker Hill Special Improvement District to
satisfy all debts, loans and financial liabilities incurred by the corporation.
The district management corporation may not borrow an amount that
exceeds the approved budget for that fiscal year. The Charter of the Bunker
Hill Special Improvement District shall include a clause incorporating the
aforementioned.
(10) Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the
corporation; provided, however, that if the properties within the
district petition to dissolve the district, the city shall have the right
to amend the current year's budget and schedule fees and/or taxes
in order to liquidate outstanding claims against the district
management corporation.
(11) Provide security, sanitation and other services in the district,
supplemental to those provided normally by the city.
(12) Undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or
attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to
locate there or to visitors to the district, including but not limited to
litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities,
recreational and rest areas and facilities and those improvements
generally permitted for pedestrian malls under N.J.S.A. 40:56-66
pursuant to pertinent regulations of the governing body.
(13) Publicize the district and the businesses included within the
district boundaries.
(14) Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in and to balance the
business mix of the district.
(15) Organize special events in the district.
(16) Provide special parking arrangements for the district.
(17) Provide temporary decorative lighting in the district.
§ 92-4 SERVICE CHARGES § 92-6
90:197

ARTICLE II
Downtown Paterson Area
[Adopted 7-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-036]
§ 92-7. Establishment of District.
The Downtown Paterson Special Improvement District ("district") is hereby
established consisting of the properties designated and listed on Schedule
A annexed hereto56 by tax block and lot numbers and street addresses.
§ 92-8. Assessments.
All costs of development, construction and acquisition relating to the
provision of improvements shall be financed by and assessed to properties
especially benefitted thereby. All costs of improvements and maintenance,
other than the costs of improvements and maintenance ordinarily incurred
by the city out of general funds, shall be determined and approved pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 or N.J.S.A. 40:36-85 as determined by the district
management corporation. The foregoing costs shall be collected as a special
assessment against properties who are benefitted thereby within the
district.
§ 92-9. Annual report; budgets; fiscal year; audit.
A. The Mayor, with the assistance and concurrence of the district
management corporation, shall submit an annual report to the
Municipal Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-80. Such reports shall
consist of an estimate of the cost of operating and maintaining and
annually improving the special improvement district.
B. The district management corporation shall submit a detailed annual
budget for approval by resolution of the Municipal Council, pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56-84. The budget shall be submitted with
a report which explains how the budget contributes to the goals and
objectives for the special improvement district.
C. The fiscal year of the District and of the management corporation shall
be January 1 to December 31. Within 30 days after the close of each
fiscal year, the district management corporation shall make an annual
report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year to the Municipal
Council.
D. The district management corporation shall cause an annual audit of its
books, accounts and financial transactions to be made and filed with the
Municipal Council. This audit shall be completed and filed with the
Municipal Council within four months after the close of the fiscal year of
the corporation. A certified duplicate copy of the audit shall be filed
with the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the
56.Editor's Note: Said Schedule A is on file in the City Clerk's office.
§ 92-7 SERVICE CHARGES § 92-9
90:199
§ 92-10. District management corporation designated; membership;
powers.
State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs within five days
of the filing of the audit with the Municipal Council.
A. The Municipal Council of the City of Paterson hereby designates the
Downtown Paterson Special Improvement District Management
Corporation ("district management corporation"), a nonprofit
corporation, as the district management corporation for the district.
B. The corporation shall be composed of the following members; one
nonvoting Council representative to be appointed by the Municipal
Council; one nonvoting municipal agency head or designee, appointed
by the Mayor; and eleven downtown Paterson area business and/or
property owners to be appointed according to the bylaws of the district
management corporation.
C. This district management corporation, in addition to acting as an
advisory board to the Mayor and Council, shall have all powers
necessary and requisite to effectuate the purposes of this article and
the district, including but not limited to:
(1) Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its
business and prescribe rules, regulations and policies for the
performance of its functions and duties.
(2) Employ such persons as may be required and fix and pay their
compensation from funds available to the corporation.
(3) Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements
respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of
property or money.
(4) Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or
convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the
corporation, including contract with any person, firm, corporation,
governmental agency or other entity.
(5) Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own
obligations.
(6) Borrow money from private lenders or governmental entities for
periods not to exceed 180 days.
(7) Fund the improvement of the exterior appearance of properties in
the district through grants or loans.
(8) Fund the rehabilitation of properties within the district.
(9) Accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease or manage property in
the district.
§ 92-9 PATERSON CODE § 92-10
90:200
§ 92-11. Municipal powers retained.
Notwithstanding the creation of the special improvement district, the City
of Paterson expressly retains all its powers and authority over the area
designated as within the special improvement district.
§ 92-12. Debt obligations.
This article obligates the Downtown Paterson Special improvement district
to satisfy all debts, loans and financial liabilities incurred by the
corporation. The district management corporation may not borrow an
amount that exceeds the approved budget for that fiscal year. The Charter
of the Downtown Paterson Special Improvement District shall include a
clause incorporating the aforementioned.
(10) Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the
corporation; provided, however, that if the properties within the
district petition to dissolve the district, the city shall have the right
to amend the current year's budget and schedule fees and/or taxes
in order to liquidate outstanding claims against the district
management corporation.
(11) Provide security, sanitation and other services in the districts
supplemental to those provided normally by the city.
(12) Undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or
attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to
locate there or to visitors to the district, including but not limited to
litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities,
recreational and rest areas and facilities and those improvements
generally permitted for pedestrian malls under N.J.S.A. 40:56-66
pursuant to pertinent regulations of the governing body.
(13) Publicize the district and the businesses included within the
district boundaries.
(14) Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in and to balance the
business mix of the district.
(15) Organize special events in the district.
(16) Provide special parking arrangements for the district.
(17) Provide temporary decorative lighting in the district.
§ 92-10 SERVICE CHARGES § 92-12
90:201

ARTICLE III
Sandy Hill Area
[Adopted 1-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-005]
§ 92-13. Establishment of District.
The Sandy Hill Special Improvement District (hereinafter the "district") is
hereby established consisting of the properties designated and listed on
Schedule A and annexed hereto. Said Schedule A is on file with the City
Clerk's office by tax block and lot numbers and street addresses.
§ 92-14. District management corporation designated; membership;
powers.
A. Designated: The City Council of the City of Paterson hereby designates
the Sandy Hill Special Improvement District Management Corporation
(herein "district management corporation"), a nonprofit corporation
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 15A:1-3, as the district management corporation
for the district.
B. Membership: The district management corporation shall be composed
of the following eight members:
(1) Three business owners within the district appointed pursuant to
the bylaws of the district management corporation;
(2) Three property owners within the district appointed pursuant to
the bylaws of the district management corporation;
(3) One elected official from the City Council; and
(4) One department head or designee of the Mayor appointed by the
Mayor.
C. Powers: Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-83, the district management
corporation may exercise those powers listed herein; additionally, the
district management corporation shall have all the powers to effectuate
its purposes, including, but not limited to, the power to:
(1) Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its
business and prescribe rules, regulations and policies for the
performance of its functions and duties.
(2) Employ such persons as may be required and fix and pay their
compensation from funds available to the corporation.
(3) Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements
respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of
property or money.
(4) Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or
convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the
§ 92-13 SERVICE CHARGES § 92-14
90:203
§ 92-15. Assessments.
All costs of development, construction, and acquisition relating to the
provision of improvements shall be financed by and assessed to properties
located within the boundaries of the district. All costs of improvements,
maintenance, or additional police or private security, other than costs of
improvement maintenance, or police ordinarily incurred by the City of
corporation, including contract with any person, firm, corporation,
governmental agency or other entity.
(5) Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own
obligations.
(6) Borrow money from private lenders or governmental entities for
periods not to exceed 180 days.
(7) Fund the improvement of the exterior appearance of properties in
the district through grants or loans.
(8) Fund the rehabilitation of properties within the district.
(9) Accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease or manage property in
the district.
(10) Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the
corporation; provided, however, that if the properties within the
district petition to dissolve the district, the City shall have the right
to amend the current year's budget and schedule fees and/or taxes
in order to liquidate outstanding claims against the district
management corporation.
(11) Provide security, sanitation and other services in the district,
supplemental to those provided normally by the City.
(12) Undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or
attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to
locate there or to visitors to the district, including but not limited to
litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and facilities,
recreational and rest areas and facilities and those improvements
generally permitted for pedestrian malls under N.J.S.A. 40:56-66
pursuant to pertinent regulations of the governing body.
(13) Publicize the district and the businesses included within the
district boundaries.
(14) Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in and to balance the
business mix of the district.
(15) Organize special events in the district.
(16) Provide special parking arrangements for the district.
(17) Provide temporary decorative lighting in the district.
§ 92-14 PATERSON CODE § 92-15
90:204
Paterson out of general funds, shall be determined and approved pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 or N.J.S.A. 40:36-85 as determined by the district
management corporation. The foregoing costs shall be collected as a special
assessment.
§ 92-16. Annual report; budget; fiscal year; audit.
§ 92-17. Municipal powers retained.
Notwithstanding the creation of the special improvement district, the City
of Paterson expressly retains all its powers and authority over the area
designated as within the special improvement district.
§ 92-18. Debt obligations.
This article obligates the Sandy Hill Special Improvement District to satisfy
all debts, loans, and financial liabilities incurred by the district management
corporation. The district management corporation may not borrow an
amount that exceeds the approved budget for that fiscal year. The Charter
of the Sandy Hill Special Improvement District shall include a clause
incorporating the aforementioned.
A. Annual report: The Mayor, with the assistance and concurrence of the
district management corporation, shall submit an annual report to the
City Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-80. The report shall include an
estimate of the cost of operating, maintaining, and annually improving
the district for the fiscal year.
B. Budget: Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-84, the district management
corporation shall submit a detailed annual budget for approval by
resolution of the City Council. The budget shall include a report
explaining the rationale for expenditures, progress made during the
fiscal year, and goals and objectives for the district.
C. Fiscal year: The fiscal year of the district and of the management
corporation shall be January 1 to December 31. Within 30 days after the
close of each fiscal year, the district management corporation shall
make an annual report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year to
the City Council.
D. Audit: Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-88, the district management
corporation shall cause an annual audit of its books, accounts and
financial transactions to be made and filed with the City Council, and
for that purpose the district management corporation shall employ a
certified public accountant of New Jersey. The annual audit shall be
completed and filed with the City Council within four months after the
close of the fiscal year of the district management corporation, and a
certified duplicate copy of the audit shall be filed with the Director of
the Division of Local Government Services in the Department of
Community Affairs within five days of the filing of the audit with the
governing body of the municipality.
§ 92-15 SERVICE CHARGES § 92-18
90:205

ARTICLE IV
21st Avenue Area
[Adopted 6-30-2015 by Ord. No. 15-051]
§ 92-19. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRICT MANAGEMENT CORPORATION — (Also referred to as "DMC")
The 21st Avenue District Management Corporation, Inc., an entity
incorporated pursuant to Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes and
designated by this article to receive funds collected by a special
improvement assessment within the special improvement district, as
authorized by this article and any amendatory ordinances.
SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT — (Also referred to as "District" or
"SID") That area within the City of Paterson described by block and lot
numbers and street addresses as set forth in Schedule A57 and designated
by this article as an area in which a special assessment on property within
the district shall be imposed for the purpose of promoting the economic and
general welfare of the district and the City of Paterson in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et seq.
§ 92-20. Creation of district.
A. There is hereby created and designated within the City of Paterson a
special improvement district to be known as the "21st Avenue Special
Improvement District," consisting of properties designated and listed
by tax lot and block number and street addresses on Schedule A
attached hereto.58 The district shall be subject to special assessments
on all affected property within the district, which assessment shall be
imposed by the municipality for the purposes of promoting the
economic and general welfare of the district and the City of Paterson.
B. All properties within the special improvement district, except those set
forth in Subsection C of this section, are deemed included in the
assessing provisions of this article and are subject to assessment for
special improvement district purposes.
C. The following properties are excluded from the assessing provisions of
this article and are exempt from any assessment for special
improvement district purposes:
(1) Properties maintained solely for residential use and occupied by
the owner or the owner's family; and
(2) Properties owned by a nonprofit entity and exempt from real
property taxes under Title 54, Chapter 4 of the Revised Statutes;
57.Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the City offices.
58.Editor's Note: Said schedule is on file in the City offices.
§ 92-19 SERVICE CHARGES § 92-20
90:207
§ 92-21. Budget, assessments, fiscal requirements, annual reports,
audit.
except those properties granted exemption or abatement from
taxation under the Urban Enterprise Zones Act (P.L. 1983, c. 303),
as provided in N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.139 to 3.149, the Environmental
Opportunity Zone Act (L.1995, c. 413), codified at N.J.S.A.
54:4-3.150 et seq., the Long Term Tax Exemption Law (L.1991, c.
431), codified at N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., the Five-Year Exemption
and Abatement Law, codified at N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., or any
similar statute granting partial or total tax exemption or abatement
for a limited duration as incentive to develop, improve, rebuild,
renovate, alter, convert, or rehabilitate any property.
D. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting a property as defined
in § 92-20, Subsection C of this article from voluntarily negotiating a fee
or assessment or in-kind contribution associated with any property.
A. It is hereby determined that the operation and maintenance of the
district may involve annual costs relating to services peculiar to the
district that are distinguished from operation and maintenance services
normally provided by the City of Paterson outside the district.
B. The district's annual budget, annual assessment, annual reporting,
audit and other fiscal requirements and related matters shall be
conducted under the specific procedures set forth under N.J.S.A.
40:56-80 et seq., subject to public notice and governing body approval
to the full extent mandated by the said statutory procedures.
C. Monies appropriated and collected for the annual costs of operating
and maintaining the special improvement district shall be credited to a
special account. The Mayor and Council may incur the annual costs of
improving, operating and maintaining the special improvement district
during a fiscal year, though not specifically provided for by line item or
other category in an approved estimate for such fiscal year, if in its
discretion it shall be deemed necessary to provide for such annual
improvements or operation or maintenance prior to the succeeding
fiscal year and so long as the total amount of the account approved for
that year is not exceeded by that expenditure. Any balances to the
credit of the account and remaining unexpended at the end of the fiscal
year shall be maintained and applied towards the financial
requirements of the improvement district for the succeeding year.
D. The City of Paterson shall not be obligated to pay over funds that the
City of Paterson has not received.
E. The District Management Corporation shall cause an annual audit of its
books, accounts and financial transactions to be made and filed with the
Mayor and Council and for that purpose shall employ a certified public
accountant of New Jersey. The annual audit shall be completed and filed
with the governing body within four months after the close of the fiscal
§ 92-20 PATERSON CODE § 92-21
90:208
§ 92-22. Designated district management corporation.
year of the corporation, and a certified copy of the audit shall be filed
with the Director of Community Affairs within five days of the filing of
the audit with the Mayor and Council.
F. The district management corporation shall, within 30 days after the
close of each fiscal year, make an annual report of its activities for the
preceding fiscal year to the Mayor and Council and the Borough Clerk.
G. Wherever feasible and appropriate, and where no specific provision
herein is to the contrary, in applying the said statutory standards
regarding the district's annual budget, annual assessment, and annual
reporting, both the City of Paterson (including but not limited to its
Office of the Tax Assessor) and the district itself shall generally emulate
procedures actually employed in the instance of the Bunker Hill Special
Improvement District, created by City of Paterson Ord. No. 94-078, and
the Downtown Paterson Special Improvement District, created by City
of Paterson Ord. No. 97-036.
A. The nonprofit corporation, the 21st Avenue District Improvement
Corporation, Inc. an entity incorporated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et
seq., is hereby designated as the district management corporation for
the district and designated by this article to receive funds collected by a
special improvement assessment within the special improvement
district. This management corporation, in addition to acting as an
advisory board to the Mayor and Council, shall have all powers
necessary and requisite to effectuate the purpose of this article and the
district, subject to annual approval by the Mayor and Council of the
DMC's budget, including, but not limited to:
(1) Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and conduct of its
business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies in
connection with the performance of its function and duties;
(2) Employ such persons as may be required, and to fix and pay their
compensation from funds available to the district management
corporation;
(3) Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements
respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of
property or money;
(4) Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or
convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the
corporation, including contracts with any person, firm, corporation,
governmental agency or other entity;
(5) Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its
obligations;
§ 92-21 SERVICE CHARGES § 92-22
90:209
(6) Borrow money from private lenders for periods subject to statutory
limits established by the State of New Jersey and from
governmental entities for that or longer periods;
(7) Fund the improvement of the exterior appearance of properties in
the district through grants or loans;
(8) Fund the rehabilitation of properties in the district;
(9) Accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease or manage property in
the district;
(10) Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the
district management corporation;
(11) Provide security, sanitation and other services to the district,
supplemental to those provided normally by the City of Paterson;
(12) Undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or
attractiveness of the district to businesses which may wish to
locate there or to visitors to the district, including, but not limited
to, litter cleanup and control, landscaping, parking areas and
facilities, recreational and rest areas and facilities, pursuant to
pertinent regulations of the municipality;
(13) Publicize the district and the businesses included within the
district boundaries;
(14) Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in, and to balance the
business mix of, the district;
(15) Advise the Mayor and Municipal Council in connection with the
acquisition and construction of improvements and the operation
and maintenance thereof in the special improvement district, and
making of a plan therefor and the recommendations comments or
requests of members of the public and of owners and occupants of
property included within the special improvement district;
(16) Provide special parking arrangements for the district;
(17) Provide temporary decorative lighting in the district;
(18) Organize special events in the district;
(19) Review all applications, plans, specifications, etc., for the proposed
construction or alteration of any and all exterior improvements to
buildings and facades, including temporary and permanent signs
and awnings, within the special improvement district for the
purpose of providing advice and recommendations to those wishing
to improve their properties consistent with the recommendations
offered by the DMC. Recommendations made under this section
shall be in writing and will be forwarded to the appropriate
approving authority, namely the City of Paterson Construction Code
§ 92-22 PATERSON CODE § 92-22
90:210
§ 92-23. Municipal powers retained.
§ 92-24. Fiscal year and annual budget.
Official, Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. Recommendations
offered shall be developed within the time frames within which the
Construction Official, the Planning Board and Zoning Board must
take appropriate actions.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-68, in order to receive any funds or exercise
any of the powers granted herein, the Board of Trustees of the District
Improvement Corporation, Inc., shall include (i) one nonvoting
Municipal Council member to be appointed by the Municipal Council,
and (ii) one nonvoting municipal agency head or other designee
appointed by the Mayor, in addition to voting members appointed
pursuant to the district improvement corporation by-laws.
A. Notwithstanding the creation of a special improvement district, the City
of Paterson expressly retains all its powers and authority over the area
designated as being within the special improvement district.
B. Nothing contained herein shall accomplish or be interpreted or
construed to be the creation or a vacation, in whole or in part, of any
municipal street or right-of-way or part thereof, or to amend any zoning
ordinance requirement or to limit any other rule or law of general
application.
C. The district management corporation shall not make or enter into any
contracts for the improvement of any publicly owned or operated
facility or property within the special improvement district, unless the
Mayor and Council delegate to the district management corporation, by
separate ordinance, the contracting of work to be done on any street or
streets or on any other municipal property within the special
improvement district, and provided the district management
corporation, as the contracting unit, complies with the New Jersey
Local Public Contracts Law, Public Law 1971, Chapter 198 (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.) and provided the plans specifications and bid
requirements as applicable for the work contracted shall be approved
by the municipal engineer and the Mayor and Council, by resolution,
prior to initiation of any action for the awarding of a contract under the
Local Public Contracts Law.
D. The district management corporation shall comply with all applicable
statutes, ordinances and regulations.
E. No employee or contractor of the DMC shall be considered an employee
or contractor of the City of Paterson, and the City of Paterson shall not
be or become a coemployer or cocontractor of any DMC employee or
contractor. All employees and contractors, as a condition of
employment or contract, shall be required to execute a written
acknowledgment and acceptance of this status.
§ 92-22 SERVICE CHARGES § 92-24
90:211
§ 92-25. No municipal guarantee of DMC debts or obligations.
The municipality shall not be responsible for any debt or obligation of the
DMC, and shall not pledge its full faith and credit thereto, except as it shall
choose to do so in specific instances in accordance with all applicable laws.
§ 92-26. Limitation of power.
A. The fiscal year of the DMC shall be the calendar year.
B. The DMC shall submit to the Mayor and Council a detailed annual
budget for each upcoming fiscal year no later than December 31 of the
preceding year together with a report which explains how the budget
contributes to the goals and objectives for the district.
C. The budget shall be introduced, approved, amended and adopted with
N.J.S.A. 40:56-84.
A. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Mayor and Council at any
time, subsequent to the adoption of this article, from, by ordinance:
(1) Abandoning the operation of the district, changing the extent of the
district, supplementing or amending the description of the district
to be specially assessed or taxed for annual costs of the district,
changing or repealing any plan, rules, requisitions or limitations
adopted for the operation of the district, as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:56-75; or
(2) Rescinding the designation, redesignating, or designating a new
district management corporation to receive funds collected by a
special improvement assessment within the district, and to exercise
the powers granted to the district management corporation by this
article and any amendatory ordinances.
B. If, for any reason, the entity designated as the district management
corporation for the district and designated by this article to receive
funds collected by a special improvement assessment and to exercise
those powers granted to the district management corporation by this
article and any amendatory ordinances shall cease to operate or shall
lose its designation as the district management corporation, through
action by the governing body or otherwise, any and all monies and
property of the entity shall be transferred forthwith to the City of
Paterson.
§ 92-24 PATERSON CODE § 92-26
90:212
Chapter 93
TENANT ADVISORY BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing Authority — See Ch. 49.
Dangerous and unfit buildings — See Ch. 157.
Certificates of re-rental approval and
compliance — See Ch. 175.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Illegal conversions — See Ch. 187.
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
Lead-based paint — See Ch. 351.
Property registration — See Ch. 371.
§ 93-1. Creation.
The Municipal Council hereby creates a Tenant Advisory Board to function
as follows.
§ 93-2. Membership.
The Paterson Tenant Advisory Board shall be comprised of five individuals,
three of whom shall be tenants and two of whom shall be landlords. The
term of members shall be for a period of one year. Each At-Large
Councilman shall recommend one of the members of the Board, subject to
the approval by the full Council, and the Mayor shall appoint the other two
members.
§ 93-3. Duties.
The Tenant Advisory Board shall exercise the following duties and powers:
A. Hear complaints from tenants as to conditions in their units or at the
property at which they reside;
B. Refer tenants' complaints, when appropriate, to the respective
departments or divisions within the City of Paterson, including the
Department of Community Development, Division of Housing and the
Division of Health, or, when appropriate, to any court, other
governmental office or agency or private agency;
C. Receive reports from the respective departments or divisions or other
referral recipients as to matters referred by the Board;
D. Report to the Municipal Council, as directed by the Council, regarding
matters presented to the Board; and
E. Such other duties and powers as the Municipal Council may lawfully
direct through resolution or amendment to this chapter.
§ 92-26 TENANT ADVISORY BOARD § 93-3
93:213
Chapter 95
WATER COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 473.
§ 95-1. Appointments.
Appointments to the Passaic Valley Water Commission shall be made by the
Mayor pursuant to law and the city's agreement with said Commission.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 102
ADVERTISING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 113.
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 179.
Signs — See Ch. 414.
Smoking — See Ch. 421.
§ 93-3 PATERSON CODE § 95-1
95:214
ARTICLE I
Advertising Tobacco Products and Alcoholic Beverages Near School
Property
[Adopted 1-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-007]
§ 102-1. Advertisement of alcoholic beverages or tobacco products
unlawful in certain areas.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation, business
association or any other entity to display a tobacco or alcoholic beverage
advertisement in a publicly visible location on or within 1,000 feet of the
perimeter of any school property within the City of Paterson. Any such
tobacco advertisements located in said areas prior to the effective date of
this article must either be removed or permanently and completely covered
at the time this ordinance takes effect.
§ 102-2. Exemptions.
This article shall not apply to:
§ 102-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this article:
PUBLICLY VISIBLE LOCATION — Any outdoor location visible to the public,
including but not limited to outdoor billboards, roofs and sides of buildings,
water towers and freestanding signboards; and doors or windows
reasonably visible to the public from the outside at a distance of two feet
from such doors or windows. The term "publicly visible location" shall not
include:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — The same definition as set forth in N.J.S.A.
33:1-1.
SCHOOL PROPERTY/PREMISES — The building, grounds or facilities, or
any portion thereof, owned, occupied by or under the custody or control of
A. A single sign, poster, placard or label within ten feet of an entrance to
an establishment which sells tobacco products or alcoholic beverages if
such sign, poster, placard or label is no larger than six square feet and
contains only black printing on white background; provided, however,
that such sign contains only one or more of the following words:
"liquor," "alcoholic beverages," "tobacco," "tobacco products,"
"cigarettes," "cigars," "pipe tobacco," "chewing tobacco," "snuff," "sold
here," "available," "for sale," "here."
B. Any tobacco advertisement on a licensed taxicab or autobus.
A. Any location intended to be visible only by those inside a premises.
B. A private residence.
C. Any doors or windows of a multiple-dwelling unit.
§ 102-1 ADVERTISING § 102-3
102:215
public, private or parochial institutions for the primary purpose of providing
education instruction to students at or below the twelfth grade level.
TOBACCO ADVERTISEMENT — Any words, pictures, posters, placards,
signs, photographs, symbols, devices, graphic displays or visual images of
any kind, or any combination thereof, the purpose or affect of which is to
promote the use or sale of a product, including through the identification of
a brand of a tobacco product, a trademark of a tobacco product or a trade
name associated exclusively with a tobacco product.
LIQUOR/ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE ADVERTISEMENT — Any words,
pictures, posters, placards, signs, photographs, symbols, devices, graphic
displays or visual images of any kind, or any combination thereof, the
purpose or effect of which is to promote the use or sale of a product,
including through the identification of a brand of an intoxicating liquor,
alcoholic beverage, a trademark of a liquor/alcoholic beverage product or a
trade name associated exclusively with the same.
§ 102-3 PATERSON CODE § 102-3
102:216
Chapter 105
AIR POLLUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
§ 102-3 AIR POLLUTION § 102-3
105:217

ARTICLE I
Title; Policy; Definitions
§ 105-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Air Pollution Control
Code of the City of Paterson."
§ 105-2. Findings and declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, cinders,
soot, fly ash, gases, fumes, vapors, odors, dust and other contaminants is a
menace to the health, welfare and comfort of the residents of the city and
a cause of substantial damage to property. For the purpose of controlling
and reducing atmospheric pollution, it is hereby declared to be the policy of
the city to minimize air pollution, as herein defined, and prohibit excessive
emission of the same, to establish standards governing the installation,
maintenance and operation of equipment and appurtenances relating to
combustion which are a source or potential source of air pollution and, in
furtherance of this purpose, to cooperate and coordinate these efforts with
the State Department of Environmental Protection and Energy, Bureau of
Air Pollution Control.
§ 105-3. Definitions.
The following terms, whenever used herein or referred to in this chapter,
shall have the respective meanings assigned to them unless a different
meaning clearly appears from the context:
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one (1) or
more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are or tend to be
injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant life or to property
or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property
throughout the city as shall be affected thereby, and excludes all aspects of
employer-employee relationship as to health and safety hazards.
DIRECTOR — The Health Officer, who shall also be known as the "Director
of Air Pollution Control."
ECONOMIC POISONS — Those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Any furnace, boiler, water heater, device,
mechanism, stoker, burner, stack, oven, stove, kiln, still or other apparatus
or a group or collection of such units used in the process of fuel burning
for the generation of heat or power. Refuse-burning equipment shall be
considered incinerators, as herein defined, and not as "fuel-burning
equipment" under this definition. Ovens, stoves or ranges used exclusively
for domestic cooking purposes are not included herein.
INCINERATOR — Any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for
destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance,
§ 105-1 AIR POLLUTION § 105-3
105:219
including but not limited to refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris or scrap or
facilities for cremating human or animal remains.
ODOR — Property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPEN BURNING — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are
emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or
chimney.
OPERATOR — Any person who has care, custody, or control of a building or
premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without knowledge of the
owner thereof.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or who shall have charge, care or control of
any premises or part thereof, including but not limited to a dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner or as a fiduciary, including
but not limited to executor, administrator, trustee, receiver, guardian or as
a mortgagee in possession regardless of how such possession was obtained.
Any person who is a lessee or sublessee of all or any part of any premises,
including but not limited to a dwelling or dwelling unit, shall be deemed to
be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility with the
owner over the premises or portion thereof so leased or subleased.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies, as well as individuals.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible wastes (except body wastes),
and shall include but not be limited to garbage, rubbish, yard trimmings,
leaves, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and
solid market and industrial wastes.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Ringelmann's scale for grading the
density of smoke, published by the United States Bureau of Mines, or any
chart, recorder, indicator or device for the measurement of smoke density
which is approved by the Department of Environmental Protection and
Energy of the State of New Jersey, as the equivalent of said Ringelmann's
scale.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive, and
shall include but not be limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber, carpets,
wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, tin
cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS — Any business, trade or industry engaged in
whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material,
including but not limited to metals, chemicals, shipping containers or
drums.
SMOKE — Small gasborne and airborne particles arising from a process of
combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations or the prosecution of any business, trade
§ 105-3 PATERSON CODE § 105-3
105:220
or industry, and shall include but not be limited to plastic products, cartons,
paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ 105-3 AIR POLLUTION § 105-3
105:221

ARTICLE II
Open Burning
§ 105-4. Open burning prohibited.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning of refuse or
plant life nor conduct a salvage operation by open burning.
§ 105-5. Certain trade waste exempt.
The open burning of trade waste is not prohibited where no other known
method of disposal can be used without hazard to health or property and
the required affidavit has been filed with and approved by the Director of
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and Energy.
§ 105-4 AIR POLLUTION § 105-5
105:223

ARTICLE III
Combustion of Fuel
§ 105-6. Emission of visible smoke from fuel combustion.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit visible smoke to be emitted
into the outdoor air from combustion of fuel in any stationary indirect heat
exchanger except as provided in § 105-7 of this chapter.
§ 105-7. Certain emissions from fuel combustion permitted.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann smoke chart,
or greater than twenty-percent capacity, exclusive of water vapor, to be
emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in any stationary
indirect heat exchanger having a rated hourly capacity of two hundred
million (200,000,000) BTU or greater gross heat input and discharging
through a stack or chimney having all internal cross-sectional dimensions of
sixty (60) inches or greater.
§ 105-8. Certain temporary emissions exempt.
The provisions of §§ 105-6 and 105-7 shall not apply to smoke which is
visible for a period of not longer than three (3) minutes in any consecutive
thirty-minute period.
§ 105-9. Direct heat exchangers and motor vehicles exempt.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to direct heat exchangers or
manufacturing processes or to any motor vehicle while operating on the
public highways.
§ 105-10. Test facilities for indirect heat exchangers.
Any person responsible for the construction, installation, alteration or use
of an indirect heat exchanger shall, when requested by the Director, provide
the facilities and necessary equipment for determining the density or
opacity of smoke being discharged into the open air.
§ 105-6 AIR POLLUTION § 105-10
105:225

ARTICLE IV
Incinerators
§ 105-11. Smoke emissions from incinerators.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any incinerator,
the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 of the Ringelmann
smoke chart, to be emitted into the open air or emissions of such opacity
within a stack or chimney or, exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity
leaving a stack or chimney to a degree greater than the emission designated
as No. 1 of the Ringelmann smoke chart.
§ 105-12. New fires and temporary emissions.
The provisions of § 105-11 shall not apply to smoke emitted during the
building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not darker than
No. 2 of the Ringelmann smoke chart for a period of no longer than three
(3) consecutive minutes or to emissions of such opacity within a stack or
chimney or, exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity leaving a stack or
chimney to a degree which is greater than the emissions designated as
No. 2 of the Ringelmann smoke chart for a period no longer than three (3)
consecutive minutes.
§ 105-13. Visible particles from incinerators.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of particles of
unburned waste or ash from any incinerator which are individually large
enough to be visible while suspended in the atmosphere.
§ 105-14. Odors from incinerators.
No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any incinerator
which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell in any area of
human use or occupancy.
§ 105-15. Limitation on time of operation of incinerators.
No person shall operate and no owner or operator of any building in the
city shall permit the operation of an incinerator prior to 7:00 a.m. or after
5:00 p.m. of any day, and all operation shall be completely terminated by
5:00 p.m., including complete extinction of the fire and removal of material
in a safe manner from the firebox to a noncombustible container; provided,
however, that by special permit, the city may, because of exceptional
circumstances, permit different hours of operation under such conditions as
it shall deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public or of
persons in the vicinity.
§ 105-11 AIR POLLUTION § 105-15
105:227

ARTICLE V
Asbestos Surface Coatings
§ 105-16. Emission of substances prohibited.
No person or owner of property and no person having possession or control
of property shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 105-17. Asbestos spraying.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit surface coating by spraying on
any building, structure, facility, installation or internal or external portion
thereof of asbestos or friable material containing in excess of twenty-fivehundredths
percent (0.25%) (by weight) asbestos.
§ 105-18. Testing asbestos content.
A. Any person responsible for the manufacture, application or use of any
coating, which the Director or any agent thereof has reason to believe
contains asbestos, shall, when requested by the Director, conduct such
tests as are necessary in the opinion of the Director to determine the
presence and the amount and/or kinds of asbestos in the coating. Such
tests shall be conducted in a manner approved by the Director and shall
be made at the expense of the person responsible.
B. The Director may waive the testing requirements of Subsection A of this
section upon receipt of a materials specification report from the
material manufacturer certifying that the asbestos content of the
surface coating for which testing is required complies with the
provisions of § 105-17 hereof.
§ 105-16 AIR POLLUTION § 105-18
105:229

ARTICLE VI
Inspections; Right of Entry
§ 105-19. Inspections authorized; accessibility.
All buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject to inspection
from time to time by the Director or his duly authorized representatives. All
rooms and areas in the building shall be available and accessible for such
inspection which shall be made during usual business hours if the premises
are used for nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that inspections
may be made at other times if:
§ 105-20. Emergency inspections; failure to allow access.
Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the Director
has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an immediate
threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall take place only where
the time required to apply for and secure the issuance of a warrant would
render ineffective the immediate action necessary to abate the condition.
Emergency inspections may also be authorized by the Governor in times of
air pollution emergencies in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:2C-30 and N.J.A.C.
7:27-12.2. Where the Director or his duly authorized representative is
refused entry or access or is otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner,
occupant or operator from conducting an inspection of the premises, such
person shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties
hereunder.
§ 105-21. Search warrants.
A. The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection;
B. There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises
which can only be apprehended and proved by inspection during other
than prescribed hours; or
C. There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an
immediate threat to health or safety requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
A. The Director may, upon affidavit, apply to any Judge having authority
for a search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and
circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a
nuisance or violation of this chapter may exist on the premises,
including one (1) or more of the following:
(1) That the premises requires inspection according to the cycle
established by the Director for periodic inspections of premises of
the type involved.
§ 105-19 AIR POLLUTION § 105-21
105:231
(2) That observation of external conditions (for example, smoke, ash,
soot, odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the
belief that a violation of this chapter exists.
(3) Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning equipment
and/or system, types of incinerator, particular use of premises or
other factors which renders systematic inspections of such
buildings necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
B. If said Judge is satisfied as to the matters set forth in said affidavit, he
may authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting access to
and inspection of that part of the premises on which the nuisance or
violation may exist.
§ 105-21 PATERSON CODE § 105-21
105:232
ARTICLE VII
Construction of Chapter; Enforcement; Penalties
§ 105-22. Construal of provisions.
This chapter is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes herein
described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or abridging
the emergency powers of any agency of government except to the extent
expressly set forth herein.
§ 105-23. Director of Air Pollution Control designated;
enforcement.
§ 105-24. Violations and penalties.
A. The Health Officer of the Health Division shall, in addition to his other
duties, enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter and, in
exercising his powers and duties hereunder, shall be known as the
"Director of Air Pollution Control."
B. The Director may appoint or designate other employees or officers of
the Health Division to perform duties necessary for the enforcement of
this chapter.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who
shall fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.) or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of community service for
not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.59
B. The violation of any section of this chapter shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense independent of the violation of any other section or
of any order issued pursuant to this chapter.
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 105-22 AIR POLLUTION § 105-24
105:233
Chapter 109
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183. Fire safety — See Ch. 215.
§ 109-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices,
whether by direct line, radio, telephone or other means, actuating a device
at the public safety complex of the city and requiring response thereto by
the Police Division, Fire Division or other municipal agencies.
§ 109-2. Applicability; scope. [Amended 2-15-1983 by Ord. No.
83-008]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any alarm device or local alarm designed to summon the
Police Division, Fire Division or other municipal agencies to any location
in response to any type of alarm signal. The terms of this chapter shall in
no way prohibit alarm companies from providing service by private sources
to other offices within or without the city, so long as such activity is not
connected to the alarm console, except, however, that any person having
a premises protected by such an alarm device shall still be responsible for
compliance with this chapter.
§ 109-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM CONSOLE — The console or control panel of devices giving a visual
or audio response, or both, and located within the confines of the Police
Division of the city.
ALARM DEVICE — Any type of alarm system actuating equipment in the
alarm console providing warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other
peril.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Any alarm device or combination of devices
installed for one (1) or more buildings at a location other than the alarm
console.
COMMERCIAL, BUSINESS, NONPROFIT PREMISES — Any premises used
for any and all purposes other than solely as a dwelling unit.[Added
11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-073]
§ 105-24 PATERSON CODE § 109-3
109:234
DIAL ALARM — That type of device using telephone lines transmitting an
alarm directly through the police switchboard.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Limited to a member of the Police
Division or Fire Division of the city.[Amended 2-15-1983 by Ord. No.
83-008]
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm actuated by inadvertence, negligence,
intentional or unintentional act of someone other than an intruder, and
shall include as well alarms caused by malfunctioning of the alarm device
or other relevant equipment but shall not include alarms created by
malfunction of the alarm console.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm or device which, when actuated, produces a
signal not connected to the alarm console, such as store or home burglar
alarms actuating bell devices.
PERMITTEE — Any person owning an alarm device or a local alarm within
the scope of this chapter.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, corporation or
association.
RESIDENTIAL PREMISES — A premises solely occupied as a residence or
dwelling unit.[Added 11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-073]
§ 109-4. Alarm console; fees. [Amended 2-15-1983 by Ord. No.
83-008; 7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-037; 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-021]
A. There is established a police alarm console in the public safety complex
to be owned and operated by the city by members of the Police Division
in accordance with rules and procedures established by this chapter
and by the Director of Public Safety; the panel shall be maintained by
the city through its employees or through independent contractors as
may be determined by the Mayor and/or Council.
B. Any connection to the police alarm console shall be of a type inspected
and approved by the Chief of Police of the city or his designated
representative, and any person aggrieved by the decision may appeal
the decision, in writing, within ten (10) days to the Director of Public
Safety.
C. All alarms existing as of the date of the adoption of this chapter shall be
connected hereunder to the alarm console, and no connection cost for
such transfer shall be permitted.
D. Any permittee for any alarm device shall be required to register the
same annually with the Police Division of the City of Paterson.
E. For any alarm system disconnected from the alarm console or any
discontinuance of a dial alarm or a local alarm, the permittee shall be
required to give notice thereof of such discontinuance.
§ 109-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 109-4
109:235
§ 109-5. Registration of permittees. [Amended 2-15-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-008]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which owns or operates an alarm
device shall make application for the continuance thereof, in writing, to
the Chief of Police, which application shall contain at least the location
of the device, the name of the installer of the device, the type of device,
provisions relating to false alarms and testing procedures, a list of persons
to be contacted in the event of an alarm and other information as may be
required by the Director of Public Safety. In addition, any permittee shall list
the names of three (3) persons, nonresidents of the premises protected by
said alarm device and situated within one-half (1/2) hours' travel distance
from the city who have keys to the protected premises.
§ 109-6. Limitations of city's obligations.
The city shall be under no duty or obligation to any permittee hereunder,
the alarm console and allied equipment being maintained at will and subject
to termination at any time by cancellation of the system by resolution duly
adopted by the Mayor and Council of the city, and any individual permit
issued hereunder may be revoked at any time by the Mayor and Council
upon recommendation of the Department of Public Safety, provided that
thirty (30) days' notice is given, in writing, to the permittee. Any permit
granted hereunder shall be accepted upon the express condition that the
permittee shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from and on account
of any and all damages arising out of the city's operation or failure of alarm
console of the city or the permittee's alarm device.
§ 109-7. Installation of fire alarm devices. [Amended 2-15-1983 by
Ord. No. 83-008; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
All fire alarm devices shall be installed in accordance with the requirements
of the Fire Safety Code60 or higher authority and with the approval of the
Fire Chief.
§ 109-8. False alarms; fines; disconnection. [Amended 2-15-1983 by
Ord. No. 83-008; 7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-037]
F. Any permittee who shall have paid an annual fee previously authorized
by Subsection D of this section to cover any portion of the calendar year
1997 shall be entitled to a pro rata refund for the portion of that fee
which would cover the period from April 1, 1997, through September
30, 1997.
A. In the case of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police Division in a manner to be prescribed by
rules and regulations in accordance with § 109-12 of this chapter. In
addition, in the case of false alarms, the Chief of Police or Fire Chief
60.Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Fire Safety.
§ 109-4 PATERSON CODE § 109-8
109:236
§ 109-9. Use of unauthorized equipment; inspections. [Amended
2-15-1983 by Ord. No. 83-008]
Any unauthorized equipment may be disconnected by the Chief of Police
or his designated representative for noncompliance with this chapter, and
any person installing or maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be
prosecuted for violation of this chapter, and each and every day the
equipment is in operation shall be considered a separate violation. Any
permittee shall by acceptance of the permit be deemed as having consented
to inspection of the premises on which said alarm devices are installed at
reasonable hours by the Chief of Police or his designated representative.
§ 109-10. Dial alarm devices. [Amended 2-15-1983 by Ord. No.
83-008]
Dial alarm devices shall be permitted only under the following conditions:
shall cause an investigation to be made and keep a record of said
alarms on file.
B. For such false alarms, the Council prescribes the following penalties:
[Amended 11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-073; 6-9-2004 by Ord. No.
04-044]
(1) For the first, second and third false alarms in any given calendar
year, a warning shall be issued.
(2) For the fourth false alarm in the same calendar year, a fine of not
less than $50 shall be paid to the City of Paterson.
(3) For the fifth false alarm, a fine of $75 shall be paid to the City of
Paterson.
(4) For the sixth false alarm, a fine of $100 shall be paid to the City of
Paterson.
(5) For the seventh and subsequent false alarm, the fine will increase
in increments of $100.
C. Where the investigation of the Police or Fire Divisions discloses
continued abuse of the privilege or connection to the alarm console and
a disregard of the permittee for taking remedial steps to avoid false
alarms, the Council reserves the right to require disconnection from the
alarm console for a limited or permanent time, provided that no such
permit shall be revoked or suspended without giving the permittee an
opportunity to show cause before the Council why such action should
not be taken.
A. No dial alarm devices shall be allowed until a test alarm has been made
by the owner in conjunction with the Chief of Police or Fire Chief or
their representatives.
§ 109-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 109-10
109:237
§ 109-11. Local alarms. [Amended 2-15-1983 by Ord. No. 83-008]
§ 109-12. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Director of Public Safety may from time to time promulgate rules
and regulations supplementing this chapter in order to provide for
recordkeeping and efficient management of the system; provided, however,
that the Council must first approve the rules or any changes thereto.
B. No dial alarm devices shall be permitted unless of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety in accordance with the rules promulgated
under § 109-12.
C. All dial alarms shall be coded to dial a special separate number, which
number can be obtained from the Chief of Police, and no dial alarm shall
be coded to dial the number of the general police switchboard of the
city.
D. All dial alarms devices shall be capable of disconnect to enable the
owner to call the police switchboard to indicate that a false alarm has
occurred.
E. The contents of any recorded message from a dial alarm device must be
intelligible and in a format approved by the Chief of Police. No such
message shall be transmitted more than three (3) times as a result of a
single stimulus of the mechanism. Messages shall not exceed fifteen
(15) seconds, and the time gap between delivery shall be approximately
ten (10) seconds.
F. The sensory mechanism of such devices shall be adjusted so as to
suppress false indications and not to be actuated by impulses due to
pressure changes in water pipes, short flashes of light, wind, noises,
rattling or vibration of doors or windows or other forces unrelated to
general alarms.
G. All components of such equipment must be maintained by the owner in
good repair, and when evidence exists that there has been failure to
comply with the operational requirements of this chapter, the Chief of
Police is then authorized to demand that such device be disconnected
until such time as compliance with current requirements is
reestablished.
A. Local alarms shall be of a type that shall be limited to sounding an
alarm for no more than thirty (30) minutes.
B. In the event that the Police Division has to respond to a false alarm for a
local alarm, the penalties provided for in § 109-8 shall be applicable.
C. In the event of malfunction of the equipment or a real activation of the
equipment and a person cannot be located to secure the device, the
permittee shall be liable to pay a penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.).
§ 109-10 PATERSON CODE § 109-13
109:238
§ 109-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068; 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-049]
Any person, firm or corporation found guilty in the Municipal Court of the
City of Paterson for violation of the terms of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for a period not exceeding
90 days, or any combination thereof, except that violations of § 109-8 are
subject to punishment by payment of fines in the amount of $50. Fines for
violation of § 109-8 are payable at the Violations Bureau without a court
appearance. Costs of court of $30 will be imposed, consistent with New
Jersey Court Rule 7:11-4, for all such payments.
Chapter 113
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic Beverage Control Board — See Ch.
9.
Advertising — See Ch. 102.
§ 109-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 109-13
109:239

ARTICLE I
Licensing; Regulations
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 3, Arts. 2, 3, 4 and
5, of the 1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 113-1. Number of plenary retail consumption licenses issued;
exceptions.
The number of plenary retail consumption licenses outstanding in the city at
the same time shall not exceed 300; provided, however, that this restriction
shall not prevent:
§ 113-2. Number of plenary retail consumption licenses issued to
one person; premises covered.
No more than one plenary retail consumption license shall be granted to any
person, and said license shall cover only the premises for which the license
is issued.
§ 113-3. Limitation on location of plenary retail consumption
licenses.
A. The renewal of licenses issued and outstanding on April 15, 1940, or the
transfer of such licenses and the renewal of licenses so transferred.
B. The issuance of a new plenary retail consumption license to a person
who, having held a plenary retail consumption license:
(1) Surrendered the same or permitted it to expire because of his
induction in the Armed Forces of the United States; and
(2) Filed the application for a new plenary retail consumption license
within one year from the completion of his active service in said
armed forces.
C. The issuance of a new license to a person who files an application
therefor within 60 days following the expiration of the license renewal
period if the State Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.18, shall determine, in writing,
that the applicant's failure to apply for a renewal of his license was due
to circumstances beyond his control.
A. No plenary retail consumption license, except renewals for the same
premises covered by the previous license and transfers within the same
premises, shall be granted for or transferred to any premises within
1,000 feet from an existing licensed premises covered by a plenary
retail consumption license or a plenary retail distribution license. In the
event that a licensee desires to transfer to another premises, he shall be
permitted to do so within 600 feet of the premises wherein he is located
at the time of said transfer, but shall comply with the provisions
aforementioned when transferring to premises in excess of 600 feet
§ 113-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 113-3
109:241
§ 113-4. Number of plenary retail distribution licenses issued;
exceptions.
The number of plenary retail distribution licenses outstanding in the city at
the same time shall not exceed 35; provided, however, that this restriction
shall not prevent:
from the premises upon which the transfer is sought. [Amended
8-25-1998 by Ord. No. 98-061]
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of Subsection A of this
section, the Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control may allow the transfer
of a plenary retail consumption license to any location within the Great
Falls Historic District and the Central Business District as the same are
defined and delineated in the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance
of the city.61 [Amended 4-5-1983 by Ord. No. 83-025; 8-11-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-042]
C. Said 1,000 feet, 1,500 feet and 600 feet referred to in Subsections A
and B of this section shall be measured in a normal way that a
pedestrian would properly walk from the nearest entrance of the
licensed premises to the nearest entrance of the premises sought to be
licensed, which measurement standards shall be those as applied under
N.J.S.A. 33:1-76.62 [Amended 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-061]
A. The renewal of licenses issued and outstanding on June 19, 1939, or the
transfer of such licenses from person to person and the renewal of
licenses so transferred.
B. The issuance of a new plenary retail distribution license to a person
who, having held a plenary retail distribution license:
(1) Surrendered the same or permitted it to expire because of his
induction in the Armed Forces of the United States; and
(2) Filed the application for a new plenary retail distribution license
within one year from the completion of his active service in said
armed forces.
C. The issuance of a new license to a person who files an application
therefor within 60 days following the expiration of the license renewal
period if the State Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-12.18, shall determine, in writing,
that the applicant's failure to apply for a renewal of his license was due
to circumstances beyond his control.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
62.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 3-11, Limitation on location of premises holding plenary retail
consumption licenses having broad package privilege; exceptions, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-061.
§ 113-3 PATERSON CODE § 113-5
109:242
§ 113-5. Limitation on location of plenary retail distribution
licenses.
§ 113-6. License fees. [Amended 3-15-1983 by Ord. No. 83-013;
11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-070]
A. No plenary retail distribution license, except renewals for the same
premises covered by the previous license and transfers within the same
premises, shall be granted for or transferred to any premises within
1,000 feet from an existing licensed premises covered by a plenary
retail distribution license or a plenary retail consumption license. In the
event that a licensee desires to transfer to another premises, he shall be
permitted to do so within 600 feet of the premises wherein he is located
at the time of said transfer, but shall comply with the provisions
aforementioned when transferring to premises in excess of 600 feet
from the premises upon which the transfer is sought. [Amended
8-25-1998 by Ord. No. 98-061]
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of Subsection A of this
section, the Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control may allow the transfer
of a plenary retail distribution license to within 1,500 feet of the
premises wherein the license is located at the time of said transfer,
where the licensed premises is being taken for any municipal, county,
state or federal project or where the licensed premises is destroyed to
the extent that it can no longer be used for the purpose for which the
license was issued and it is not intended to restore the same. If such a
transfer is granted, no plenary retail distribution license shall be
transferred to the premises or part thereof so vacated by such transfer.
C. Said 1,000 feet, 1,500 feet and 600 feet referred to in Subsections A
and B of this section shall be measured in a normal way that a
pedestrian would properly walk from the nearest entrance of the
licensed premises to the nearest entrance of the premises sought to be
licensed, which measurement standards shall be those as applied under
N.J.S.A. 33:1-76. [Amended 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-061]
A. The annual fee for a plenary retail consumption license shall be $1,093.
[Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 03-068; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
10-055]
B. The annual fee for a plenary retail distribution license shall be $878.
[Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 03-068; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
10-055]
C. Any licensee under this chapter may apply for the renewal of his license
prior to the expiration, provided that they are qualified to receive a
license and the premises for which such renewal license is sought are
suitable for such purpose. Such renewal privilege shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall limit or prevent the decreasing
of the number of licenses to be issued within the City of Paterson. All
applications for renewal and payment of the annual license fee shall be
§ 113-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 113-6
109:243
§ 113-7. Hours and days of sale. [Amended 6-3-1981 by Ord. No.
81-033; 9-16-2014 by Ord. No. 14-045; 7-25-2017 by Ord. No.
17-063]
submitted no later than June 1 of each year. Any application for a
license renewal which is not completed within 30 days of the renewal
date shall be subject to an additional late administrative charge equal
to 10% of the cost of the license renewal. [Amended 6-28-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-048]
D. For licenses effective on or after June 30, 2016, no license shall be
renewed under this section unless the owner or manager of the licensed
establishment first attends an annual liquor/law awareness training
seminar, the Paterson Alcohol Beverage Education Seminar (“PABES”).
The PABES shall be conducted annually, and it shall meet the minimum
requirements for such training as periodically set forth by the City of
Paterson. The PABES is detailed in § 113-20 below. [Added 2-24-2004
by Ord. No. 04-011; amended 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-048]
E. The failure of a liquor license owner, shareholder, partner, officer,
manager, or director to attend the training seminar required in
Subsection D above and § 113-20A below shall constitute a violation of
this chapter by the licensee. [Added 2-24-2004 by Ord. No. 04-011;
amended 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-048]
F. In addition to the sums referred to in Subsections A and B, a surcharge
of $200 shall be assessed against each license annually to fund the City
of Paterson’s license retirement program consistent with N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.42. [Added 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-048]
G. Surcharge monies will continue to be collected annually until the total
revenue derived from the surcharge equals the total amount expended
by the City of Paterson to acquire and retire licenses pursuant to
contracts authorized by ordinances adopted under this section and
consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.39 through 40:48-2.43. If in the final
license year in which the surcharge authorized by this section is in
effect the total additional revenue derived from all years the surcharge
has been in effect shall exceed the amount expended by the City of
Paterson for the acquisition and retirement of licenses, such excess
shall be rebated pro rata to the then current license holders or credited
against the next renewal fee to be paid by the then license holders
consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.42. [Added 6-28-2016 by Ord. No.
16-048]
A. With regard to plenary retail consumption licenses, no licensee shall
sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery
of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption of any alcoholic
beverage on the licensed premises between the following hours on the
following days:
(1) On weekdays, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 113-6 PATERSON CODE § 113-7
109:244
§ 113-8. Closing of premises during prohibited times of sale;
exceptions.
During the times when sales are prohibited by § 113-7, the entire licensed
premises shall be closed. This requirement shall not apply to hotels,
restaurants, as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t, or other establishments where
the principal business is other than the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 113-9. Interior of premises to be open to view during closing
hours.
During the hours when sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by § 113-7,
the entire interior of the licensed premises shall be kept open to public view
from the outside thereof, and no screen, partition or other obstacle shall be
permitted to interfere with a clear public view during said hours.
§ 113-10. Restrictions on female employees; dancing.
(2) On Sundays, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m.
(3) On New Year's Day when it is a Sunday, between the hours of 5:00
a.m. and 1:00 p.m.
B. Additionally, no licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, permit or
suffer the sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage for offpremises
consumption on any day of the week between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
C. When New Year's Day is a weekday, sale, service, delivery and
consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises shall be permitted
during the entire day.
D. In addition to the hours restrictions set forth in Subsections A and B,
above, and excepting New Year's Day, as set forth in Subsections A(3)
and C, above, any plenary retail consumption licensee (e.g., bar or
other A.B.C. licensee serving alcohol on the premises) located within a
specified location, as detailed in Chapter 181, entitled "Commercial
Hours of Operation," shall also be bound by the closing times set forth
in that chapter. However, opening times shall be unaffected.
A. No plenary retail consumption licensee shall allow, permit or suffer any
female employed on the licensed premises to:
(1) Accept any food or beverage, alcoholic or otherwise, at the expense
of or as a gift from any customer or patron.
(2) Sit at any table or stand at any bar with any person, patron or
customer visiting the licensed premises.
(3) Perform dances commonly known as "go-go dances."
§ 113-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 113-10
109:245
§ 113-11. Display of license.
All licenses granted shall be conspicuously displayed at all times on the
licensed premises in such plain view as to be easily read by all persons
visiting the licensed premises.
§ 113-12. Harboring immoral persons; permitting illegal acts.
§ 113-13. Gaming and gambling prohibited.
No licensee shall participate in or permit the violation of any gaming or
gambling law or ordinance within the licensed premises.
§ 113-14. Modification of rules and regulations.
All licenses shall be subject to the right reserved by the Board to change,
alter, amend or repeal the provisions of these rules and regulations at any
time.
§ 113-15. Entry into licensed premises by minors.
No minor shall enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing or having served or delivered to
such minor any alcoholic beverage.
§ 113-16. Consumption and purchase of alcoholic beverages by
minors prohibited.
No minor shall consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for
the retail sale of alcoholic beverages or purchase or attempt to purchase or
have another purchase for him any alcoholic beverage.
(4) Perform by engaging in what is commonly known as "striptease" by
the removing of all or part of her clothing where accompanied by
music or without music and whether or not as part of dance.
B. No plenary retail consumption licensee shall allow, permit or suffer any
amateur performance of the performances prohibited in Subsection
A(3) and (4) of this section; provided, however, that this section shall
not be construed to prohibit social dancing by patrons.
A. No licensee shall harbor criminals or lawless or immoral individuals.
B. No licensee shall permit the licensed premises to be used:
(1) In the procuring or furnishing of women for immoral purposes.
(2) For the commission of crimes or immoral acts.
(3) For the defrauding or permitting of the defrauding of anyone in the
licensed premises by misrepresentation or threats.
§ 113-10 PATERSON CODE § 113-17
109:246
§ 113-17. Misstating age prohibited.
No person shall misrepresent or misstate his age or her age or the age of
any other person for the purpose of inducing any licensee or any employee
of such licensee to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to a minor.
§ 113-18. Suspension or revocation of licenses.
In addition to the penalties provided in § 113-19, any license issued
pursuant to this article may be suspended or revoked for violation of any
provision of this article or for violation of any provision of N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et
seq. or any of the rules and regulations promulgated by the Director of the
Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 113-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Except as may be provided in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., any person who
violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not more than
90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 113-20. Paterson Alcohol Beverage Education Seminar (PABES).
[Added 6-28-2016 by Ord. No. 16-04863]
A. As a precondition of the original or renewal application for a Class C
and D license, the licensee shall, on an annual basis, attend the
mandatory Paterson Alcoholic Beverage Education Seminar (PABES)
provided by the City, to be offered at a date, time, and location as
determined by the City. The notice for the PABES shall be included with
the annual renewal application. Attendance at the program shall be by
any person listed as an owner, shareholder, partner, officer, or director
on the application for a license, as modified at any time after issuance of
the license, or by a general manager, manager, or other person who
regularly performs as the primary person in charge of the daily
operations of and in the licensed premises. A photograph of each
individual attending the PABES on behalf of each liquor license shall
accompany the annual renewal application.
B. Any licensee who fails to attend the initial session of the PABES will
have the opportunity to make up the session at a cost of $250. There
will be one make-up session per year, at a date and location as
determined by the City.
C. Failure to attend either of the initial or make-up PABES session will be
cause for nonrenewal of the liquor license.
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 113-20
through 113-24 as §§ 113-21 through 113-25, respectively.
§ 113-17 ALARM SYSTEMS § 113-20
109:247
D. A photocopy of the certificate of completion of the PABES program will
be maintained in the manager's office on the premises of the licensee.
§ 113-20 PATERSON CODE § 113-20
109:248
ARTICLE II
Consumption in Public
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 18, Art. 8, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 113-21. Findings.
The Council has determined that the public drinking of alcoholic beverages
by persons or groups of persons standing about on sidewalks, especially in
the areas near taverns, or sitting in or standing about automobiles while
drinking intoxicating beverages has created a public nuisance with the
consequent result that the safety of persons lawfully using the streets and
public areas has been affected and deems it in the public interest to prevent
such public drinking.
§ 113-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any fluid or solid capable of being converted
into a fluid, suitable for human consumption, and having an alcoholic
content of more than 1/2 of 1% by volume, including alcohol, beer, lager
beer, ale, porter, naturally fermented wine, treated wine, blended wine,
fortified wine, sparkling wine, distilled liquors, blended distilled liquors and
any brewed, fermented or distilled liquors fit for use for beverage purposes
or any mixture of the same and fruit juices.
§ 113-23. Public consumption restricted; permit.
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages on any of the public streets,
sidewalks, parking lots, roadways, pathways, playgrounds, parks or quasipublic
areas or any other public property whatsoever within the city at
any hour of the day or night unless a special permit is issued therefor in
accordance with applicable statutes.
§ 113-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068; 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-048]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, any
person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine in the amount of $50. Fines for violation of
§ 113-22 are payable at the Violations Bureau without a court appearance.
Costs of court of $30 will be imposed, consistent with New Jersey Court
Rule 7:11-4, for all such payments. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 113-21 ALARM SYSTEMS § 113-24
109:249

ARTICLE III
Advertising Devices
[Adopted 1-20-1998 by Ord. No. 98-008]
§ 113-25. Signs and banners.
Signs, banners, flags or other similar decorations advertising alcoholic
beverages by any means, including but not limited to pictures, drawings,
brand names of alcoholic beverages, generic names of types of alcoholic
beverages, etc., shall be prohibited except for signs directly affixed to
the building which constitutes the licensed premises or contained in the
windows of said buildings which constitutes the licensed premises. Included
among the above prohibition shall be signs or banners affixed to fences
surrounding the building which constitutes licensed premises or
freestanding signs located on the sidewalk or adjoining area of the building
which constitutes the licensed premises.
§ 113-25 ALARM SYSTEMS § 113-25
109:251

ARTICLE IV
Possession or Consumption on Private Property
[Adopted 6-9-2015 by Ord. No. 15-043]
§ 113-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meaning
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of a minor pursuant
to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — A minor's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling, or any other
person related to a minor by blood or affinity.
§ 113-27. Possession or consumption prohibited on private
property.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property within the City of Paterson, except as hereinafter
provided or as may be permitted by state statute:
§ 113-28. Violations and penalties.
Except as may be provided in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., any person who
violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500, or by a period of community services
for not more than 40 hours, or any combination thereof.
A. Any underage person who consumes or possesses an alcoholic beverage
in connection with a religious observance, ceremony or rite, or
consumes or possesses an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and
with the permission of a parent, guardian or relative who has attained
the legal age to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
B. Any underage person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised
Statutes, or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while
enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a county
vocation school or post-secondary education institution.
§ 113-26 ALARM SYSTEMS § 113-28
109:253
Chapter 117
AMUSEMENTS AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public billiard and pool rooms — See Ch. 133.
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 179.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Dance halls and dancing academies — See Ch.
191.
Roller-skating rinks — See Ch. 389.
§ 113-28 PATERSON CODE § 113-28
109:254
ARTICLE I
Mechanical Amusement Devices
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 4, Art. 1, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 117-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — An individual applicant; a corporate applicant, any of its
officers, directors or stockholders; or a partnership applicant, any of its
partners.[Amended 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-047; 1-21-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-003; 7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-022]
LICENSED PREMISES — The premises or portion thereof where a licensed
device is to be operated, used or maintained.[Added 1-21-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-003]
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE or DEVICE — The type of machine,
electronic game or contrivance commonly known and designated as
bagatelle, baseball, hockey, football, pool table, gun, shuffle alley, bowling,
pinball or pin amusement game, video game, arcade game or computer
game or machine or device similar to the foregoing which, upon the
insertion of a coin, paper money, slug or token in any slot or receptacle
attached to said machine or device or connected therewith, or which by
remote control, mechanical or manual means, with or without payment
of a fee, operates or which may be operated for use as a game, contest
or amusement in a public or quasi-public place, private club, social club,
fraternal organization or in any building, store or other place wherein the
public is invited or wherein the public may enter.[Amended 2-5-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-001; 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-047; 1-21-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-003; 7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-022]
§ 117-2. Amusement devices not to be used for gambling. [Added
1-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-003; amended 4-28-1992 by Ord. No.
92-018]
A. No license shall be granted for any mechanical amusement device
which is to be used for the purpose of gambling. For the purpose of this
article, a mechanical amusement device, the operation of which is
based in any part on random chance or the random assignment of
numbers and the operation of which does not require more than
minimum skill or hand-eye coordination, shall be presumed to be
intended to be utilized for gambling purposes. By way of clarification
but not limitation, mechanical amusement devices used for the purpose
of gambling shall be deemed to include the following:
(1) Mechanical amusement devices known as "Joker Poker" or any
similar mechanical amusement devices displaying playing cards;
keno or any similar mechanical amusement devices displaying a
§ 117-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-2
109:255
§ 117-3. License required. [Amended 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001;
7-27-1993 by Ord. No. 93-022]
number board where numbers are designated by random; Horse
Racing; Roulette; Dice; LuckyLines, Cherry Master or any similar
mechanical amusement devices styled after a slot machine with a
rolling display or circular wheel on which are depicted symbols;
lotto or lottery-type machines.
(2) Any mechanical amusement device, the operation of which is based
in any part on random chance or the random assignment of
numbers and the operation of which does not require more than
minimal skill or hand-eye coordination and which does not have an
operable slot or receptacle for the insertion of coin or paper money;
this section shall not be deemed to prohibit devices provided at no
charge by restaurants or retail establishments for the amusement
of their patrons. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
(3) Any mechanical amusement device, the operation of which is based
in any part on random chance or the random assignment of
numbers and the operation of which does not require more than
minimal skill or hand-eye coordination and with buttons or controls
labeled "double up" or "bet" or buttons or controls performing said
function regardless of label. [Amended 10-27-1992 by Ord. No.
92-057]
(4) Any mechanical amusement device, the operation of which is based
in any part on random chance or the random assignment of
numbers and the operation of which does not require more than
minimal skill or hand-eye coordination and which can be controlled
or operated from a remote location by other than the individual
player. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
(5) Any mechanical amusement device, the operation of which is based
in any part on random chance or the random assignment of
numbers and the operation of which does not require more than
minimal skill or hand-eye coordination and which is readily capable
of being converted by the internal technology of the mechanical
amusement device to machines such as set forth in Subsection A(1)
above. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
B. For the purposes of this prohibition, mechanical amusement devices
commonly known as "pinball machines," regardless of the nature of any
visual display thereon, shall be deemed to require more than minimal
skill or hand-eye coordination and thus are not subject to this
prohibition against licensing.
A. No person shall operate, maintain or use in any public or quasi-public
place, club, private club, social club, fraternal organization or in any
building, store or other place where the public is invited or wherein the
public may enter any mechanical amusement device, as defined in
§ 117-2 PATERSON CODE § 117-3
109:256
§ 117-4. Disqualifications precluding licensing. [Amended
9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-047; 1-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-003;
10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-057]
§ 117-5. Application for license; investigation of applicant and
premises; notice of intention to apply for license.
§ 117-1, without first having obtained a license for each such device as
hereinafter provided.
B. Subject to the provisions of Article III, Amusement Parlors, of this
chapter, a separate license shall be required for any device capable of
being played independently with any other device, whether or not one
or more such devices is encased in one enclosure.
A. Except as otherwise permitted by § 117-13, no license required by this
article shall be issued to: [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
(1) Any applicant who shall have completed a sentence for conviction
of any crime of the first, second, third or fourth degree or
equivalent crimes in other states or the federal system within three
years of the date of his application or date of annual renewal of the
same unless the applicant shall have within that three-year period
completed parole or probation supervision resulting from that
crime.
(2) Any applicant who shall have been convicted of a disorderly
persons offense or petty disorderly person offense relating to
gambling.
B. No license required by this article shall be issued to any applicant to
operate, maintain or use any mechanical amusement device in any
premises or location wherein a violation of this article has occurred and
for which violation a license has been automatically suspended for a
period of one year or more pursuant to § 117-13. The provisions of this
Subsection B shall apply regardless of any transfer of ownership.
C. With regard to an application from corporations or partnerships, an
applicant wherein a stockholder holding 10% or more of the stock or a
partner holding 10% or greater share in the partnership has been
convicted of a crime, conviction of a disorderly persons offense or petty
disorderly persons offense relating to gambling or violation of this
article shall be denied a license. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
A. An application, sworn to by the applicant, shall be filed with the
licensing division, upon forms requesting the information set forth in
§ 117-6C. [Amended 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-057]
§ 117-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-5
109:257
§ 117-6. Issuance of license; contents of application and license.
[Amended 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001; 9-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-047; 1-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-003]
B. The license inspector shall investigate all applicants for the license
required by § 117-3 and the premises wherein each mechanical coinoperated
amusement device will be located.
C. Notice of intention to apply for license.
(1) Following the filing of an application for a premises where no
licensed mechanical coin-operated amusement device has been
located immediately prior to the application, the applicant shall
forthwith cause to be published a notice of his intention to apply for
a license to operate, maintain or use a mechanical coin-operated
amusement device or devices.
(2) The notice of intention shall state the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The address of the premises where the device or devices are to
be maintained.
(3) Said notice shall be published once in a newspaper published and
circulated in the City.
(4) Proof of such publication shall be filed with the licensing division
prior to consideration of the application by the Council.64
A. After proper investigation and after approval of the application for a
license by the Council, the Licensing Division shall issue a license for
each mechanical amusement device in the name of the proprietor of the
premises where the same is to be operated, used or maintained.
B. The application for each mechanical amusement device must be signed
by the applicant and said signature acknowledged by a notary public or
other person authorized by the State of New Jersey to administer oaths.
C. The application for a license or renewal of a license shall state:
(1) The name, residence, date of birth, driver's license number and
post office address of the licensee.
(2) The type of ownership entity. If the license is to be held by a
corporation or partnership, the corporation or partnership shall list
the names and addresses of its stockholders holding 10% or more
of its stock or of 10% or greater interest in the partnership, as the
case may be.
64.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 4-4(d), which immediately followed this subsection, added
9-15-1981 by Ord. No. 81-064, was repealed 11-2-1981 by Ord. No. 81-076.
§ 117-5 PATERSON CODE § 117-6
109:258
§ 117-7. License fee; expiration of license; devices no longer
eligible for licensure. [Amended 6-21-1983 by Ord. No. 83-052;
2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001; 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-047;
1-8-1991 by Ord. No. 91-002; 1-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-003]
(3) The street address of the premises where the device is to be
operated, used or maintained, the portion of the premises where
the device is to be operated, used or maintained and the owner of
record of said premises.
(4) The machine or device licensed for operation and use to which the
license is to be affixed, including a description of the machine,
manufacturer and serial number.
(5) The name, address, telephone number and mechanical amusement
device distributor license number of the distributor from whom the
applicant purchased, leases, rents or otherwise obtained the
machine.
(6) A copy of the bill of sale for each machine disclosing the holder of
any security interest or, in the alternative, the lease/rental
agreement for said machine.
(7) Any trade name to be used at the premises where the machine is to
be located. A copy of the applicable trade name certificate shall be
attached to the application.
(8) If the applicant for the license is not the owner of record for the
premises at which the machine will be located, a copy of the lease
or rental agreement establishing the applicant's right to use the
premises for the period of the license must be provided.
(9) The application shall contain a certification under oath made by the
applicant that the information contained in the application and all
attachments thereto is complete, accurate and truthful to the best
of his knowledge and belief.
(10) The application shall request a social security number from the
licensee and designate said request optional.
D. The license shall state:
(1) The name and post office address and street address of the
licensee.
(2) The street address and portion of the premises where the device is
to be operated, used or maintained.
(3) A description and serial number of the machine or device licensed
for operation and use to which the license is to be affixed.
A. The license fee for each mechanical amusement device shall be $220
for each machine per year or any part thereof, payable with the filing of
§ 117-6 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-7
109:259
§ 117-8. Display of license required.
No mechanical amusement device shall be placed, operated, maintained
or used until the license issued pursuant to this article shall be affixed
thereto in a conspicuous place, so that the license shall be easily and quickly
identified.65
§ 117-9. Transfer of license; fee. [Amended 9-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-047]
§ 117-10. Seizure of devices; appeal; disposition of unclaimed
devices. [Added 1-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-003; amended 4-28-1992
by Ord. No. 92-018]
the application. If the application is rejected or withdrawn, half of
the application fee shall be returned to the applicant. [Amended
11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-072; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-063]
B. Each license shall expire on August 31 next following the issuance of
said license.
C. In the event that any mechanical amusement device licensed under this
article is subsequently rendered ineligible for a license as a result of
amendment of this article, the license holder shall, upon written notice
to the Licensing Division, have the option to substitute a different
eligible machine for the expiration of the license period at no additional
charge or apply for a pro rata refund from the Licensing Division for the
unexpired period of the license.
A. The licensee shall be permitted to transfer the license for a specific
machine issued under this article, within the year for which it is issued,
to any other like device operated in the same premises in place of the
device from which the license is transferred. The licensee shall
immediately notify the Licensing Division of such transfer, together
with a description and serial number of the device now licensed,
including all material or information required in § 117-6. No transfer of
license shall be deemed complete unless all the information required is
supplied.
B. Transfers of a license from one place to another or from one owner to a
new owner are subject to disclosure of all the information and material
required in § 117-6, investigation as to possible disqualification under
§ 117-4 and approval by the Municipal Council of said transfer. The fee
for said transfer shall be $25.66
65.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 4-7.1, Access to machine, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 1-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-003.
66.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 4-9, Playing by minors prohibited, which immediately followed
this section, as amended 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001, was repealed 9-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-047. Also, former Sec. 4-10, Gambling and free prizes, which followed this section, as
amended 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001, 1-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-003 and 4-28-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-018, was repealed 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-057.
§ 117-7 PATERSON CODE § 117-10
109:260
§ 117-11. Devices to be in clear view; number of devices per
premises restricted. [Amended 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001]
A. If a police officer of the Police Division or any law enforcement officer
with the authority to act within this jurisdiction shall have probable
cause to believe that a mechanical amusement device is prohibited
pursuant to § 117-2 above, such device may be seized and removed
from the premises by the Police Division or its authorized personnel or
other law enforcement officer with the authority to act within this
jurisdiction and impounded. The Chief of Police or his designee shall
give written notice of the seizure to the distributor of said device as
designated on the device or on the license application on file with the
Division of Licensing for the device in question. Said notice shall be
mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular mail to
the distributor at the address designated on the machine or on file with
the Division of Licensing within two days of seizure, excluding holidays
and weekends; said notice to be complete on mailing. Said device shall
not be released until proper ownership documents are presented and/or
licensing fees, if such machine is eligible for licensing, are paid,
together with a removal/storage charge of $250 per device seized. If
possible, those removing the machine or device shall provide the
person in charge of the licensed premises with a report to be filed with
the Police Division, noting any obvious damage to the property.
B. Any owner of a mechanical amusement device who wishes to appeal the
seizure of a device pursuant to this section or the refusal to license said
device pursuant to § 117-2 may appeal said decision to the Municipal
Council. Said appeal must be filed, in writing, with the Municipal Clerk
within 15 days of mailing of notice of seizure or the refusal to issue a
license. The fee for said appeal shall be $25, and said fee must be paid
in order to perfect the appeal. The Municipal Council will render a
decision on said appeal within 60 days of perfection of the appeal. The
filing of an appeal shall not delay or affect the owner's ability to retrieve
any seized device upon compliance with the provisions of this section.
This appeal shall not affect the right of any person to appeal any action
taken under this section to New Jersey Superior Court or other court of
competent jurisdiction.
C. If no person names a claim for return of a machine/device seized under
this section within six months from the date of seizure, said machine/
device may be disposed of pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157.
A. Every mechanical amusement device shall at all times be in clear view
upon the premises wherein it is located.
B. No more than three mechanical amusement devices shall be licensed
under this article for any licensed premises wherein such devices are to
be operated, used or maintained: provided, however, that no more than
one six-pocket pool-type coin-operated machine shall be licensed for
any licensed premises wherein such machine is to be operated, used or
maintained. The restrictions set forth in this section shall not apply
§ 117-10 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-11
109:261
§ 117-12. Regulations pertaining to licensed premises. [Amended
11-3-1980 by Ord. No. 80-052; 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001]
§ 117-13. Suspension or revocation of license; reinstatement;
periodic inspection. [Amended 11-3-1980 by Ord. No. 80-052;
2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001; 1-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-003]
where the premises, wherein the mechanical amusement devices are to
be operated, used or maintained, is licensed as an amusement parlor
pursuant to Article III, Amusement Parlors, of this chapter; provided,
further, however, that the limitations provided herein shall not apply to
any mechanical amusement device which heretofore was not subject to
the requirements of § 117-3 and which mechanical amusement device
was actually installed, operated, used or maintained prior to the
effective day of the ordinance codified in this chapter. [Amended
2-19-1985 by Ord. No. 85-011; 1-21-1992 by Ord. No. 92-003]
A. No person on the licensed premises shall have illegally in his possession
or under his control or offer to another any habit-forming drug, nor
shall the licensee permit, suffer or allow such person on the licensed
premises.
B. No licensee shall permit, suffer or allow the unlawful sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises.
C. No licensee shall permit the operation of any mechanical amusement
device during the hours when the taverns in the City are closed.67
D. The licensee shall at all times maintain good order upon the licensed
premises and shall not permit, suffer or allow any disturbance,
congestion or loitering upon the licensed premises.
E. No licensee shall allow gambling, as defined by the New Jersey Criminal
Code, to take place on the licensed premises. [Amended 10-27-1992
by Ord. No. 92-057]
F. No mechanical device shall be located in a so-called "back room" nor in
any part of the licensed premises which is not open to the general
public.
G. No licensed premises shall be without adequate sanitary facilities or
contain any fire, safety or health hazard.
A. In addition to any other penalties for any violation of this article, the
Council may, after notice and hearing and for just cause, suspend,
revoke or not renew any license issued hereunder for:
(1) Any crime.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 113, Alcoholic Beverages, Art. I, Licensing; Regulations.
§ 117-11 PATERSON CODE § 117-13
109:262
(2) A disorderly persons offense related to gambling, including but not
limited to violations of N.J.S.A. 2C:37-1 et seq.68
(3) A violation of the provisions of this article.
(4) Failure to comply with the federal or state laws or City ordinances
pertaining to the operation of the licensed premises.
(5) Failure to maintain the premises in accordance with the provisions
of this article.
(6) Any cause which would have been cause for rejection of the
application in the first instance.
(7) A material and knowing misstatement or omission of information
required on the applications pursuant to § 117-6. The question of
whether a misstatement or omission is material and knowing shall
be question of fact of the fact finder.
B. Any person whose license has been revoked under the authority of the
preceding Subsection A may, after the lapse of two years from the date
of conviction, apply to the Council for an order removing the
disqualification from obtaining or holding a license under this article.
C. Whenever any such application described in Subsection B of this
section is made and it appears to the satisfaction of the Council that at
least two years have lapsed from the date of the last conviction, the
applicant has conducted himself in a law-abiding manner during that
period and the granting of a license for the operation of mechanical
amusement device will not be contrary to the public interest, the
Council may enter an order removing the applicant's disqualification
from obtaining or holding a license under this article because of the
conviction. On and after the date of the entry of such order, the person
therein named shall be qualified to obtain and hold a license under this
article, notwithstanding the conviction therein referred to, provided
that he or she is, in all other respects, qualified under this article.
D. During the period of which the license is suspended as provided in
Subsection A hereof, no license under this article shall be issued to any
person to operate, maintain or use any mechanical amusement device
in any premises or location wherein the violation giving rise to the
suspension has occurred. The provision of this subsection shall apply
regardless of any transfer of ownership.
E. The Police Division shall make periodic inspections of all mechanical
amusement devices licensed under this article to ensure that the
licensee is in compliance with all the terms and conditions of his
license.
68.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 4-13(a)(3), which immediately followed this subsection and
pertained to gambling, was repealed 10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-057.
§ 117-13 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-14
109:263
§ 117-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-047]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 117-14 PATERSON CODE § 117-14
109:264
ARTICLE II
Distributors of Mechanical Amusement Devices
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 4, Art. 2, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 117-15. Definitions. [Amended 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Refers to an individual applicant, a corporate applicant, any
of its officers, directors or stockholders; or a partnership applicant, any of
its partners.
DISTRIBUTOR — Any person who leases or rents out or places, under any
arrangement, one or more mechanical amusement devices, as defined in
this section.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE or DEVICE — Refers to the
mechanical amusement device defined in § 117-1 of this chapter.
§ 117-16. Distributor's license required. [Amended 2-5-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-001; 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-048]
No distributor shall distribute to any person, partnership or corporation
any mechanical amusement device for the purpose of operation thereof at
premises within the City of Paterson without first having obtained a license
(hereinafter referred to as a "distributor's license") therefor as hereinafter
provided in this article.
§ 117-17. Application for license; contents of application;
disqualifications precluding licensing. [Amended 2-5-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-001; 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-048; 11-12-1996 by Ord. No.
96-064]
A. An application for a license required by this article shall be filed with
the Licensing Division upon forms approved by the Council.
B. The application shall state:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) Post office and street address of the applicant.
(3) Whether the applicant or any member of the applicant's immediate
family has been convicted of:
(a) A crime.
(b) A violation of any City ordinance involving gambling.
(c) A violation of this article.
§ 117-15 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-17
109:265
§ 117-18. Investigation of applicant and premises. [Amended
2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001]
It shall be the duty of the license inspector, appointed by the Council, to
investigate all applicants for said license and to investigate the premises
wherein each mechanical amusement device will be located.
(4) In the case of an application by a corporation, limited liability
company or partnership, the application shall reflect whether any
partner, corporate officer or shareholder or any member of said
partners officer's or shareholder's immediate family of the
applicant has been convicted of:
(a) A crime.
(b) A violation of any City ordinance involving gambling.
(c) A violation of this article.
(5) In the case of any application by an individual, the application shall
reflect whether that individual or any member of his immediate
family has ever been a shareholder or officer of a corporation,
limited liability company or a partner in a partnership which has
been convicted of:
(a) A crime.
(b) A violation of any City ordinance involving gambling.
(c) A violation of this article.
(6) Trade names utilized by the applicant.
(7) Such other information as the Council shall deem necessary or
proper.
C. With regard to applications from corporations, limited liability company
or partnerships, an applicant wherein a stockholder or member of his
immediate family holding 10% or more of the stock or a partner or
member of his immediate family holding 10% or greater share in the
partnership has been convicted of a crime, violation of any City
ordinance involving gambling or a violation of this article shall be
denied a license.
D. With regard to applications from individuals, if said individual or
member of his immediate family has ever been a stockholder or
corporate officer in a corporation or a partner in a partnership which
has been convicted of a crime, violation of any City ordinance involving
gambling or a violation of this article, said applicant shall be denied a
license.
E. For purposes of this section, "immediate family" shall be deemed to
include spouse and children.
§ 117-17 PATERSON CODE § 117-19
109:266
§ 117-19. Issuance and term of license.
§ 117-20. Number of machines; license fees; processing fee; late
renewal. [Amended 6-8-1983 by Ord. No. 83-045; 2-5-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-001; 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-048; 12-12-1989 by Ord. No.
89-064]
§ 117-21. Restrictions on distributors; changes in license
application information. [Amended 11-3-1980 by Ord. No. 80-052;
2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001; 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-048]
A. After proper investigation and after approval of the application by the
Council, the Licensing Division shall issue the distributor's license,
provided that the prescribed license fee has been paid.
B. The license shall be valid for a term of one year from the date of its
issuance.
A. The license issued under this article shall designate the number of
mechanical amusement machines allowed to be distributed under the
particular license. The fee for the license shall be fixed in accordance
with the number of machines allowed to be distributed thereunder, all
in the following manner: [Amended 1-22-1991 by Ord. No. 91-003;
11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-067; 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 03-023;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-063]
Number of Machines Under
Particular License
License Fees for
Particular License
Distribution of from 1 to and including 25
machines
$1,100
Distribution of from 26 to and including 50
machines
$1,650
Distribution of more than 50 machines $2,200
B. The above license fees are fixed for the purpose of both regulation and
revenue and shall be payable with the filing of the application. If the
application is rejected, the fee is to be returned to the applicant, except
for a processing fee of $25.
C. Any application for a license renewal which is not complete within 30
days of the renewal date shall be subject to an additional late
administrative charge equal to 10% of the cost of the license renewal.
[Added 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-067]
A. No distributor nor any of his officers, directors, agents, servants or
employees shall, by threats, promises or intimidation, seek to control or
direct the placement or removal of any mechanical amusement device.
B. Each distributor shall promptly report, in writing, to the Licensing
Division any change by addition or deletion of the information furnished
§ 117-19 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-21
109:267
§ 117-22. Display of notice regarding usage restrictions. [Amended
2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001]
All mechanical amusement devices distributed by the licensee shall display
in a prominent place in view of the player a notice, in prominent lettering
and approved as to form by the Council, setting forth that:
§ 117-23. Report and requirements of distribution. [Amended
2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001; 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-048]
§ 117-24. Suspension or revocation of license; reinstatement.
[Amended 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-048]
on the license application and all material attached thereto, and this
obligation shall be fully met during the term of any license or the
renewal thereof.
A. The machine shall not be used for gambling purposes.69
B. No prize or free games or other reward shall be given to any person in
connection with the play or operation of the same.
A. The licensee shall report to the Licensing Division, in writing, in form
and manner required by the Council, the name and address of the
person and the premises to whom a mechanical amusement device has
been delivered and distributed, within seven days after the same has
been delivered by the distributor.
B. The licensee, prior to distributing any mechanical amusement device to
premises within the City of Paterson, shall establish and verify with the
City of Paterson Licensing Division that a valid mechanical amusement
device license pursuant to Article I of this chapter, Mechanical
Amusement Devices, has been issued for the specific machine, premises
and owner in question.
A. In addition to any other penalties for any violation of this article, the
Council may, after notice and hearing and for just cause, suspend,
revoke or not renew any license issued hereunder for: [Amended
11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-064]
(1) Any crime.
(2) A violation of any City ordinance involving gambling, including
violation of this article in relation to gambling.
(3) A violation of the provisions of this article by the applicant, a
member of the applicant's immediate family, a corporation in which
the applicant was a shareholder or officer or a partnership in which
the applicant or a member of his immediate family held an interest.
69.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 4-22(b), regarding minors, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-048.
§ 117-21 PATERSON CODE § 117-24
109:268
§ 117-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-26-1989 by Ord. No.
89-048]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(4) Any cause which would have been cause for rejection of this
application of the first instance, including but not limited to
violation of § 117-17.
B. Any person whose license has been revoked under the authority of the
preceding Subsection A may, after the lapse of two years from the date
of conviction, apply to the Council for an order removing the
disqualification from obtaining or holding a license under this article.
C. Whenever any such application described in Subsection B of this
section is made and it appears to the satisfaction of the Council that at
least two years have lapsed from the date of the last such conviction,
the applicant has conducted himself in a law-abiding manner during
that period and the granting of a license for the distribution of
mechanical amusement devices will not be contrary to the public
interest, the Council may enter an order removing the applicant's
disqualification from obtaining or holding a license under this article
because of the conviction. On and after the date of the entry of such
order, the person therein named shall be qualified to obtain and hold a
license under this article, notwithstanding the conviction therein
referred to, provided that he or she is, in all other respects, qualified
under this article.70
70.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 4-25, Suspension or revocation of license, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 9-26-1989 by Ord. No. 89-048.
§ 117-24 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-25
109:269

ARTICLE III
Amusement Parlors
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 4, Art. 3, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 117-26. Definitions. [Amended 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AMUSEMENT PARLOR — Any public or quasi-public place or premises to
which the public is invited or which the public may enter wherein more
mechanical amusement devices, as defined in this section, are operated,
maintained or used or intended to be operated, maintained or used than are
permitted under the provisions of § 117-11 of this chapter.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Refers to the mechanical
amusement device defined in § 117-1 of this chapter.
§ 117-27. Amusement parlor license required.
No person shall operate or maintain an amusement parlor without first
obtaining a license therefor issued by the Licensing Division after the
Council has approved the granting thereof.
§ 117-28. Scope. [Amended 6-3-1981 by Ord. No. 81-034; 2-5-1985
by Ord. No. 85-001]
Nothing contained in this article is intended to prevent the holder of an
amusement parlor license issued under this article from operating or
maintaining on the licensed premises any machine or device operated for
the emission of songs or music or the recording of voices or music or the
reproduction of photographs or photographic prints or any electrical device
which may be used as a test of strength or any video device which provides
no free play, no prizes nor the return of any money.
§ 117-29. Application for license; contents; accompanying floor
plan. [Amended 8-10-1982 by Ord. No. 82-014; 2-5-1985 by Ord. No.
85-001]
A. An application for a license required by this article shall be filed with
the Licensing Division on forms approved by the Council.
B. The application shall set forth:
(1) The name and address of the applicant and the location of the
premises to be licensed; in the case of a partnership, the names and
addresses of all partners; in the case of a corporation, the names
and addresses of the officers, directors and stockholders thereof
for a period of six months prior to the date of the application. Such
persons may be required to furnish fingerprints and photographs.
§ 117-26 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-29
109:271
§ 117-30. Prerequisites to licensing. [Amended 8-10-1982 by Ord.
No. 82-014; 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001]
(2) Whether or not any of the persons, partners, officers, directors or
stockholders described in Subsection B(1) of this section have ever
been convicted of:
(a) A crime.
(b) A disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly persons
offense relating to gambling. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
(c) A violation of any ordinance of the City involving gambling or
morals.
C. The application shall have attached to it a floor plan of the premises to
be licensed, showing clearly the number and location of all amusement
machines and all entrances and exits.
D. The application shall have attached to it a floor plan of the premises to
be licensed, showing clearly all entrances and exits.
E. The application shall be accompanied by the license fee.
A. No license shall be granted under this article for any premises where no
emergency fire exit is provided.
B. No license shall be granted under this article until the premises has
been inspected by the Fire Division of the City and approved by the Fire
Division for such use as an amusement parlor.
C. No license shall be granted under this article where the applicant or
any partner or any officer, director or stockholder of a corporate
applicant shall have been convicted of:
(1) A crime.
(2) A disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly persons offense
relating to gambling. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
(3) Violation of any ordinance of the City involving gambling or morals.
D. The Council may, in its discretion, grant the license when such
conviction shall have preceded the date of the application by two years
or more or, if less than two years, upon application by the applicant for
removal of the disqualification, the Council may, in its discretion, grant
a license hereunder.
E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, no
license shall be granted under this article for any premises unless the
applicant and all of the persons described in § 117-29B are of good
§ 117-29 PATERSON CODE § 117-30
109:272
§ 117-31. Prohibited locations of premises.
No license shall be granted under this article for premises located:
§ 117-32. License fee; term of license; refund; late renewal.
moral character. A favorable written report of the Chief of Police shall
be taken as evidence of good moral character.
F. No license shall issue to any amusement parlor wherein more than 10
amusement devices are to be installed unless the proprietor of such
establishment shall retain special uniformed police officers, uniformed
security officers or uniformed constables, at the proprietor's expense,
to be at the premises during all hours of operation.
G. As a condition for granting a license for an amusement parlor for
premises located within § 117-31B of this article, the licensor shall
provide on-site at least one security guard throughout all hours of
operation. The security guard shall be an off-duty police officer,
uniformed security guard, constable or equivalent thereof. [Added
6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-043]
A. Within 200 feet of any church or school; or
B. Within the following described area: Beginning at the intersection of
Straight Street and Broadway; thence running west along Broadway to
Curtis Place; then south along Curtis Place to Prospect Street;
continuing south along Prospect Street to Market Street; thence east
along Market Street to Main Street; thence south along Main Street to
Ward Street; thence east along Ward Street to Straight Street; thence
north along Straight Street to the point and place of beginning, except
that the Municipal Council may grant a license for premises located
within the aforementioned area, provided that within said premises or
immediately adjacent thereto and within the same structure is located a
duly licensed food service establishment, such as a restaurant or food
court, with a seating capacity of not fewer than 75 persons. [Amended
10-27-1992 by Ord. No. 92-056; 6-28-1994 by Ord. No. 94-043]
A. The fee to be paid for the license required by this article shall be $385
plus an additional charge of $55 per machine located on the premises
per annum. [Amended 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-066; 12-2-2003
by Ord. No. 03-077; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-063]
B. The license shall be valid for the period of one year from the date of
issuance unless sooner revoked or suspended.
C. If the application is rejected or withdrawn, the sum of $175 of the
license fee shall be returned to the applicant.
D. An application for a license renewal which is not completed within 30
days of the renewal date shall be subject to an additional late
§ 117-30 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-32
109:273
§ 117-33. Contents of license; display of license; license to be
issued prior to placement of devices. [Amended 5-3-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-035A; 2-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-001]
§ 117-34. Transfer of licenses.
The license shall not be transferable from place to place or to another
person until proper application shall have been made as heretofore
provided for an original issuance and shall be granted only on the written
consent of the Council.71
§ 117-35. Gambling; free plays or prizes.
The licensee or his agents, servants or employees shall not:
administrative charge equal to 10% of the cost of the license renewal.
[Added 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-066]
A. All licenses issued hereunder shall:
(1) Be signed by the Licensing Director;
(2) Bear the date of issuance;
(3) Show the name of the person to whom issued; and
(4) Show the location of the premises wherein the amusement parlor is
to be conducted.
B. The license shall be posted and conspicuously displayed in the licensed
premises.
C. No mechanical amusement device shall be placed in any premises until
after the license has been issued by the Licensing Director and posted
conspicuously in the premises.
A. Permit, suffer or allow any machines or devices on the licensed
premises to be used for gambling purposes.
B. Offer, permit, suffer or allow any prize, free play or return of money on
any machines or devices on the licensed premises, except for any
machines or devices in amusement parks as licensed by the State of
New Jersey and the City of Paterson, which shall be subject to state law
and regulations governing prizes. [Amended 6-23-2009 by Ord. No.
09-019]
71.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 4-36, Restrictions as to minors, amended 2-5-1985 by Ord. No.
85-001, was deleted 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068.
§ 117-32 PATERSON CODE § 117-36
109:274
§ 117-36. Hours and days of operation of mechanical amusement
devices. [Amended 8-10-1982 by Ord. No. 82-014; 6-23-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-019]
No licensee shall permit the operation of any mechanical amusement device
during the hours when the taverns in the City are closed.
§ 117-37. Suspension or revocation of license.
§ 117-38. Purpose.
This article is enacted for the purpose of raising revenue and for the
regulation and control of amusement parlors.
§ 117-39. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
A. In addition to any other penalties for any violation of this article, the
Council may, after notice and hearing and for just cause, suspend or
revoke any license issued hereunder for:
(1) A violation of the provisions of this article;
(2) Failure to comply with the federal or state laws or City ordinances
pertaining to the operation of the licensed premises;
(3) Failure to maintain the premises in accordance with the provisions
of this article; or
(4) Any cause which would have been cause for rejection of the
application in the first instance.
B. If the license is revoked, said premises shall not be licensed under this
article for a period of one year from the date of revocation.
§ 117-36 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-39
109:275

ARTICLE IV
Public Amusement Parks
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 4, Art. 7, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 117-40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC AMUSEMENT PARK — Any park, grove, enclosure, space or place
or any room or structure included within any park, grove, enclosure, space
or place to which the public is invited or admitted for the purpose of
recreation, amusement or refreshment, either with or without the payment
of a fee or admission charge, and which is conducted by a person owning,
leasing, occupying or using the same as a business designed to produce gain
or profit.
§ 117-41. Amusement park license required. [Amended 6-23-2009
by Ord. No. 09-019; 9-28-2010 by Ord. No. 10-048]
No person shall engage in the business of operating a public amusement
park without first obtaining a license therefor issued by the Licensing
Division after approval thereof of the Council. Center City Entertainment,
LLC, t/a Center City Arcade, located at 301 Main Street, is hereby declared
to be a recognized amusement park as defined by state statute and
regulations governing amusement games and amusement parks.
§ 117-42. Application for license; contents of application.
A. An application for a public amusement park license shall be made in
writing and signed by the applicant. It shall be filed with the Licensing
Division upon forms approved by the Council and be accompanied by
the required license fee.
B. The application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation.
(3) The location of the premises sought to be licensed as an
amusement park and approximate size thereof.
(4) The type and nature of buildings and structures thereon or to be
placed thereon.
(5) The specific nature of the business to be conducted therein.
(6) The desired date for issuance of the license.
(7) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of:
§ 117-40 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-42
109:277
§ 117-43. License fee; term of license.
§ 117-44. Compliance with other regulations.
No license for a public amusement park shall be issued or continued in force
and effect where such public amusement park or the buildings or structures
therein contained do not comply with or conform to the regulations and
ordinances of the City regarding health or fire and the provisions of the
building code, state statutes or state regulations.
§ 117-45. Sanitary condition; police protection.
§ 117-46. Revocation of license; hearing; suspension pending
hearing.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 117-47, the Council may, upon
hearing, revoke any license issued under this article for any violation of this
article or for other good cause, provided that the licensee shall be given
at least five days' written notice of the hearing. Pending such hearing, the
Council may suspend the license until final determination has been made.
§ 117-47. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
(a) Any crime.
(b) A disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly persons
offense relating to gambling. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
(c) Any violation of a City ordinance involving gambling or moral
turpitude.
C. If the answer to either Subsection B(7)(a), (b) or (c) of this section is
"yes," the applicant shall state the date and nature of each conviction.
A. The fee for a license issued under this article, imposed for revenue,
shall be $500.
B. The license shall be effective for the calendar year or any part thereof,
unless sooner revoked.
A. All public amusement parks shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition.
B. The licensee shall, at his expense, provide sufficient police protection.
§ 117-42 PATERSON CODE § 117-47
109:278
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 117-47 ALARM SYSTEMS § 117-47
109:279
Chapter 121
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 337.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 363.
Slaughterhouses — See Ch. 417.
§ 117-47 PATERSON CODE § 117-47
109:280
ARTICLE I
Licensing and Control of Dogs
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 5, Art. 1, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 121-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AT LARGE — Refers to a dog off the premises of the person owning or
keeping or harboring it and not in a crate or other safe control or not
securely fastened to a tether, leash or chain held by its owner or other
person capable of controlling said dog.
DOG — Any male or female dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, includes every
person having a right of property in such dog and every person who harbors
or has such dog in his keeping.
§ 121-2. Annual license and registration tag required; placing tag
on dog. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog of licensing age in the City
shall, in each year, apply for and procure from the Licensing Division in the
Department of Finance a license and official metal registration tag for each
such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall place upon each such dog a
collar or harness with the registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 121-3. License and tag for newly acquired dog or for dog attaining
licensing age.
The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which
attains licensing age shall apply for a license and registration tag for such
dog within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 121-4. Dogs brought into City.
A. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the City any dog
licensed in another state for the current year, and bearing a registration
tag, and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be kept within
the City for a period of more than 90 days shall immediately thereafter
apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog unless a
license for such dog is not required under § 121-5.
B. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the City any
unlicensed dog and who shall keep the same or permit the same to be
§ 121-1 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-4
109:281
§ 121-5. Dogs licensed in other municipalities.
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing year
for any dog owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag issued by any
other municipality of this state shall be accepted by the City as evidence of
compliance.
§ 121-6. Fees; expiration date of license; exceptions. [Amended
11-2-1981 by Ord. No. 81-075; 3-6-1984 by Ord. No. 84-023;
5-1-1984 by Ord. No. 84-048; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 121-7. Application for license; contents.
kept within the City for a period of more than 10 days shall immediately
thereafter apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog.
A. The person applying for a license and registration shall pay to the
Director of Revenue Collection a fee of $11 for the licensing of each
dog, the additional sum of $1.20 for the registration tag of each dog and
a fee of $3 for any dog of reproductive age which has not had its
reproductive capacity permanently altered through sterilization
pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 172.72 Each license and tag shall be renewed
annually, and for each annual renewal the fee for the license and
registration tag shall be the same as for the original license and
registration tag. Said licenses and registration tags and renewals
thereof shall expire on January 31. [Amended 1-27-2004 by Ord. No.
04-005; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-069]
B. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service dogs" and dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other dogs as hereinabove provided for in this article, except that the
owner or keeper of such dogs shall not be required to pay any fee
therefor.
C. (Reserved) 73
D. Notwithstanding Subsection A, any owner of a dog applying for license
and registration tags who presents a certificate signed by a licensed
veterinarian stating that the dog has been spayed or neutered shall pay
to the Director of Revenue Collection a fee of $11 for the licensing of
each dog and an additional sum of $1.20 for the registration of each
dog. [Amended 1-27-2004 by Ord. No. 04-005; 11-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-069]
72.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3b and N.J.S.A. 4:19A-1 et seq.
73.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding fees to be paid by senior citizens, was
repealed 1-27-2004 by Ord. No. 04-005.
§ 121-4 PATERSON CODE § 121-7
109:282
§ 121-8. Issuance of license and registration tag; preservation of
information; report to state.
§ 121-9. Removal of tag or attaching to another dog forbidden.
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 121-10. Barking or howling; running at large; committing
nuisances.
A. The application for a dog license and registration tag shall be made to
the Licensing Division.
B. The application shall state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the dog for which the license and registration are sought and whether it
is of a long-haired or short-haired variety, the name, street and post
office address of the owner and the person who shall keep or harbor
such dog.
A. After the filing of the application and payment of the license fee and
registration tag fee, the Licensing Division shall issue the license and
registration tag. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of
the applications. The license forms and uniform official metal
registration tags designed by the State Department of Health shall be
furnished by the Licensing Division and shall be numbered serially and
shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the City.
B. The information of said application and the registration number issued
for the dog shall be preserved for a period of three years by the
Licensing Division.
C. The Licensing Division shall forward to the State Department of Health
each month, on forms furnished by said Department, an accurate
account of registration numbers issued or otherwise disposed of.
A. No person shall keep or harbor any dog which shall disturb the
neighborhood by excessive barking, whining or howling.
B. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit
it to run at large upon any public street or in any of the public places of
the City. There shall be a presumption that any dog found running at
large upon any public street or in any of the public places of the City
shall have been permitted or suffered to run loose by the person
owning, keeping or harboring said dog. [Amended 5-1-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-042]
C. No person owning, keeping or harboring a dog shall suffer or permit it
to commit a nuisance by defecation, to do any injury or to do any
damage to any lawn, shrubbery, grounds or property.
§ 121-7 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-10
109:283
§ 121-11. Control by leash or chain.
Any dog, licensed or unlicensed, when off the premises of the owner or
person keeping, harboring or in charge of such dog shall be restricted by a
leash, tether, chain, rope or the like, the overall length of which, including
the hand grip, shall not exceed six feet and shall be held by a person able to
control such dog.
§ 121-12. Defiling property prohibited.
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance
on:
§ 121-13. Removal of feces. [Amended 11-29-2005 by Ord. No.
05-083]
The restriction against defiling or defecating outlined in § 121-12 shall not
apply to that portion of the street lying between curblines which shall be
used to curb such dog under the following conditions:
§ 121-14. Summons; complaint.
D. No person owning or accompanying any dog except Seeing Eye dogs,
service dogs and hearing ear dogs shall take, permit or allow such dog
in any retail food establishment where food is exposed for sale or upon
the private premises of any person other than the owner or keeper of
such dog and there to annoy or endanger any person. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
A. Any common driveway, sidewalk, passageway, bypass, play area or any
place where people congregate or walk; or
B. Any public property, except as outlined in § 121-13.
C. Any private property, including but not limited to lawns and private
drives and walkways. [Added 10-13-1998 by Ord. No. 98-071]
A. The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all feces
deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by the Health
Division.
B. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
such dog in accordance with the provisions of this article.
A. In the event of such violation occurring on either private property or
public property, a summons may be issued by any authorized
enforcement agent set forth in § 121-15.
§ 121-10 PATERSON CODE § 121-14
109:284
§ 121-15. Authorized enforcement agents.
The provisions of §§ 121-11 through 121-14 shall be enforced by:
§ 121-16. Interference with enforcement agents.
No person shall hinder, molest, obstruct or interfere with any person
authorized or empowered to enforce any provision of §§ 121-11 through
121-15.
§ 121-17. Appointment of animal control officers; duties. [Amended
5-1-1984 by Ord. No. 84-042; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
The Director of Public Safety may appoint suitable and fit persons to be
animal control officers, whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of
this article and any other ordinance of the City or state statute concerning
animals, including but not limited to N.J.S.A. 4:22-1 et seq.
§ 121-18. Seizure and impounding. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
An animal control officer shall take into custody and impound or cause to be
taken into custody and impounded the following:
B. Where such violation occurs on private property, a complaint may be
filed in the Municipal Court by the owner of said property or by his
authorized agent.
A. Local police.
B. Sanitary inspectors of the Health Division.
C. Animal control officers. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
D. Inspectors of the Department of Public Works.
E. Metermen. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
A. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which an animal control officer has reason to believe
is a stray dog.
B. Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog without a current registration tag on his collar.
C. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog.
D. Any dog running at large in violation of § 121-10B.
E. Any dog which has bitten or injured a person and caused an abrasion of
the skin.
§ 121-14 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-18
109:285
§ 121-19. Notification of impoundment; disposition of unclaimed
dogs; redemption; exceptions; fees.
F. Any vicious dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping
or harboring said dog.
G. Any dog which so disturbs the quiet of any person or neighborhood as to
constitute a nuisance and whose owner has been convicted of a
violation of § 121-10A.
H. Any dog which the owner or person keeping or harboring said dog
wishes to dispose of and to which he renounces ownership, custody and
control, in writing.
I. Rabid dogs.
J. Animals that are ill, injured or pose a threat to the public.
A. If any dog seized as provided in § 121-18A through F, inclusive, wears a
collar or harness having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the
name and address of any person or a registration tag or if the owner or
the person keeping or harboring said dog is otherwise known, an
animal control officer shall forthwith serve or cause to be served on the
person whose address is given on the collar or the owner or the person
keeping or harboring said dog, if known, a notice in writing, stating that
the dog has been seized and will be liable to be offered for adoption or
destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the service of the
notice. [Amended 11-10-1987 by Ord. No. 87-042; 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068]
B. The notice referred to in Subsection A of this section may be served
either by delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served or by
leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of abode or at the
address given on the collar or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid
letter addressed to that person at his usual or last known place of abode
or to the address given on the collar. [Amended 11-10-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-042]
C. When any dog seized in accordance with § 121-18A through F,
inclusive, has been detained for seven days after notice, when notice
can be given as above set forth, and if the owner or person keeping or
harboring said dog has not claimed said dog and paid all expenses
incurred by reason of its detention, including maintenance not
exceeding $4 per day, and if the dog is unlicensed at the time of the
seizure and the person keeping or harboring said dog has not produced
a license and registration tag for said dog, an animal control officer may
cause the dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as
possible. Any redemption of a dog pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall not be deemed to discharge or release the owner thereof
from the penalties prescribed for any violation of this article.
§ 121-18 PATERSON CODE § 121-19
109:286
[Amended 11-10-1987 by Ord. No. 87-042; 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
D. The preceding requirements of Subsections A, B and C of this section
shall not be deemed applicable when any dog found running at large
and seized and impounded pursuant to § 121-18E and F (whether
licensed or unlicensed) is vicious or appears to be suffering from rabies.
In such case, an animal control officer or any member of the Police
Division may (with or without consultation with the Health Division)
cause said dog to be destroyed if he deems it necessary. [Amended
11-10-1987 by Ord. No. 87-042; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
E. The requirement that the maintenance charge of $4 per day be paid
prior to redemption of a dog may be waived upon request to the animal
control officer under the following circumstances: [Added 11-10-1987
by Ord. No. 87-042; amended 2-23-1988 by Ord. No. 88-007;
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
(1) The request for waiver of said fees prior to redemption or adoption
of a dog shall be in writing and directed to the certified animal
control officer.
(2) The applicant shall be a nonprofit corporation whose stated
corporate purposes include the care, treatment or sheltering of
animals.
(3) Said nonprofit corporation shall have on file in the office of the City
Clerk of the City of Paterson a disclosure statement indicating the
proper name and state of corporation of the nonprofit corporation,
the officers and directors thereof, the registered agent and primary
place of business and a certificate of insurance establishing that
said corporation is insured in a minimum amount of general
liability/personal injury policy $100,000 per occurrence/$300,000
aggregate.
(4) Said corporation shall have paid an annual fee to the City Clerk's
office in the amount of $100 to qualify under this provision for a
waiver of Subsection C above, said fee to be good for 12 months
from the date on which it is to be paid.
(5) Said applicant shall agree to hold harmless and indemnify the City
for any claims arising out of the actions of the animals which shall
be redeemed by the corporation.
(6) The dog in question to be adopted shall have been maintained by
the City for a minimum of seven days.
F. The owner of any dog voluntarily surrendered in accordance with
§ 121-18H or seized in accordance with § 121-18G which is
subsequently destroyed shall be liable for the cost of destroying said
dog. The cost for the destruction of a large dog, defined as a dog
weighing more than 50 pounds, shall be $10. The cost for the
§ 121-19 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-19
109:287
§ 121-20. Rabies quarantine; fee. [Added 5-1-1984 by Ord. No.
84-042; amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
The owner of any dog or other animal which, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:4-78, is
confined to the pound by the animal control officer for a quarantine period
to determine if the animal has rabies shall be liable for all expenses incurred
by reason of its detention, including maintenance, not exceeding $4 per
day.74
§ 121-21. Annual canvass of dogs; report. [Amended 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068]
The animal control officers or other persons designated by the Council shall
annually, after February 1, cause a canvass to be made of all dogs owned,
kept or harbored within the limits of the City and shall report the result
thereof, including the names of all persons owning, keeping or harboring
the dogs, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.15.
§ 121-22. Right of entry upon premises for seizure. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
An animal control officer or any member of the Police Division is authorized
to go upon any premises to seize for impounding any dog or dogs which he
may lawfully seize and impound when he is in immediate pursuit of such
dog or dogs, except upon the premises of the owner of the dog if said owner
is present and forbids the same.
§ 121-23. Interference. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with any persons appointed as
animal control officers or any officers of the City or other duly authorized
destruction of a small dog, defined as a dog weighing 50 pounds or
less, or any cat voluntarily surrendered, shall be $5. Any person may
apply to the animal control officer for a waiver of said fees on the
basis of financial or other hardship documented to the satisfaction of
the animal control officer. [Amended 5-1-1984 by Ord. No. 84-042;
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
G. After holding any dog obtained pursuant to § 121-18A through F for
seven days and giving the proper notice pursuant to Subsections A
through D above or immediately upon taking possession of any dog
pursuant to § 121-18H, the animal control officer may offer said dog for
adoption. Any person adopting a dog pursuant to this section shall pay a
fee of $28. [Amended 5-1-1984 by Ord. No. 84-042; 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068]
74.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 5-13.1, regarding vicious dogs, and Sec. 5-13.2, regarding dog
fighting, both of which were added 11-10-1987 by Ord. No. 87-042 and immediately
followed this section, were deleted 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068.
§ 121-19 PATERSON CODE § 121-23
109:288
agent in the performance of any duty authorized or empowered by this
article.
§ 121-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-1-1984 by Ord. No.
84-042; 9-24-1987 by Ord. No. 87-031; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068; 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 05-014]
A. Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with §§ 121-2,
121-3, 121-9, and 121-23 of this article shall be liable to a penalty of not
less than $5 nor more than $50 for each offense, to be recovered by and
in the name of the City, except that for the first offense in case of
violation of § 121-2, 121-3, or 121-4 of this article, the penalty shall be
not less than $1 nor more than $50, to be recovered in a like manner.
B. Any person who violates or fails or refuses to comply with §§ 121-10
through 121-16, except as provided below, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,250, by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service
for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof, except that
violations of §§ 121-11 and 121-12 are subject to punishment by
payment of fines in the amount of $50. Fines for violations of §§ 121-11
and 121-12 are payable at the Violations Bureau without a court
appearance. Costs of court of $30 will be imposed, consistent with New
Jersey Court Rule 7:11-4, for all such payments.
C. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs
§ 121-23 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-24
109:289

ARTICLE II
Animal Pounds
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 5, Art. 2, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 121-25. Establishment of pound; location and control.
§ 121-26. Pound Veterinarian.
The position of Pound Veterinarian for a term of three years, heretofore
created by ordinance, is hereby continued. It shall be the duty of the Pound
Veterinarian of the City to make a minimum of two visits a month to the
animal pound of the City to inspect the same and examine the animals
therein contained, as well as make further calls whenever necessary to
examine and treat sick animals.
§ 121-27. Duties of animal control officers. [Amended 12-19-1995
by Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 121-28. Disposition of moneys collected; statement.
All moneys received for the redemption of impounded animals shall be paid
to the City Treasurer, together with a statement explaining the same, at
such times as the Council shall require.
A. An animal pound for the impounding and keeping of animals found in
the City as heretofore established is hereby continued.
B. The pound shall be located at a place designated by the Council of the
City and shall be under the control of such animal control officers as are
appointed by the Department of Public Safety. [Amended 12-19-1995
by Ord. No. 95-068]
A. Maintenance of animal pound. The animal control officers shall feed
and care for all animals confined in the pound and keep the pound in a
clean and sanitary condition.
B. Animals at large; impounding. Any animals found running at large in
the City may be taken to the pound by the animal control officer. The
animal control officer shall keep a record of each animal taken at the
time of impounding much animal.
C. Redemption of impounded animals; maintenance charges.
(1) The provisions of § 121-19 shall be applicable to all dogs and,
insofar as practicable, to all other impounded animals.
(2) In addition to the maintenance fee of $4 per day for dogs as
provided in § 121-19, a charge of $1 per day or portion thereof shall
be made for a cat and $3 per day or portion thereof for any other
animal.
§ 121-25 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-28
109:291

ARTICLE III
Rabbits
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 5, Art. 3, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 121-29. License required.
No live rabbits shall be kept within the City without a license granted by the
Health Division of the City as hereinafter set forth in this article.
§ 121-30. Running at large prohibited; rabbits to be confined.
No rabbits shall be allowed to run at large in the City. All live rabbits shall
be confined in a suitable rabbit hutch as set forth in § 121-31.
§ 121-31. Rabbit hutches.
§ 121-32. Term of license; renewal; fee.
§ 121-33. Revocation of license.
Every license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked by the Health
Officer, upon notice and hearing, for violation of any provision of this article
or violation of any ordinance of the City or state or federal law applicable
thereto.
§ 121-34. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068; 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 05-009]
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine in the amount of $50. Fines for violation of
any provision of this article are payable at the Violations Bureau without
a court appearance. Costs of court of $30 will be imposed, consistent with
New Jersey Court Rule 7:11-4, for all such payments. A separate offense
A. Every rabbit hutch shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be subject at all times to inspection by the inspectors of the Health
Division.
B. No part of any rabbit hutch shall be maintained within 50 feet of a
building used in whole or in part as a dwelling.
A. Each license required by the provisions of this article shall expire on
December 31 in each year and shall be renewed annually.
B. The fee for each license issued or renewal thereof is $15. [Amended
12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-047]
C. The license fee herein set forth shall be payable at the time of issuance
or renewal.
§ 121-29 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-34
109:293
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
§ 121-34 PATERSON CODE § 121-34
109:294
ARTICLE IV
Fowl and Birds
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 5, Art. 4, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 121-35. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOWL — Includes poultry or birds of any kind, edible or otherwise, wild or
domestic, including any winged or flying birds or animals except canaries,
parakeets and parrots.
§ 121-36. Keeping of live chickens and roosters prohibited; license
required for other fowl; running at large prohibited; exemption.
§ 121-37. Term of license; fee.
§ 121-38. Revocation of license.
Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article may be revoked
by the Health Officer, after due notice and hearing, for violation of the
provisions of this article or of any ordinance of the City or of any state or
federal law applicable thereto.
A. The keeping of live chickens and roosters in the City is hereby
prohibited.
B. No other live fowl shall be kept within the City without a license issued
by the Health Division, as hereinafter set forth in this article.
C. No fowl shall be allowed to run at large in the City.
D. Exempt from the provisions of this section are business establishments
which sell live fowl to the public.
A. Each license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
expire on December 31 in each year.
B. The fee for each license or renewal thereof is $15. [Amended
12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-047]
C. Notwithstanding the above provisions, no licenses shall be issued from
the effective date of this article through October 15, 1995, during which
time the City of Paterson Division of Health shall conduct a study to
assess the suitability of permanently banning all such licenses. [Added
3-14-1995 by Ord. No. 95-015]
§ 121-35 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-39
109:295
§ 121-39. Sanitary enclosures; inspections.
All fowl shall be confined in a suitable enclosure which shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition. All such enclosures shall be subject at all times
to inspection by the inspectors of the Health Division.
§ 121-40. Poultry houses; exception.
§ 121-41. Feeding of birds restricted; exceptions. [Amended
11-9-2005 by Ord. No. 05-74]
§ 121-42. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
A. With respect to poultry, all poultry houses shall have an enclosed
runway. The coop and runway thereof shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition and shall be subject at all times to inspection by the
inspectors of the Health Division.
B. The provisions of § 121-39 and of Subsection A of this section shall not
apply to any person regularly engaged in the business of dealing in
fowl.
A. The littering of private grounds for the purpose of feeding free and wild
birds or the placing or causing to be placed or any food designed or
intended for the purpose of feeding such birds in such a manner and in
such quantity so as to create a hazard of rodent infestation so as to
create any health hazard by so doing shall be prohibited.
B. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent or prohibit the
keeping of domestic pigeons in a place provided for their shelter or to
prevent or prohibit the feeding of some birds or other varieties of birds
not constituting a health hazard.
§ 121-39 PATERSON CODE § 121-42
109:296
ARTICLE V
Prohibited Animals
[Adopted 5-1-1984 as Ord. No. 84-042 (Secs. 5-35 and 5-36 of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson)]
§ 121-43. Types of prohibited animals; exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his or
her possession or under his or her control within the City limits of the
City any poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild
animal or reptile, any vicious or dangerous domesticated animal or any
other animal or reptile of wild, vicious or dangerous propensities.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his or
her possession or under his or her control within the City limits of the
City of Paterson any of the following animals: all poisonous animals,
including rear-fanged snakes; apes; chimpanzees; gibbons: gorillas;
orangutans; siamangs; baboons; bears; bison; cheetahs; crocodilians 30
inches or more in length; coyotes; deer; elephants; gamecocks and
other fighting birds; hippopotamuses; hyenas; jaguars; leopards; lions;
lynx; monkeys; ostriches; piranha fish; pumas, also known as "cougars,"
"mountain lions" and "panthers"; rhinoceroses; sharks; snow leopards;
swine; tigers; wolves; horses; cows; goats; turkeys; sheep; pigs; steers;
bulls; donkeys; burros; ponies and any other members of the bovine or
equine animal families. This section shall not apply to any horse or pony
maintained or kept within the City of Paterson prior to May 1, 1984. A
person who maintained or kept a pony prior to May 1, 1984, may
subsequently maintain or keep a new pony or ponies, provided that the
number of ponies under his or her control when this subsection was
enacted does not increase. [Amended 11-10-1987 by Ord. No.
87-041; 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 99-052]
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or have in his or
her possession or under his or her control in the public areas of the City
of Paterson any snake unless the same is in a secure approved carrier
for the same. This section is intended to apply to those snakes whose
possession is not entirely prohibited pursuant to Subsections A and B
above. Snakes whose possession is not prohibited pursuant to
Subsections A and B above may be maintained within the dwelling unit
of the owner of said snake. For the purposes of this section, a public
area of the City of Paterson shall be deemed to include, but not be
limited to, streets, sidewalks, public parks, public buildings or any
retail, industrial or commercial establishment which is open on a
regular basis to members of the public. [Added 5-27-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-02575 ]
75.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection C a
Subsection D.
§ 121-43 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-43
109:297
§ 121-44. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
D. The provisions of Subsections A and B shall not apply to licensed
permitted uses such as pet shops, menageries, zoological gardens and
circuses if:
(1) Their location conforms to the provisions of the Zoning and Land
Development Ordinance of the City.76
(2) All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and are so maintained as to eliminate objectionable
odors.
(3) The animals are maintained in quarters so constructed as to
prevent their escape.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 121-43 PATERSON CODE § 121-44
109:298
ARTICLE VI
Bees and Beehives
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 18, Art. 4, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 121-45. Location of beehives restricted.
No person shall keep or maintain any bees or beehives in the City within
100 feet of any public building, street, roadway or the property line of any
public park or outdoor recreation area or keep or maintain any bees or
beehives within 100 feet of any dwelling house or place of residence other
than that of the owner or keeper of such bees.
§ 121-46. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-058]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 121-45 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-46
109:299

ARTICLE VII
Potentially Dangerous Dogs
[Adopted 5-23-1995 as Ord. No. 95-029]
§ 121-47. Special registration number, tag and license.
In the event that any dog, whose owner resides within the municipality, is
found to be a potentially dangerous dog pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-23, said
dog shall be issued a potentially dangerous dog registration number and a
red identification tag along with a City of Paterson potentially dangerous
dog license. Said license shall be issued to the owner only upon
demonstration that the owner has complied with any orders issued
regarding the potentially dangerous dog pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-16 et seq.
The last three digits of the potentially dangerous dog registration number
shall be the three-digit code assigned to the City of Paterson by the State
of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-16 et seq. Said license shall only be
issued by the City Clerk upon written notice from the Animal Control Officer
of compliance with the terms of this section.
§ 121-48. Reporting of violations.
The municipality shall designate and publicize a telephone number for
reporting violations of N.J.S.A. 14:19-16 et seq., including the suspected
presence of any potentially dangerous or vicious dogs.
§ 121-49. License fee.
The fee for a potentially dangerous dog license shall be $150.
§ 121-50. Conditions for issuance of license.
In order to obtain the issuance of a potentially dangerous dog registration
number and license, the owner must comply with the following conditions:
A. Maintain liability insurance in the amount determined by the Animal
Control Officer to cover any damage or injury caused by the potentially
dangerous dog. Said liability insurance shall contain the provision that
the City of Paterson be named as an additional insured for the sole
purpose of being notified upon the cancellation, termination or
expiration of said liability insurance policy.
B. Immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the potentially dangerous dog
will be kept and maintained, which has sound sides, top and bottom to
prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by climbing,
jumping or digging and is within a fence of at least six feet in height
separated by at least three feet from the confined area. The owner of a
potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the enclosure to prevent
the entry of the general public and to preclude the release or escape of
a potentially dangerous dog by an unknowing child or other person. All
potentially dangerous dogs shall be confined in the enclosure or, if
§ 121-47 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-50
109:301
taken out of the enclosure, securely muzzled and restrained with a
tether approved by the animal control officer and having a minimum
tensile strength sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the
potentially dangerous dog's movements to a radius of no more than
three feet from the owner and under the direct supervision of the
owner.
§ 121-50 PATERSON CODE § 121-50
109:302
ARTICLE VIII
Feeding of Wildlife
[Adopted 11-9-2005 by Ord. No. 05-07477]
§ 121-51. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife in
any public park or on any other property owned or operated by the City of
Paterson, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 121-52. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit or scatter any edible material with
the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife. Feeding does not
include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated.
§ 121-53. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by the City of Paterson, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers.)
§ 121-54. Enforcement.
§ 121-55. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250.
A. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
Municipal Officials of the City of Paterson.
B. Any person found to be in violation of this article shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
77.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 122, but was redesignated as
Ch. 121, Art. VIII, to maintain the organizational style of the Code.
§ 121-51 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-56
109:303
§ 121-56. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
§ 121-56 PATERSON CODE § 121-56
109:304
ARTICLE IX
Pet Waste
[Adopted 11-29-2005 by Ord. No. 05-08378]
§ 121-57. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
disposal of pet solid waste in the City of Paterson, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 121-58. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — The pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Any person who shall possess, maintain, house or
harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or not the
owner of such pet.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
§ 121-59. Requirement for disposal.
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owned or possessed by that person.
78.Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 123, but was redesignated as
Ch. 121, Art. IX, to maintain the organizational style of the Code.
§ 121-57 ALARM SYSTEMS § 121-60
109:305
§ 121-60. Exemptions.
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 121-61. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Police Department and
the Local Board of Health of the City of Paterson.
§ 121-62. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250.
§ 121-63. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this article.
§ 121-64. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
§ 121-60 PATERSON CODE § 121-64
109:306
Chapter 125
AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bazaars — See Ch. 129.
Garage sales and flea markets — See Ch. 249.
Motor vehicle junk dealers — See Ch. 287.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 367.
Close-out sales — See Ch. 395.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 399.
§ 125-1. Licenses for public auctioneers and auction sales required;
exceptions.
§ 125-2. Application for public auctioneer's license; contents;
accompanying items.
A. No person shall act as a public auctioneer and no person shall conduct
an auction sale, in whole or in part, or cause any public auction to be
held in the City without first applying for and obtaining the appropriate
license therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to sales conducted
by sheriffs, constables, sergeants at arms, executors, administrators,
assignees of insolvent debtors, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers or
public officers acting under judicial process nor to special one-day
auction sales as provided for in § 125-10 of this chapter.
A. Any person desiring a public auctioneer's license under this chapter
shall file an application, in writing and under oath, with the Licensing
Division on forms approved by the Council.
B. The application shall set forth the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, residence address and length of time of
continuous bona fide residence in the county immediately prior to
making the application, if any.
(2) Places where the applicant has resided for a period of three years
immediately prior to making the application.
(3) Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States.
(4) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime.
(5) The experience the applicant has had as an auctioneer or in the
auction business.
C. The application shall be accompanied by the following:
§ 121-64 ALARM SYSTEMS § 125-2
109:307
§ 125-3. Application for public auction sale license; contents;
accompanying items.
(1) A photograph, two inches by two inches, of the applicant taken
within one year of the application.
(2) The license fee prescribed in § 125-7C of this chapter, which fee
shall be returned if the license is denied.
A. Any person desiring a license to conduct a public auction sale shall file
an application, in writing and under oath, with the Licensing Division on
forms approved by the Council.
B. The application shall set forth the following information:
(1) If the applicant is a sole proprietor or partnership, the full name
and residence address of the proprietor or of all the partners.
(2) If the applicant is a corporation, the date and state of
incorporation, corporate name, business address and the name and
address of the registered agent.
(3) The street address and description of the premises where the
auction sale is to be held and the nature of the applicant's
occupancy of said premises, whether by lease or sublease, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy.
(4) The true name and address of the owner of the goods, wares and
merchandise to be offered for sale at the auction.
(5) The number of licenses which have been granted to the applicant to
conduct auction sales within the City within a period of two years
prior to the date of the filing of this application, and whether the
applicant has ever had such license denied or revoked.
(6) The experience the applicant has had in the auction business.
(7) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime.
C. The application shall be accompanied by the following:
(1) A complete and detailed inventory of the goods, wares and
merchandise to be offered for sale at the auction. Each item on said
inventory shall be described in such manner (by serial number,
distinctive markings, size, weight or other description) as to be
readily identifiable. Said inventory shall be attached to and become
a part of the application.
(2) The license fee, prescribed in § 125-8C of this chapter; provided,
however, that if the application is disapproved by the Council, the
Licensing Division shall retain $10 out of the license fee to defray
the cost of investigating the statements contained in the
§ 125-2 PATERSON CODE § 125-3
109:308
§ 125-4. Bond required.
§ 125-5. Public hearing for auction sale license; publication of
notice.
§ 125-6. Approval of application; reasons for denial.
application and the balance of the license fee shall be returned to
the applicant.
A. As a condition precedent to the granting of the license to engage in an
auction sale or to act as auctioneer, the applicant shall enter into and
deliver to the Licensing Division a bond in favor of the City with two
responsible freeholders as sureties or, in lieu thereof, a bond of a surety
company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of New
Jersey, in the sum of $5,000. Before issuance of the license, the
Licensing Division shall approve the sufficiency of the sureties, and the
Corporation Counsel shall approve the form of the bond. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
B. The surety bond described in the preceding subsection shall be
conditioned upon the due observance of all ordinances of the City
respecting the conduct and operation of auctioneers and the auction
business at any time during the continuance of such business. The bond
shall be for the benefit of any person who recovers a judgment against
any licensee under this chapter by reason of any damage sustained by
such person as a result of having purchased any article or commodity at
a public auction sale, conducted or operated by said licensee, due to
fraud or deceit practiced in advertising, selling or effecting such
purchase or sale. The surety bond shall be for the protection of persons
and property and for the preservation of the safety and property of the
City and its inhabitants and as may be required by any statute or City
ordinance or regulation.
A. The Licensing Division shall notify the applicant in writing of the date,
time and place of the public hearing before the Council on application
for a license to conduct a public auction sale.
B. The applicant shall then publish a notice of said application once a week
during two consecutive weeks next preceding the date of said hearing
in a daily newspaper published and circulated in the City. The notice
shall contain the name and address of the owner of the goods, wares
and merchandise to be the object of the sale, the general nature of the
goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale and the date, time
and place of the public hearing on such application. An affidavit of
publication of said notice shall be filed with the Licensing Division
before the date of the public hearing.
A. The Council may, after investigation and subject to the provisions of this
chapter, grant an auctioneer's license or a license to conduct an auction
sale.
§ 125-3 ALARM SYSTEMS § 125-6
109:309
§ 125-7. Issuance of auctioneer's license; term; fee; license
nontransferable.
§ 125-8. Issuance of auction sale license; term; fee; restrictions on
merchandise.
B. It may deny the application for any of the following reasons:
(1) Location and use of said property covered by the application does
not conform to all ordinances of the City and to all laws, rules and
regulations of the State of New Jersey or of any body, board or
commission thereof which may be applicable thereto.
(2) The applicant is not a proper or fit person to be licensed.
(3) The location of said public auction will be a hazard to life and
property.
(4) The operation of a public auction at the location sought will affect
the health, morals or safety of the public.
(5) The applicant has failed to meet the requirements of this chapter
relating to contents of the application or to the terms and
conditions for issuance of the license sought.
A. After approval of the application by the Council and the filing of the
bond required by § 125-4, the Licensing Division shall issue to the
individual auctioneer a license to which has been attached the
photograph submitted with the application as provided for in § 125-2.
B. The term of an auctioneer's license shall be for a period of one year or
any remaining portion thereof, commencing with June 1 and ending on
June 1 next following issuance thereof.
C. The license fee for an auctioneer's license shall be $220. [Amended
4-5-1983 by Ord. No. 83-015; 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-081;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-064]
D. The issued license shall be valid only to the person to whom issued and
is nontransferable.
A. After approval of the application by the Council and the filing of the
bond, required by § 125-4, the Licensing Division shall issue a license
authorizing the auction sale.
B. The term of the license shall not exceed 15 consecutive days, Sundays
and legal holidays excluded.
C. The license fee for conducting a public auction sale shall be $220.
[Amended 4-5-1983 by Ord. No. 83-021; 12-2-2003 by Ord. No.
03-081; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-064]
§ 125-6 PATERSON CODE § 125-8
109:310
§ 125-9. Public auction sale license restrictions.
§ 125-10. Special one-day permit to conduct auction sale;
limitations; fee. [Amended 4-5-1983 by Ord. No. 83-018; 12-2-2003
by Ord. No. 03-081; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-064]
The Licensing Division shall issue to auctioneers licensed by the City special
one-day permits to conduct an auction sale for one specific day, upon
payment of a fee of $110 for the day. No such special permit shall be issued
where the occasion of the sale shall run more than two days.
§ 125-11. Display of license.
Any license or permit issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously
displayed for public inspection at the place of business where the public
auction is being conducted.
§ 125-12. Conduct of sale.
D. The license shall authorize only the sale of the goods, wares and
merchandise described in the inventory attached to the application, and
only such goods, wares and merchandise shall be offered for sale on the
premises during the licensing period.
A. Except for special one-day licenses as hereinafter provided, not more
than one license to conduct an auction sale shall be granted to any
person within any two-year period nor shall such license be granted for
the same premises more than once within any two-year period.
B. A public auction sale license may not be renewed or extended.
A. The auction sale shall be conducted so as to dispose of merchandise to
the highest bidder.
B. No auctioneer shall:
(1) Accept other than bona fide bids.
(2) In describing goods that are being auctioned, make, directly or
indirectly, by verbal or written statement or advertisement, any
false representations as to the character, quality, condition, value
or ownership of said goods.
(3) Falsely represent that such goods are, in whole or in part, bankrupt
or insolvent stock or damaged goods or goods saved from fire.
(4) In any way or manner violate any of the provisions of the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
C. No person holding an auction sale license shall use or employ any
person as an auctioneer unless said person is the holder of a currently
issued auctioneer's license under this chapter, except as otherwise
provided in § 125-13.
§ 125-8 ALARM SYSTEMS § 125-13
109:311
§ 125-13. Helper's permit; fee; term; issuance.
§ 125-14. Hours and days of sale.
No auction sale shall be conducted on Sunday or between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays.
§ 125-15. Daily record of sales; open to inspection.
§ 125-16. Suspension or revocation of license or permit.
After due notice and hearing, any license or permit issued under this
chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the Council for the
violation of any provision of this chapter or upon conviction of a crime
involving moral turpitude.
§ 125-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
A. The auctioneer may employ one helper or assistant in the conduct of
any auction sale, provided that the helper has obtained either a helper's
permit or a temporary permit. The individual desiring a helper's permit
shall file an application with the Licensing Division and pay a fee of $10
upon the filing of said application. Pending action by the Council on
such application, the Licensing Division shall forthwith issue a helper's
temporary permit operative and valid only for a period of 45 days.
B. After investigation, the Council may approve the application for a
helper's permit which shall be issued by the Licensing Division and
shall be valid for a term of one year, commencing and terminating as in
the case of an auctioneer's license provided for in § 125-7B hereof. In
the event that a helper's permit is denied, the fee of $10 shall be
retained as a helper's temporary permit fee.
A. Each auctioneer conducting a sale under a license granted under this
chapter shall maintain a daily record of sales. The record shall include
the following information for all sales: the identity of each article sold,
by the same description as that contained in the inventory attached to
the application for a license to conduct an auction sale; and the full
name and address of the purchaser and the price paid.
B. During the auction sale, the sales record required by Subsection A of
this section shall be kept at the place of the auction sale and shall be
open to inspection by any member of the Council, Licensing Division,
Chief of Police, County Prosecutor or by any person duly authorized, in
writing, by any of the foregoing.
§ 125-13 PATERSON CODE § 125-17
109:312
Chapter 129
BAZAARS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 125.
Entertainment and shows — See Ch. 203.
Garage sales and flea markets — See Ch. 249.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 355.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 363.
§ 129-1. Definitions. [Amended 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 99-027]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAZAAR — Refers to an event which consists primarily of a temporary
market of shops or stalls, singly or in groups, where goods are displayed for
sale.
CARNIVAL — Refers to an event which consists primarily of kiddie rides,
merry-go-rounds or other amusement rides and games of chance for which
the winners generally receives a nonmonetary prize.
CIRCUS — Refers to an event which consists primarily of a variety of
performances involving special physical skills, wild animal acts and clowns.
FESTIVAL — Refers to an event which consists primarily of a celebration
marked by special observances, including programs of cultural events or
entertainment.
PICNICS — Refers to an event which consists primarily of the preparation
and eating of food outdoors or under a temporary structure.
§ 129-2. License required. [Amended 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 99-027]
No person shall conduct a bazaar, carnival, circus, festival or picnic where
an admission fee is charged or goods or food is sold without first having
obtained a license as hereafter provided in this chapter. A license under this
chapter shall not be required for the following events:
A. Weddings.
B. The annual Easter egg hunt.
C. Jazz festivals and symphonies.
D. Religious services.
E. Family reunions.
F. House tours.
§ 125-17 BAZAARS § 129-3
129:313
§ 129-3. Application for license; qualifications; issuance of license.
[Amended 9-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-051; 3-3-1998 by Ord. No.
98-102; 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 99-027]
A. Application for a license shall be addressed to the Council and filed in
the office of the Licensing Division on forms approved by the Council.
The application shall be accompanied by the license fee prescribed in
§ 129-4 hereof.
B. No license shall be granted to any applicant who has been convicted
three times of violating this chapter, nor shall a license be granted to
conduct an event regulated under this chapter where the proposed
location of the event is the lot located at Memorial Drive and West
Broadway, Block G0820, Lot 10. [Amended 11-23-1999 by Ord. No.
99-059]
C. No license shall be issued unless:
(1) The applicant has complied with all applicable state laws and
ordinances of the city, including but not limited to those contained
in Chapter 363 of the Code of Paterson.
(2) Proper sanitary conditions exist and will be maintained on the
premises to be used.
(3) The applicant ensures that no banners, signs, flags or other
decorations are posted on any perimeter fencing surrounding the
location for which the license is issued in such a fashion that said
banners, signs, flags or other decorations shall obstruct in any
fashion a clear line of sight onto the property.
D. Each of the five types of events regulated under this chapter may only
be conducted once within a twelve-month period at any one location, so
although there may be up to five events at any one location. each event
would be of a different type, so for example, once one circus takes place
at a given location, another circus may not be conducted at the same
location until 12 months have passed. No such license shall be issued
for more than five consecutive days. This prohibition shall not apply to
licenses issued for indoor locations located completely within
permanent structures.
E. A license for a bazaar must be applied for and issued not more than 12
months prior to the first day of the scheduled event. In the event that
more than one applicant shall request the use of an outside location
pursuant to Subsection D above, the applicant first in time, as
evidenced by the City Clerk's record of receipt of the application, shall
have the prior right to said location.
F. Required proofs.
(1) After approval of the complete application for a license by the
Council, the Licensing Division shall issue the license subject to
§ 129-3 PATERSON CODE § 129-3
129:314
§ 129-4. License fee. [Amended 4-5-1983 by Ord. No. 83-019;
11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-069]
The license fee for a bazaar shall be $150 per day.
§ 129-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 133
BILLIARD AND POOL ROOMS, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices — See
Ch. 117.
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 179.
§ 133-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
receipt of the following no later than two weeks prior to the
scheduled event:
(a) Proof of adequate insurance coverage in the form of a
certificate of insurance naming the City of Paterson as an
additional insured in the amounts required under the Code of
Paterson § 363-12(B) or in an amount equivalent thereto.
(b) Proof of adequate security and emergency medical personnel
in the form of employment contracts or equivalent proof
satisfactory to the Chief of Police or his delegate. The applicant
is solely responsible for the cost of providing said personnel.
(c) Proof that all other city ordinances and required permits or
licenses have been complied with.
(2) Failure to provide any one or more of the above items shall cause
the Division of Licensing to withhold issuance of a license, despite
prior city council approval of same.
§ 129-3 BAZAARS § 133-1
129:315
PUBLIC BILLIARD ROOM or PUBLIC POOL ROOM — Refers to any place
open to the public and containing one or more billiard or pool tables.
§ 133-2. License required.
No person shall operate a public billiard or pool room unless he first obtains
a license therefor as hereinafter provided in this chapter.
§ 133-3. Limitation on number of licenses outstanding; exceptions.
§ 133-4. Requirements for issuance of license.
Every applicant for a license shall be at least 18 years of age and a citizen
of the United States. The applicant shall be the actual owner or proprietor
of the business for which he seeks a license.
§ 133-5. Proximity to church or school as grounds for denial of
license.
No license shall be granted under this chapter covering any new location
within 200 feet of the property line of a school or church edifice. Said 200
feet shall be measured in the normal way that a pedestrian would properly
walk from the nearest entrance of said church or school to the nearest
entrance of the premises sought to be licensed.
§ 133-6. Application for license; contents; fee required; notice of
intention for initial application.
A. No more than five licenses under this chapter shall be issued and
outstanding at the same time.
B. When the licenses issued and outstanding under this chapter shall be
fewer than five, additional licenses may be granted, but only in
sufficient numbers so that the number of licenses issued and
outstanding at the same time does not exceed five.
C. Nothing in the provisions of Subsections A and B shall apply to:
(1) The renewal of public billiard or pool room licenses which were
issued and outstanding as of April 17, 1961; or
(2) The transfer from person to person or from place to place of public
billiard or pool room licenses which were issued and outstanding as
of April 17, 1961, or to the renewal of licenses so transferred.
A. The application shall be addressed to the Council and filed with the
Licensing Division on forms furnished by said Licensing Division and
approved by the Council. The application shall be signed by the
applicant and shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the applicant.
§ 133-1 PATERSON CODE § 133-6
129:316
§ 133-7. License fee; term of license. [Amended 4-5-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-020]
§ 133-8. Issuance of license.
The license shall be issued by the Licensing Division after approval of the
application by the Council.
(2) The residence of the applicant.
(3) The date and place of birth.
(4) The place where the licensed business is to be conducted.
(5) The length of residence in the City.
(6) Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States.
(7) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime or
misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each such crime or
misdemeanor and date and place of conviction.
B. The application shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed in § 133-7.
If the application is rejected or withdraw, the sum of $40 of said fee
shall be returned to the applicant.
C. Notice of intention to apply for license.
(1) Whenever any applicant shall apply for the issuance of an initial
license, the applicant shall forthwith cause to be published a notice
of his intention to apply for a license to operate or maintain a public
billiard or pool room.
(2) Said notice of intention shall state the following:
(a) The name and address of the applicant.
(b) The address of the premises where the public billiard or pool
room is to be maintained.
(3) Said notice shall be published for two consecutive weeks, once
each week, in a newspaper published and circulated in the City.
(4) Proof of such publication shall be filed with the Licensing Division
prior to consideration of the application by the Council.
A. The license fee for each public billiard or pool room shall be $220 per
year or any part thereof. [Amended 11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-070;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-062]
B. The term of the license shall be for the calendar year. Each license shall
expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
§ 133-6 BAZAARS § 133-9
129:317
§ 133-9. Display of license.
The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the premises licensed
under this chapter.
§ 133-10. Closing hours.
Every public billiard or pool room licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall close no later than 1:00 a.m. and shall remain closed until at
least 7:00 a.m. No billiards or pool shall be played between these hours.
§ 133-11. Lawful operation of premises; minors excluded.
Each licensee shall maintain good order and observe existing laws and shall
not harbor or allow persons under 18 years of age to congregate or play in
the licensed premises.
§ 133-12. Transfer of license; fee; approval.
Upon application made therefor, in accordance with § 133-6, a license may
be transferred from person to person or from one location of business to
another upon payment of a fee of $25 after approval of the transfer by the
Council.
§ 133-13. Death of licensee.
In the event of the death of a licensee, the license held by him may be
extended to his executor, administrator or trustee and may be renewed or
transferred by said executor, administrator or trustee.
§ 133-14. Revocation of license; suspension pending hearing.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 133-15, any license issued under
this chapter may be revoked by the Council for cause, after notice and
hearing, and pending such hearing, the license may be suspended.
§ 133-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 134
BINS FOR DONATED ITEMS
§ 133-9 PATERSON CODE § 134-1
129:318
§ 134-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIN FOR DONATED ITEMS or DONATION BIN — An enclosed receptacle
whose exterior length, width and breadth are each greater than two feet,
or whose exterior volume is greater than 10 cubic feet, designed to be used
exclusively for the donation and the temporary storage of clothing or other
donated goods.
§ 134-2. Permit generally required.
Any person seeking to place, use, employ or maintain a donation bin, as
defined in this chapter, in the City of Paterson must first apply for and obtain
a donation bin permit from the Director of Public Works or his designee, for
each such container.
§ 134-3. Permit fee and duration.
§ 134-4. Contents of initial application, renewal application, and
displayed permit.
A. A fee of $250 shall be required for the said permit, to be collected by
the Director of Public Works or his designee, to authorize placement of
the donation bin for a period of one year.
B. The permit shall be renewable, upon application to the Director of
Public Works or his designee, for an annual fee of $250.
A. A completed initial application for a donation bin permit shall (in
fulfillment of the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 et seq.) state the
following:
(1) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible, including not only the street address, but also a precise
description of where on the property the donation bin would be
located.
(2) The manner in which the applicant anticipates any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the bona fide office of
any person or entity that owns the bin, and any person or entity
that may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin.
(4) Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his or
her property.
§ 134-1 BAZAARS § 134-4
129:319
(5) The applicant's certification that the donation bin shall not be
placed within 100 yards of any place that stores large amounts of,
or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases, or in any other
location that would constitute a safety hazard.
(6) If the applicant is a limited liability company or corporation, the
application shall also include the name and address of the
company's registered agent as well as a contact person.
B. A completed renewal application for a donation bin permit shall (in
fulfillment of the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 et seq.) state the
following:
(1) The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible, and,
if the applicant for renewal intends to move it, the new location
where the bin would be situated after the renewal is granted and
written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
property.
(2) The manner in which the applicant for renewal has used, sold, or
dispersed any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have been
allocated or spent, and any changes the person anticipates it may
make in these processes during the period covered by the renewal.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the bona fide office of
any person or entity that owns the bin, and any person or entity
that shared or profited from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, and of any persons or entities that may do so
during the period covered by the renewal.
(4) The certification of the applicant for renewal that the donation bin
shall not be placed within 100 yards of any place that stores large
amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or gases, or in
any other location that would constitute a safety hazard.
C. The donation bin shall prominently display the donation bin permit
issued by the Department of Public Works, which (in fulfillment of the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 et seq.) shall state the following:
(1) The permit number and its date of expiration.
(2) The name, and address and telephone number of the person and/or
organization that owns the bin, and of any other organization that
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin;
(3) In cases when any entity other than the person or organization that
owns the bin may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and
easily understandable manner, indicating that clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be
§ 134-4 PATERSON CODE § 134-4
129:320
§ 134-5. Placement of clothing donation bins, maintenance and
tonnage requirements.
§ 134-6. Investigation of complaints, notice of violation, and right
of hearing.
The Department of Public Works shall receive and investigate, within 30
days, any complaints from the public about the donation bin. Whenever
it appears to the Department of Public Works that a person and/or
organization has engaged in, or is engaging in any act or practice in
violation of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 et seq. (the substantive portions of which
have been recapitulated above as § 134-4 of this chapter). The person and/
or organization that placed the bin shall be issued a notice of violation via
regular and certified mail to the address provided in the application form,
and the said notice of violation shall also be affixed to the exterior of the bin
itself. The notice of violation shall state that if the violation is not rectified
within 45 days of the posting of the notice of violation, the bin will be seized
or removed at the expense of the person and/or organization who placed the
bin, any clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be sold at a
shared, or given entirely to, an entity other than the person or
organization that owns the bin, and identifying all such entities
which may share or profit from such donations.
(4) A statement, consistent with the information provided in the most
recent application or renewal application, indicating the manner in
which the person anticipates any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent.
A. All clothing donation bins must be placed on the property of the person
or organization who owns the bin, or with the express written consent
of the owner of the property.
B. No clothing donation bin shall be placed on public property or on a
public street or sidewalk.
C. All owners of clothing donation bins shall be required to maintain such
bin in a sanitary condition.
D. All owners of clothing donation bins shall be required to provide a
monthly maintenance schedule that includes the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of any person or
company responsible for the maintenance of clothing bin; and
(2) The frequency with which the clothing bin is cleaned and
maintained.
E. Additionally, all owners of clothing donation bins shall submit quarterly
tonnage reports to the municipal recycling coordinator.
§ 134-4 BAZAARS § 134-6
129:321
public auction or otherwise disposed of, and a substantial monetary penalty
(of a specific amount to be stated in the notice of violation) will be assessed
pursuant to § 134-7 of this chapter.
§ 134-7. Seizure, violations and penalties and disqualification.
In the event that any person or organization who placed such a bin in
violation of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 (the substantive portion of which has been
recapitulated above as § 134-4 of this chapter) does not, within 45 days of
the posting of the notice of violation, rectify the violation, any or all of the
following steps may be taken:
§ 134-8. Restoration of eligibility after disqualification.
§ 134-9. Existing clothing donation bins.
A. Seizure. The Department of Public Works may seize the bin, remove it
or have it removed at the expense of any person or organization who
placed the bin, sell it at public auction, or otherwise dispose of any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds from
such sales shall be paid to the City Department of Finance.
B. Penalties. In addition to seizure of the bin, the Department of Public
Works may bring a civil action in the Superior Court or Municipal Court
to enforce the penalty previously set forth in the notice of violation,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.63, for up to $20,000 for each violation,
with a minimum penalty in the amount of $2,000. Any penalty monies
collected shall be paid to the City Department of Finance.
C. Disqualification. The person or organization who placed the bin shall be
disqualified from eligibility to place, use, employ or maintain a clothing
donation bin in the City of Paterson.
A. A person or organization disqualified from placing, using, employing or
maintaining a donation clothing bin by violating the provisions of this
chapter may apply to the Department of Public Works to have that
person or organization's eligibility restored. The Department of Public
Works may restore the said eligibility where both of the following
conditions are met:
(1) The seized bin had been placed with the intent of promoting the
public interest; and
(2) The applicant had undertaken a good faith effort to comply with the
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and
regulations, with no fraudulent intentions.
A. All clothing donation bins existing on the effective date of this chapter
shall move to comply with the provisions of this chapter within 30 days
of the effective date of this chapter.
§ 134-6 PATERSON CODE § 134-9
129:322
Chapter 137
BLOCK PARTIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food vending vehicles — See Ch. 243.
Garage sales and flea markets — See Ch. 249.
Noise — See Ch. 337.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 355.
§ 137-1. Conditions for temporary street closing; permit fee.
In accordance with the provisions of § 137-2, a street may be temporarily
closed for a block party or any recreational event to be conducted within an
area not exceeding one (1) city block under the following conditions:
B. Any existing clothing donation bin that fails to comply with the terms of
this section shall be made subject to the terms of §§ 134-6 and 134-7 of
this chapter.
A. No objection has been raised to the proposed block party or
recreational event by more than ten percent (10%) of the residents of
the properties fronting upon the street or portion thereof to be
temporarily closed.
B. The event is sponsored solely by and for the benefit of the residents
fronting on the street to be temporarily closed. The event may be for
commercial or advertising purposes or profit.
C. The application for a permit is filed by a bona fide resident over the age
of seventeen (17) of a property located on the street or portion thereof
which is to be temporarily closed. Such resident may file through any
civic or cultural organization or association of which the applicant is a
member. The resident must be listed on the application as per
§ 137-4B(1) herein.
D. A fee of thirty dollars ($30.) shall be paid for a permit upon approval of
the same by the Director of the Department of Public Works unless said
permit is for commercial or advertising purposes or profit in which case
a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.) shall be paid for same.
E. The persons, organization or association to whom the permit is issued
shall be liable for all losses, damages or injuries sustained by any
person, whether a participant or spectator at the block party or
recreational event, whether or not said losses, damages or injuries arise
by reason of the negligence of the person, persons or organization to
whom such permit shall have been issued. The Department of Public
Works shall require the applicant to enter into a hold-harmless
agreement, which agreement shall provide that the applicant shall
agree to save and hold the city harmless of and from any and all
§ 134-9 BLOCK PARTIES § 137-1
137:323
§ 137-2. Notice to residents; proof of notification.
The applicant for the permit shall at the time of the application provide an
affidavit establishing proof of notice upon residents of properties fronting
upon the street or portion thereof to be closed. Said notice shall consist
of a copy of the application for the permit for a temporary street closing
and a notice to the resident that any objections to said temporary street
closing should be made directly to the Director of Public Works with a
copy to the applicant. Notice must be provided to the residents of the
properties in question by the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to the
scheduled event. Said notice may be served either by handing a copy to
the resident or residents or by leaving a copy thereof at the usual place of
abode of said tenant, property owner or resident. For the purposes of notice,
multiple-family dwellings may be served by service upon a homeowners'
association if a recognized association exists for the multifamily dwelling. If
no homeowners' association exists, each unit/apartment in the multifamily
dwelling place shall be considered one (1) residence and require individual
notice. The applicant shall submit an affidavit that all required notices have
been duly served.
§ 137-3. Objections to issuance of permit; procedure.
§ 137-4. Permit required for closing of street; contents of
application; procedures.
obligations and liabilities which may arise from the temporary street
closing which represents the subject matter of the application. The
applicant shall further agree as part of these provisions to hold
harmless the city and to defend at his own cost and expense any claims
or lawsuits instituted by third parties, which obligations or liabilities
might otherwise exist or be asserted against the city. The Department
of Public Works shall further have the option to require that, prior to
the issuance of a permit or commencement of the temporary street
closing for commercial advertising purposes or profit, the applicant
submit evidence of liability insurance covering damages to property
and injuries to members of the general public arising out of the
temporary street closing in such amounts as may be from time to time
determined by the Director of Public Works.
A. All residents of properties fronting upon the street to be temporarily
closed who have been duly noticed in accordance with § 137-2 above
must submit their objections to the proposed temporary street closing,
in writing, to the Director of Public Works within five (5) calendar days
after the date of service of said notice.
B. In no event shall a permit be issued by the Director of Public Works for
the temporary closing of any street until expiration of the period within
which objections may be submitted.
§ 137-1 PATERSON CODE § 137-4
137:324
A. No person may temporarily close or attempt to temporarily close any
street within the city to motor vehicle traffic without first obtaining a
permit from the Director of Public Works. Any activity conducted within
a closed street shall be conducted strictly in accordance with the
conditions specified in the permit issued by the Director of Public
Works.
B. Applications for a permit for temporary street closing shall be made
upon forms provided by the Director of Public Works and shall contain
all of the following information:
(1) The name, residence and business addresses and phone number of
the organization or association sponsoring the temporary street
closing. If the sponsor is an organization or association, the
application shall contain the names, residence and business
addresses and phone numbers of the head of the organization and
all persons:
(a) Having an interest or position of management or control in the
organization.
(b) Who are or will be engaged in organizing, promoting,
controlling, managing or soliciting participation in the event
occasioning the temporary street closing.
(2) The date or dates and beginning and ending hours of the temporary
street closing.
(3) A description of the block to be closed by use of street numbers,
street name, intersecting street, etc.
(4) The estimated number of persons who will participate in the block
party or recreational event for which the closing is sought.
(5) The purpose of the street closing.
(6) Whether parking is requested to be restricted or prohibited during
the closing.
(7) Whether any sound amplification equipment is proposed to be used
and, if so, a description of the sound information equipment. A
separate loudspeaker permit is required if sound amplification is
used during the period the street is closed.
(8) Whether or not charity, gratuity or offerings will be solicited or
accepted or food, beverages or any merchandise will be sold.
(9) Affidavit attesting to proof of service on those owners, residents
and/or tenants of properties fronting upon the street or portion
thereof to be temporarily closed in accordance with this chapter.
§ 137-4 BLOCK PARTIES § 137-4
137:325
§ 137-5. Barricades; litter collection; compliance with other
regulations; restrictions; approval of Chief of Police and Fire Chief.
§ 137-6. Standards for issuance of permits; waiver of standards.
(10) Any other information which the Director of Public Works considers
reasonably necessary in order to carry out the provisions of this
section.
C. An application for a street closing shall be filed in triplicate not less
than ten (10) working days before the scheduled date of the temporary
street closing. Failure to file within this period is sufficient ground for
denial of the permit.
A. The Director of Public Works shall provide and remove such barricades
as are necessary. Applicants shall provide for the collection and removal
of all garbage and litter arising out of the temporary street closing in
accordance with the specifications of the Department of Public Works.
B. Prior to the issuance of a permit, applicants must comply with all
applicable state laws and city ordinances, including but not limited to
laws and Ordinances governing charitable solicitations, sale of food,
beverages and merchandise, the use of combustibles, and loudspeaker
permits.
C. Any permit issued under this section shall contain conditions
reasonably necessary to minimize the hazards to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and the public health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the City of Paterson.
D. The temporary closing of a street may be authorized by permit between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. during any one (1) day of the week.
In no event shall a street closing occur for any one (1) block more than
once during a calender year period.
E. Any application for a permit under this section shall be forwarded to the
Chiefs of the Fire and Police Divisions to ensure compliance with the
standards set forth in this chapter. No permit for temporary street
closing shall issue unless approvals are obtained from the Chief of
Police and the Fire Chief.
A. The Director of Public Works shall issue a permit authorizing the
temporary closing of a street when, based upon the information
contained in the permit and any other information he considers relevant
and reports received from the Fire and Police Divisions, he finds that all
of the following circumstances exist:
(1) The applicant has not made any false or misleading statement of
material fact in the application for a permit or any other document
required by the Director of Public Works.
§ 137-4 PATERSON CODE § 137-6
137:326
§ 137-7. Notice of issuance or denial of permit; appeal procedure;
hearing; waiver of time limitations.
(2) The application complies with the conditions set forth in § 137-1
and the applicant has paid in advance any fee required and agrees
to the conditions imposed in the permit.
(3) The time, duration and extent of the temporary street closing will
not substantially disrupt the orderly and safe movement of other
traffic.
(4) The temporary street closing will not prevent the diversion of so
great a number of police officers to areas contiguous to the closing
as to prevent normal police protection within the city.
(5) The concentration of persons will not unduly interfere with proper
fire and police protection or ambulance services to areas
contiguous to the street to be closed.
(6) The temporary street closing will not unduly interfere with the
orderly operation of parks, hospitals, churches, schools or other
public and quasi-public institutions within the city.
(7) The applicant will provide reasonable means by posting notices in
prominent areas of the street to be closed at least forty-eight (48)
hours in advance of the temporary street closing for residents or
tenants fronting on the street to be closed and all persons
participating in the street closing of the terms of the permit and all
applicable laws and ordinances.
(8) The applicant has complied with the standards set forth in and
fulfilled the requirements of §§ 137-1 through 137-4, inclusive, of
this chapter.
B. The Director of Public Works may waive one (1) or more of the
requirements of Subsection A of this section if he finds that such waiver
will not affect public safety or convenience. The Director of Public
Works may not, under any circumstances, waive the necessary
approvals of the Fire and Police Divisions or the other requirements of
§ 137-1, 137-2, 137-3, 137-4 or 137-5.
A. The Director of Public Works shall furnish the applicant with written
notice of the issuance or denial of a permit within two (2) working days
after expiration of the period for objections or as soon as practicable if
the application is made less than ten (10) days in advance of the
proposed date of the proposed street closing. If a permit is denied, the
Director of Public Works shall state the reason for the denial, in writing.
B. An applicant may appeal, in writing, the denial of a permit to the Public
Safety Director within two (2) working days of the date of denial by the
Director of Public Works. The Public Safety Director shall set a hearing
on the appeal within two (2) working days of receipt of the appeal. After
§ 137-6 BLOCK PARTIES § 137-7
137:327
§ 137-8. Revocation of permit; notification.
Any permit for a temporary street closing may be revoked by the Director
of Public Works, the Chief of the Police Division or the Chief of the Fire
Division at any time when, by reason of emergency, disaster, disorder, traffic
conditions, violation of the conditions of the permit or undue burden on
public services, he determines that the health, safety and welfare of the city
requires said revocation. Notice of revocation of a permit shall be delivered,
in writing, to at least one (1) person named upon the permit by personal
service or by certified mail, or if the temporary closing has commenced,
notice may be given orally or in writing, by personal contact or service or
by telephone to at least one (1) person named upon the permit.
§ 137-9. Warning signs to be posted.
The Director of Public Works shall post the proper warning signs of any
temporary street closing in any and all streets or portion of streets
connected with the closing.
§ 137-10. Violations and penalties.79
Any person or association who closes or attempts to close a street to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic without first having obtained a permit from
the Director of Public Works shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.), imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days
or a period of community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any
combination thereof.
Chapter 141
BOARDING HOMES FOR CHILDREN
holding a hearing, the Public Safety Director may reverse, affirm or
modify in any respect the decision of the Director of Public Works.
C. The Director of Public Works may waive the time limitations in § 137-4
for filing an application, and the Public Safety Director may waive the
time limitations in this section for filing an appeal if either of them finds
that unusual circumstances or good cause exists and that no
unreasonable burden upon the city or its citizens will be created by any
waiver. No time limit may be waived upon the initial application which
would shorten the time period for or deny the right of objection to
tenants, residents or property owners fronting on the street or portion
thereof to be temporarily closed.
D. The Director of Public Works shall forward a copy of the permit to the
City Clerk, who shall keep the same on file for inspection.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 137-7 PATERSON CODE § 141-1
141:328
§ 141-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARDING HOME FOR CHILDREN or BOARDING HOME — Includes any
privately owned dwelling or part of a dwelling or other place where one (1)
or more children under sixteen (16) years of age are placed or regularly
received, for any period of time, unattended by parent, adult relative or
legal guardian, and foster parent care is provided, excepting those places
which are operated, maintained, licensed or regulated or in which a child is
placed, pursuant to statute, by:
§ 141-2. License required; posting of license.
§ 141-3. License fee; term; transferability.
§ 141-4. Suspension or revocation of license; hearing.81
A license issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the
Health Division, after notice and hearing, for a violation of this chapter
or any rules or regulations promulgated under this chapter or when the
judgment of the Health Division is such that the further operation of the
A. The State Board of Child Welfare.
B. The State Board of Education.
C. Any aid society of a properly organized and accredited church or
fraternal society organized for aid and relief to its members.
D. Any charitable society incorporated under the laws of this state having
as one (1) of its objects the prevention of cruelty to children or the care
and protection of children.80
A. No person shall operate or maintain a boarding home for children
without first obtaining a license from the Health Division.
B. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the licensed
premises.
A. The license fee for each establishment licensed under this chapter or
the renewal thereof shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.).
B. Each license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire one
(1) year from the date of issuance thereof.
C. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable either
between persons or premises.
80.Editor's Note: Former Sec. 13-5, Incorporation by reference of Chapter VI of the State
Sanitary Code, which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of
Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 141-1 BOARDING HOMES FOR CHILDREN § 141-4
141:329
boarding home for children is not conducive to the well-being of the
children.
§ 141-5. Violations and penalties.82
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a period of community
service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 143
BOATING AND BATHING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boat rentals — See Ch. 145.
§ 143-1. Restrictions upstream from Great Falls.
No person shall bathe nor engage in any type of boating activity whatsoever
for an area one-fourth (1/4) mile upstream of the Great Falls.
§ 143-2. Signs to be posted.
The Director of the Department of Public Works is directed to post a large
sign on the McBride Avenue bridge upstream of the dam and two (2) smaller
signs one-fourth (1/4) mile upstream of the Great Falls, one (1) on each side
of the river bank, informing the public of such prohibition.
§ 143-3. Violations and penalties.83
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof.
Chapter 145
BOAT RENTALS
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 141-4 PATERSON CODE § 145-1
143:330
§ 145-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOAT RENTALS — Refers to the business of letting, renting, hiring or
chartering out any sailboat, rowboat, canoe, outboard canoe or any other
boat to be used and operated on the waters of the Passaic River or any other
body of water within the city.
§ 145-2. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of boat rentals within the city
without having first obtained a license as hereinafter provided in this
chapter.
§ 145-3. Application for license; contents.
§ 145-4. License fee; term.
§ 145-5. Investigation of equipment; report.
A. Application for a license shall be addressed to the Council and filed in
the office of the Licensing Division on forms approved by the Council.
The application shall be accompanied by the license fee prescribed in
§ 145-4 hereof.
B. The application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name and permanent home address of the applicant.
(2) If the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime or disorderly
persons offense and, if so, when, what crime or offense and in what
court.
(3) The place where the boat rental business is to be operated.
(4) Inventory of the equipment offered for hire, rent or charter.
A. The fee for a license issued under this chapter shall be twenty-five
dollars ($25.).
B. Each license issued shall be for a term of one (1) calendar year or any
remaining portion thereof. All such licenses shall terminate on
December 1 of the year in which issued.
A. After the application is filed, a designated inspector of the Licensing
Division shall inspect and examine, for soundness and safety, the
boating equipment to be used in the boat rental business. After
inspection, the inspector shall file a report of his findings with the
Council and notify the applicant of the filing thereof.
§ 145-1 BOAT RENTALS § 145-5
145:331
§ 145-6. Issuance of license.
After the application is approved by the Council, the boat rental license shall
be issued by the Licensing Division.
§ 145-7. Minors.
No licensee or his agent shall:
§ 145-8. Life preservers to be supplied by licensee.
Every licensee shall furnish each occupant of a rented boat with an
approved life preserver.
§ 145-9. Suspension or revocation of license.
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the Council for good and sufficient cause after notice to the licensee and
hearing.
§ 145-10. Violations and penalties.84
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof.
B. If the inspector has found any unsound or unsafe conditions in the
boating equipment, the license or renewal of a license shall not issue.
The applicant shall be given reasonable opportunity to repair or correct
any such reported unsound or unsafe conditions; and when the
inspector verifies the removal of these unsound or unsafe conditions, he
shall report such findings to the Council.
A. Let, rent or charter out any of his boats to any minor under the age of
eighteen (18).
B. Permit any minor under the age of eighteen (18) to use or occupy his
boats unless accompanied by another person eighteen (18) years or
older.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 145-5 PATERSON CODE § 145-10
145:332
Chapter 149
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire safety — See Ch. 215.
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
§ 145-10 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 145-10
149:333

ARTICLE I
Removal of Brush, Weeds and Debris From Yards and Lots
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 13, Art. 13, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 149-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BRUSH, WEEDS AND DEBRIS — Refers to and includes brush, ragweed
or weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage, trash or other debris.
MUNICIPAL OFFICER — Includes the Health Officer or his designee, the
Director of the Department of Public Works or his designee, the Fire Code
Official or his designee and the Director of the Division of Community
Improvements or his designee.[Added 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 89-016]
§ 149-2. Findings.
The presence upon any lot, yard, land or premises lying within the corporate
limits of the city of brush, weeds and debris, as defined by this Article, is
hereby declared and determined to be detrimental to public health, safety
and general welfare and likely to present a fire hazard.
§ 149-3. Notice to remove; contents of notice. [Amended 4-11-1989
by Ord. No. 89-016]
§ 149-4. Service of notice.
Service of any such notice as prescribed by § 149-3 shall be made upon the
owner, lessee, tenant or occupant either personally or by posting said notice
A. Whenever a municipal officer shall find upon any such lot, yard, land or
premises any brush, weeds or debris to such an extent as, in his
opinion, is inimical to the public health, safety or general welfare of the
city or to such an extent as to constitute a fire hazard, he shall give or
cause to be given written notice to the owner, lessee, tenant or
occupant of said premises to remove therefrom such brush, weeds or
debris.
B. The notice specified in Subsection A of this section shall:
(1) Require the removal of such brush, weeds and debris within ten
(10) days after service of the notice as provided in § 149-4; and
(2) Advise the person to whom the notice is directed that failure to
accomplish such removal within the time stated therein will result
in the removal thereof by or under the direction of the municipal
officer and such other penalties and consequences as are provided
by this Article.
§ 149-1 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 149-4
149:335
on said premises and mailing, by certified mail, a copy of said notice to the
owner at his last known post office address, if any. Service of the notice
by posting and mailing shall be deemed completed upon such posting and
mailing.
§ 149-5. Failure to comply with notice.
Any owner, lessee, tenant or occupant, as the case may be, who fails or
neglects to comply with the notice described in § 149-3 and duly served as
provided in § 149-4 hereof and within the time prescribed therein shall be
subject to the penalty prescribed in § 149-7.
§ 149-6. Abatement by city; costs; lien.85
Whenever, after due notice has been given as provided in §§ 149-3 and
149-4 hereof, the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant shall have refused or
neglected to remove such brush, weeds or debris in the manner and within
the time provided for in said notice, the municipal officer shall cause the
same to be removed, and the cost of such removal shall be certified to the
Council by such officer. If, upon examination of such officer's certificate, the
Council shall find the same to be correct, such certified cost shall forthwith
become a charge against said lands and constitute a lien upon said lands,
which shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes next to
be assessed and levied upon said lands. The amount of such charge or lien
shall bear interest at the same rate and shall be collected and enforced by
the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 149-7. Violations and penalties.86
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 149-4 PATERSON CODE § 149-7
149:336
ARTICLE II
Removal of Grass, Weeds and Impediments Abutting Sidewalks
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 23, Art. 8, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 149-8. Duty to remove after notification; service of notice.
§ 149-9. Failure to comply with notice.
Any owner or tenant, as the case may be, who fails or neglects to comply
with the notice duly served as provided in § 149-8 of this Article and within
the time prescribed therein shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in
§ 149-11 of this Article.
§ 149-10. Abatement by city; costs; lien.
If the owner or tenant of any such premises shall neglect or refuse to
remove the grass, weeds and impediments as required in § 149-8, it shall
be the duty of the Streets Division Superintendent to have the grass, weeds
and impediments removed forthwith. The Streets Division Superintendent
shall thereupon certify the cost of removal to the Department of Finance
which shall examine such certificate and, if found to be correct, shall cause
such cost to be charged against the land abutting or bordering upon such
sidewalks, and the amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien and tax
upon such real estate and be added to and be part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lands and shall bear interest at the same rate
as other taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as
other taxes.
§ 149-11. Violations and penalties.87
Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein, any person who
violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.), by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. The owner or tenant in possession of lands abutting or bordering upon
the sidewalks of public streets or public places in the city shall remove
all grass, weeds and impediments from the abutting sidewalks within
three (3) days after notice to remove the same given by the Streets
Division Superintendent.
B. Service of such notice shall be made upon the owner or tenant either
personally or by registered or certified mail.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 149-8 BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS § 149-11
149:337
Chapter 153
BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous and unfit buildings — See Ch. 157.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 161.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 165.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 169.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
§ 153-1. License required; exceptions.
§ 153-2. Application for license; contents of application;
investigation; issuance of license; conditions for denial of
application.
A. No person shall engage in the business of constructing, erecting,
altering, repairing, restoring, reroofing, residing, moving or
demolishing the whole or any part of buildings or structures or engage
in the construction or repair of sidewalks or driveways or engage in the
construction and installation of swimming pools or engage in the
business of erecting or altering signs, for any of which a permit is
required by the applicable ordinances of the city, until such person shall
be licensed by the Department of Community Development.
B. The owner or occupant of a building or structure who performs any of
the activities set forth in Subsection A above on such buildings or
structures shall not be required to be licensed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, provided that such owner or occupant
performs and supervises his own work.
C. This chapter shall not be applicable to builders of new homes who are
registered with the State Department of Community Affairs pursuant to
Laws of 1977, Chapter 467 (N.J.S.A. 46:3B-1 et seq.), effective
September 3, 1978.
A. Applications for licensing as required by § 153-1 above shall be made to
the Community Development Director or his designee, under oath on a
form furnished by him or his designee.
B. The application shall set forth the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, business name and business address.
(2) Whether the applicant is an individual, a partnership, a corporation
or any other entity and, if any other entity, a full explanation and
description thereof.
§ 149-11 PATERSON CODE § 153-2
153:338
(3) If the applicant is an individual, the applicant's residence address
and date and place of birth.
(4) If the applicant is a partnership, the full names, residence
addresses, dates and places of birth of each partner.
(5) If the applicant is a corporation or other entity:
(a) In the case of a corporation, the full names, residence
addresses, dates and places of birth of each major officer and
each stockholder, the name and address of the registered
agent and the address of the principal office. The term
"stockholder," as used herein, means and includes any person
owning or having an interest, either legal or equitable, in ten
percent (10%) or more of the stock issued and outstanding of
the applicant corporation.
(b) In the case of another entity, the full names, residence
addresses, dates and places of birth of each person owning or
having any interest, either legal or equitable, aggregating in
value ten percent (10%) or more of the total capital of said
entity, the name and address of the registered agent, if any, and
the address of the principal office.
(6) Whether the applicant or any partners, officers or stockholders
thereof have ever been arrested or convicted of a crime and, if so,
the name of the person arrested or convicted, the date of arrest,
the crime or charge involved and the disposition thereof. The term
"officers," as used herein, means and includes the President, Vice
Presidents, Secretary and Treasurer of a corporate applicant.
(7) The number of years the applicant has been in business at its
present business address or at any prior location, including the
addresses of such prior locations, if any.
(8) The class in which the applicant desires to be licensed, selecting
one (1) or more of the classes designated in § 153-4 below.
C. Upon receipt of such application, the Community Development Director
or his designee shall submit the same to the Police Division for a report
with reference to the truth of the matters contained in the application
and for the purpose of obtaining a copy of any police record which the
applicant or any partner, officer or stockholder thereof may have.
D. Upon return of such report, the Community Development Director or
his designee shall determine if the character and business
responsibility of the applicant or any partner, officer or stockholder
thereof is satisfactory, and if the Construction Official so determines, he
shall cause a license to be issued to the applicant. The Construction
Official shall determine that the character and business responsibility
of the applicant or any partner, officer or stockholder thereof is
satisfactory unless the application, the report of the Police Division or
§ 153-2 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 153-2
153:339
§ 153-3. License fees; term; renewal of license. [Amended
4-28-1992 by Ord. No. 92-015]
§ 153-4. Classes of licensing.
For the purpose of this chapter, there shall be the following classes for
licensing:
other evidence presented to the Community Development Director or
his designee shall tangibly disclose any of the following:
(1) Conviction for a crime involving moral turpitude.
(2) Prior violations of statutes, ordinances or regulations relevant to
the construction, erection, alteration, repair, restoration, reroofing,
residing, moving or demolition of any building, structure, sidewalk,
driveway, swimming pool, sign, billboard or part thereof.
(3) A determination of previous fraudulent acts or conduct.
(4) A record of continual breaches of contracts.
(5) Concrete evidence of bad character.
(6) Grounds similar to those listed above which reasonably would
cause the Construction Official to determine that the character and
business responsibility of the applicant or any partner, officer or
stockholder thereof is not satisfactory.
A. Upon filing such application, the applicant shall pay to the Director of
Community Development or his designee a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.) for such license or for relicensing after revocation of a license
previously issued to such applicant in accordance with the provisions of
§ 153-6.
B. The term of such license shall expire on December 31 of the calendar
year in which such license is issued.
C. Such license shall be automatically renewed by the Director of
Community Development or his designee upon payment by the
applicant to the Director of Community Development or his designee of
an annual renewal fee of fifty dollars ($50.). Such renewal shall be for
the calendar year in which such renewal occurs. Upon failure to renew
any license on or before January 31 of the immediately succeeding
calendar year, any subsequent license shall be and constitute a new
original license subject to the filing of a new application in accordance
with the provisions of § 153-2 and to the payment of the fee specified in
Subsection A of this section.
A. General contractor. A contractor who is proficient in the construction of
a building or structure from start to finish and the alteration, addition
to or repair of any building or structure. This class of contractor shall be
equipped to handle such work either by and through his own
§ 153-2 PATERSON CODE § 153-4
153:340
§ 153-5. Revocation of license; hearing.
organization or appropriate subcontractors and, in the latter event,
shall be completely responsible for his subcontractors' work.
B. Contractor. A contractor who is proficient in the construction of a
building or structure from start to finish and the alteration, addition to
or repair of any building or structure. This class of contractor shall be
equipped to handle such work by and through his own work or his own
organization or employees.
C. Roofing and siding contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the
business of or who is proficient in the applying of roofing and siding
materials to existing or new buildings or structures.
D. Demolition contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business of
or who is proficient in the demolishing of any building or structure, in
whole or in part.
E. Moving contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business of or
who is proficient in the moving of any building or structure.
F. Swimming pool contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business
of or who is proficient in the installation of swimming pools, their
equipment and appurtenances.
G. Sign or billboard contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the
business of or who is proficient in the erection, alteration or
maintenance of signs or billboards.
H. Miscellaneous contractor. A contractor who is proficient in work of a
special character as determined by the Community Development
Director or his designee.
I. Sidewalk contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business of or
who is proficient in the construction or repair of sidewalks.
J. Driveway contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business of or
who is proficient in the construction or repair of driveways.
A. If any person licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
shall be convicted of violating any statute, ordinance or regulation in
the execution of any work for which a permit is required by the
applicable ordinances of the city relevant to the construction, erection,
alteration, repair, restoration, reroofing, residing, moving or demolition
of any building, structure, sidewalk, driveway, swimming pool, sign,
billboard or part thereof, the Community Development Director or his
designee shall revoke the license of such person immediately. The
Community Development Director or his designee shall not restore
such license during such time as the violation for which such conviction
was obtained, exists or remains.
§ 153-4 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 153-5
153:341
§ 153-6. Relicensing after revocation.
Any person whose license has been revoked under the provisions of § 153-5
above may be relicensed by the Community Development Director or his
designee when the grounds upon which such license was revoked are
removed or corrected and upon payment of the fee prescribed in § 153-3A
above.
§ 153-7. Violations and penalties.88
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 157
BUILDINGS, DANGEROUS AND UNFIT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Builders and contractors — See Ch. 153.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 161.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 165.
Certificates of re-rental approval and
compliance — See Ch. 175.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Illegal conversions — See Ch. 187.
Fire safety — See Ch. 215.
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
Vacant lots — See Ch. 319.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
B. If, after a public hearing held by the Community Development Director
or his designee, the Director or his designee determines that the
character and business responsibility of any person licensed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter has become
unsatisfactory, the Community Development Director or his designee
shall revoke the license of such person immediately. At least five (5)
days' notice in writing of the time, place and purpose of such public
hearing shall be given to the license holder by the Community
Development Director or his designee. In determining whether the
character and business responsibility of such license holder has become
unsatisfactory, the Construction Official shall be bound by those
standards set forth in § 153-2D above for the issuance of licenses.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 153-5 PATERSON CODE § 153-7
153:342
ARTICLE I
Dangerous Structures
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 8, Art. 2, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 157-1. Dangerous structures prohibited.
No building, wall or structure or any part thereof which is or may become
dangerous to life or health or which creates a fire hazard or might tend to
extend a conflagration shall be permitted to remain in such condition in the
City.
§ 157-2. Notice to repair, remove or destroy dangerous structures.
If the Construction Official shall determine, after due inspection, that a
building, wall or structure is or may become dangerous to life or health or
might tend to extend a conflagration and should be repaired, removed or
destroyed, the Construction Official shall give notice to the owner of any
land affected thereby of the contemplated repair, removal or destruction of
such building, wall or structure.
§ 157-3. Form of notice.
The notice required by § 157-2 shall contain a description of the property
affected, sufficiently definite in terms to identify the same, as well as
the manner in which such repair, removal or destruction is to be carried
out, and a notice that unless such building, wall or structure is repaired,
removed or destroyed within 30 days after service of such notice, the
municipality will proceed with such repair, removal or destruction or cause
the same to be repaired, removed or destroyed under the provisions of this
article and the statutes made and provided, and that the cost of such repair,
removal or destruction shall be charged against the property affected as a
municipal lien.
§ 157-4. Manner and sufficiency of service of notice.
The notice required by § 157-2 may be served upon the owner resident in
the City in person or by leaving the same at his usual place of residence with
a member of the family above the age of 14 years. In case any such owner
shall not reside in the City, notice may be served upon the owner personally
or mailed to his last known post office address or may be served upon the
occupant of the property or upon the agent of the owner in charge thereof.
In case the owner of any such property shall be unknown or service cannot
for any reason be made as above directed, notice thereof shall be published
at least once not less than 30 days before the proposed repair, removal or
destruction, in a newspaper circulating in the City. There may be inserted in
such advertisement notice to the owner of several different parcels of land.
Notice to infant owners or owners of unsound mind shall be served upon
their guardians. Where lands are held in trust, service shall be made upon
the trustee. Where lands are held by two or more joint tenants, tenants in
§ 157-1 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-4
153:343
common or tenants by entirety, service upon one of such owners shall be
sufficient and shall be deemed and taken as notice to all.
§ 157-5. Proof of service.
The Construction Official shall file with the Revenue Collections Division,
within 10 days after service of the notice required by § 157-2 of this article,
proof of such service or proof of publication if advertised. The failure to file
the same shall not invalidate the proceedings if service has actually been
made as herein provided.
§ 157-6. Failure to comply with notice; repair by City; costs; lien.
On the failure of the owner of such property to comply with the terms
of such notice required to be given under this article, the Construction
Official is hereby authorized to repair, remove or destroy or cause to be
repaired, removed or destroyed the building, wall or structure described
in such notice, keeping an accurate account of the cost and expenses
thereof, together with the cost and expenses in the removing of the debris
from the premises, and shall file a true statement thereof under oath with
the City Clerk. Upon examination by the Council of the statement and
the ascertainment that the same was properly made and correct and so
confirmed by the Council, the same shall be filed in the office of the City
Clerk who shall record the same in a book to be kept for that purpose
and who shall certify the amount to the Revenue Collections Director to be
charged upon the books of the City against the lands on which the building,
wall or structure was repaired or from which removed or destroyed. Such
charge with interest thereon shall forthwith become a lien on the premises
and shall be added and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon such lands and be collected in the same manner as other taxes.
§ 157-7. Condemned buildings.
In addition to the provisions of §§ 157-1 to 157-6 of this article, buildings,
walls or other structures which shall be unsafe so as to be a danger to life
and limb shall immediately, upon notice from the Construction Official, be
made safe and secure or taken down, and when the public safety requires
immediate action, the Construction Official may forthwith enter upon the
premises with such assistance as may be necessary and cause such
structure to be made secure or taken down at the expense of the owner or
party in interest.
§ 157-8. Damaged buildings.
Every building which shall have been damaged by fire or other cause so as
to be dangerous by reason of bad condition of walls, floors, construction or
otherwise shall be held to be unsafe, and the Construction Official, besides
proceeding as provided in the preceding section, shall also affix a notice
of the dangerous character of the structure to a conspicuous place on the
§ 157-4 PATERSON CODE § 157-8
153:344
exterior of such building. Any person removing such notice so affixed shall
be liable to a penalty as provided in § 157-10 of this article.
§ 157-9. Buildings to be vacated.
In case any order or notice issued by the Construction Official to remedy a
condition perilous to life and property is not complied with immediately, the
Construction Official may order any building, structure, premises or part
thereof to be vacated, and in case any person neglects or refuses to vacate
such unsafe structure or premises in question, he shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as provided in § 157-10 of this article.
§ 157-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 157-8 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-10
153:345

ARTICLE II
Buildings Unfit for Habitation
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 14, Art. 2, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 157-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof, whether used and
occupied for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any outhouses,
and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
"Building" includes dwellings used and occupied for human habitation or
intended to be so used.
OWNER — The holder of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — All individuals, associations and corporations
who have interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession
thereof.
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Any housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the City, the
County of Passaic or State of New Jersey, relating to health, fire, building
regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings in the City.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The officer who is authorized by this article to exercise
the powers prescribed by this article.
§ 157-12. Public officer designated.
The Director of the Division of Community Improvements be and he is
hereby designated as the public officer to exercise the powers prescribed
by this article and N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq., providing for the creation of a
public officer. Said public officer may call upon any other department of the
City for cooperation in the exercise of his powers and duties.
§ 157-13. Investigation; complaint; notice of hearing; opportunity
to answer and defend.
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer by a public authority or
by at least five residents of the City charging that a building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use or whenever it appears to the public
officer that any building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use,
the public officer shall make a preliminary investigation. If the investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, he shall issue and cause to be served,
upon the owner and parties in interest of such building, a complaint stating
the charges in that respect. The complaint shall also contain a notice that
a hearing will be held before the public officer or his designated agent at a
place therein fixed not less than seven days nor more than 30 days after the
serving of said complaint. The notice shall state that the owner and parties
§ 157-11 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-13
153:347
in interest have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in
person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the
complaint, and that the rules of evidence prevailing in the courts shall not
be controlling in hearings before the public officer. The complaint shall be
served in the manner provided in § 157-15.
§ 157-14. Written findings of fact required; issuance and service of
orders to repair or demolish building.
§ 157-15. Manner of serving complaints, notices and orders; copy to
be filed.
Complaints, notices and orders issued by the public officer pursuant to this
article shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered mail.
If the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot be
ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence
and he shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such
complaint, notice or order upon such persons may be made by publishing
the same once in a newspaper printed and published in the City. A copy
of such complaint, notice or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on the premises affected by the complaint, notice or order. A copy of such
complaint, notice or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with
the Register's office of Passaic County.
§ 157-16. Consequence of failure to comply with orders.
A. If, after the notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, he shall state, in writing, his findings of fact in support of such
determination. He shall then issue and cause to be served, upon the
owner thereof and parties in interest, an order. The order shall require
the repair, alteration or improvement of said building to be made by the
owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
order, and it shall give the option to the owner to vacate or have said
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
B. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails
to repair, alter or improve said building within the time specified in the
order described in Subsection A hereof, then the owner shall be
required by a further order to remove or demolish said building within a
reasonable time as specified in said order of removal.
C. The orders referred to in Subsections A and B of this section shall be
served upon the owner and parties in interest in the manner provided in
§ 157-15.
A. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or
to be vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on
§ 157-13 PATERSON CODE § 157-16
153:348
§ 157-17. Lien for costs; sale of materials; disposition of proceeds;
recovery of costs of removal or demolition.
§ 157-18. Determination that building is unfit for habitation;
standards.
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such building
which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of
the main entrance to any building so closed a placard with the following
words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use;
the use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
B. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished.
A. The amount of the cost of filing of legal papers, expert witnesses' fees,
search and advertising charges in the course of any proceeding taken
under this article determined in favor of the City and such repairs,
alterations or improvements or vacating and closing or removal or
demolition, as the case may be, shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred. If the building is removed
or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the materials of such
building. The proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum derived
from any contract for the removal or demolition of the building shall be
credited against the cost of the removal or demolition thereof, including
the clearance and, if necessary, leveling of the site. If there are no such
credits or if the total sum of such costs exceeds the total of such credits,
a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall
be filed as a lien certificate with the Tax Assessor and a copy thereof
shall be sent forthwith to the owner by registered mail.
B. If the total of the credits exceeds such costs, the balance remaining
shall be deposited by the public officer in the Superior Court of New
Jersey and shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such
court. The proceeds shall be disbursed according to the order or
judgment of such court to the persons found entitled thereto by final
order or judgment of the court. Any owner or party in interest may,
within 30 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed
in a summary manner in the Superior Court of New Jersey to contest
the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth
in the lien certificate.
C. In addition to assessing the costs of removal or demolition as a lien
against the premises, the Council may, by resolution, enforce the
payment of such assessment, together with interest, as a debt of the
owner of the premises and authorize the institution of an action at law
for the collection thereof in the Superior Court or County District Court.
§ 157-16 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-18
153:349
such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents of
the City. Such conditions may, among others, include the following:
§ 157-19. Maintaining unfit buildings prohibited.
No person shall have, keep or maintain a building that is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use or which is dangerous or injurious to the
health or safety of its occupants or to the occupants of neighboring
buildings or other residents of the City.
§ 157-20. Additional powers of public officer.
The public officer is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may
be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and
provisions of this article in addition to the other powers herein granted,
including the powers to:
§ 157-21. Repairs or demolition made by City.
Any repair, alteration, improvement, removal or demolition as herein
provided may be performed by the City, through its proper officers or
employees, or the City may contract with any person to render such service
on behalf of the City, under its control and direction, and pursuant to
specifications showing in detail the service to be rendered and to rules
A. Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities.
B. Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities.
C. Dilapidation.
D. Disrepair.
E. Structural defects.
F. Uncleanliness.
A. Investigate dwelling conditions in the City in order to determine which
dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation.
B. Administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
C. Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations, provided
that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
D. Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he
deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this article.
E. Delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such
officers and agents as he may designate.
§ 157-18 PATERSON CODE § 157-21
153:350
and regulations adopted by the Director of the Division of Community
Improvements for the same and upon ample security for proper
performance being given to the City. The procedure to be followed in
entering into any such contract shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-5.
The City may recover the cost thereof from the owner by civil action. Such
action shall be in addition to any other remedy provided for by this article
and shall not make void any lien upon real estate provided for by this
article nor prevent the imposition of any penalty imposed for violation of
this article or any ordinance of the City.
§ 157-22. Other powers unaffected.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers
of any department of the City to enforce any provisions of its charter
or other statute or its ordinances or regulations or to prevent or punish
violations thereof. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition
and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other ordinance of the
City.
§ 157-23. Remedy for abatement of nuisances unaffected.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the
power of the City to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal
or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.
§ 157-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 157-21 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-24
153:351

ARTICLE III
Safeguarding Unsafe Places Abutting Streets
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 23, Art. 5, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 157-25. Duty of owner or agent.
It is hereby declared to be the duty of the owner or agent of any property
abutting on any street or highway in the City on which property there exists
an unsafe place abutting on, adjacent to or near such street or highway,
due to which place any person traveling upon such street or highway may
receive injury, to erect or construct fences, walls or other safeguards about
such unsafe places sufficient to protect any such person from injury.
§ 157-26. Notice to owner or agent.
When the existence of any unsafe place as described in § 157-25 of this
article becomes known to the Department of Public Works, the Department
shall notify, in writing, the owner or his agent of such unsafe place to
safeguard the same forthwith and shall designate in such notice the time in
which such work of safeguarding shall be completed.
§ 157-27. Consequences of failure to comply with notice; repairs by
City; recovery of costs.
If, at the expiration of the time for completion designated by the
Department of Public Works in the notice referred to in § 157-26, such work
is not completed to the satisfaction of the Department of Public Works, the
Department shall have such work done by the City, and the expense of such
work shall be charged against and collected from the owner of such unsafe
place. If necessary, the City shall proceed with a civil action for the recovery
of such money expended by the City for such work.
§ 157-28. Hearing where requirement for safeguarding denied;
defenses.
A. If any person, upon being notified to safeguard any place as specified in
§ 157-26, shall deny that the place named in such notice is unsafe, such
person, upon filing a notice with the Streets Division Superintendent,
directed to the Department of Public Works within the time limit in the
notice specified in § 157-26 for completion of the work, shall have a
hearing before the Department of Public Works. At such hearing, the
person notified may avail himself of any defense to show that the place
mentioned in such notice is not unsafe.
B. Failure to request a hearing as provided in Subsection A shall constitute
a waiver of said hearing.
§ 157-25 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-29
153:353
§ 157-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who fails to safeguard any unsafe place as directed by the
Department of Public Works after a hearing as provided in § 157-28 of this
article or after a waiver of such hearing as provided in said § 157-28 shall
be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not more than 90
days, or any combination thereof.
§ 157-29 PATERSON CODE § 157-29
153:354
ARTICLE IV
Abandoned Properties
[Adopted 11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-034; amended in its entirety
7-29-2014 by Ord. No. 14-034]
§ 157-30. Identification of abandoned property; list required.
The Director of the Division of Community Improvements, as public officer
designated by the Mayor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-80, is hereby directed to
identify abandoned properties within the municipality, place said properties
on an abandoned property list established as provided in Section 36 of P.L.
1996, c. 62 (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55), as amended by Section 28 of P.L. 2003,
c. 210, and provide such notices and carry out such other tasks as are
required to effectuate an abandoned property list as provided by law.
§ 157-31. Applicability.
The abandoned property list shall apply to the City of Paterson as a whole.
§ 157-32. Responsibilities and powers of public officer.
The Director of the Division of Community Improvements, designated by the
Mayor as the public officer, shall carry out the responsibilities established
by this article and shall have all the related responsibilities and powers
provided by law.
§ 157-33. Report to Mayor and Council.
The public officer shall provide a report to the Mayor and Municipal Council
every six months with respect to the number and location of properties
on the abandoned property list, the status of those properties, and any
actions taken by the municipality or by any qualified rehabilitation entity
designated pursuant to the authority granted the public officer with respect
to any property on the list or any other abandoned property within the City
of Paterson.
§ 157-34. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms are defined as set forth
herein:
ABANDONED PROPERTY — Includes any property that is determined to
be abandoned pursuant to the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation Act,
N.J.S.A. 55:19-78.
LIENHOLDER or MORTGAGE HOLDER — Includes any person or entity
holding a note, mortgage or other interest secured by the building or any
part thereof.
OWNER — Includes the holder or holders to the title of an abandoned
property.
§ 157-30 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-34
153:355
PROPERTY — Includes any building or structure and the land appurtenant
thereto.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Includes the person designated by the municipality
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.5 or any other officer of the municipality
qualified to carry out the responsibilities set forth in the Abandoned
Property Rehabilitation Act and designated by the Mayor.
QUALIFIED REHABILITATION ENTITY — Includes any entity organized
and authorized to do business under the State of New Jersey which shall
have as one of its purposes the construction or rehabilitation of residential
or nonresidential buildings, the provisions of affordable housing, the
restoration of abandoned property, the revitalization and improvement of
urban neighborhoods, or similar purpose, and which shall be well qualified
by virtue of its staff, professional consultants, financial resources, and prior
activities set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., to carry out the rehabilitation
of vacant buildings in urban areas.
§ 157-35. Inventory of abandoned property; list to be maintained.
The City of Paterson may direct the public officer to identify abandoned
properties for the purpose of establishing an abandoned property list
throughout the City. Each abandoned property so identified shall include the
block and lot, the name of the owner of record, the street address of the lot,
and the basis for the determination that the property is abandoned.
§ 157-36. Abandoned property criteria.
A. The public officer shall establish and maintain a list of abandoned
properties, to be known as the "Abandoned Property List." The City of
Paterson may add properties to the list at any time, and may delete
properties at any time when the public officer finds that the property no
longer meets the definition of an abandoned property, as set forth in
§ 157-36.
B. Any interested party may request that a property be included on the
abandoned property list following that procedure set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-105.
A. Any property that has not been legally occupied for a period of six
months and which meets any one of the following additional criteria
may be deemed to be an abandoned property upon a determination by
the public officer that:
(1) The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment
of the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during
that six-month period;
(2) Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued
prior to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy,
and no construction has taken place for at least six months as of the
date of determination by the public officer pursuant to this section;
§ 157-34 PATERSON CODE § 157-36
153:356
§ 157-37. Establishment of abandoned property list.
(3) At least one installment of property taxes remains unpaid and
delinquent on that property in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:4-1 et
seq., as of the date of determination of the public officer pursuant
to this section; or
(4) The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public
officer in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-82 for one or more of the
following reasons:
(a) The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3.
(b) The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases
the risk of fire to the property and adjacent properties.
(c) The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to
potential health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to
take reasonable and necessary measures to secure the
property; or the City has secured the property in order to
prevent such hazards after the owner has failed to do so;
(d) The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut
vegetation or physical deterioration of the structure or
grounds have created potential health and safety hazards and
the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remove the hazards; or
(e) The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare,
of the residents of the area in close proximity to the property,
and the owner has failed to take reasonable and necessary
measures to remedy the conditions.
B. Exceptions.
(1) A property which contains both residential and nonresidential
space may be considered abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-78
et seq., so long as 2/3 or more of the total net square footage of the
buildings was previously legally occupied as residential space and
none of the residential space has been legally occupied for at least
six months at the time of the determination of abandonment by the
public officer.
(2) A property used on a seasonal basis shall be abandoned only if it
meets any two of the additional criteria set forth in N.J.S.A.
55:19-81.
A. The public officer shall identify abandoned properties within the City of
Paterson for the purpose of establishing an abandoned property list.
The abandoned property list shall include, for each abandoned property
§ 157-36 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-37
153:357
identified, the tax block and lot number, the name of the owner of
record, if known, and the street address of the lot, The public officer
may add properties to the abandoned property list at any time, and may
delete properties at any time when he or she finds that the property no
longer meets the definition of an abandoned property.
B. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if the rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner,
as evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of
rehabilitation work authorized by those permits. A property on which
an entity other than the City of Paterson has purchased or taken
assignment from the City of a tax sale certificate which has been placed
on the abandoned list may be removed if the owner of the certificate
pays all municipal taxes and liens due on the property within 30 days
after the property is placed on the list; provided, however, that if the
owner and the certificate fails to initiate foreclosure proceedings within
six months after the property was first placed on the list, the property
shall be restored to the abandoned property list in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-103.
C. The public officer shall establish the abandoned property list and any
additions or deletions thereto by authorizing the publication of the list
in the official newspaper of the City of Paterson, which publication shall
include public notice, and within 10 days after publication, shall send a
notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail,
to the owner of record of every property included on the list. The
published and mailed notice shall identify property determined to be
abandoned setting forth the owner of record, if known, the tax lot and
block number and street address. The public officer, in consultation
with the Tax Collector, shall also send out a notice by regular mail to
any mortgagee, servicing organization, or property tax processing
organization that receives a duplicate copy of the tax bill pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:4-64(d). When the owner of record is not known for a
particular property and cannot be ascertained by the exercise of
reasonable diligence by the Tax Collector, notice shall not be mailed but
instead shall be posted on the property in the manner as provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.7. The mailed or posted notice shall indicate the factual
basis for the public officer's finding that the property is abandoned, as
that term is defined herein and in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54, and shall specify
the information relied upon in making such finding. In all cases, a copy
of the mailed or posted notice shall also be filed by the public officer in
the office of the Passaic County Clerk. This filing shall have the same
force and effect as a formal notice under N.J.S.A. 2A:15-6. The notice
shall be captioned with the name of the City of Paterson as "Plaintiff"
and the name of the property owner as "Defendant," as though an
action had been commenced by the City against the owner.
D. An owner or lienholder may challenge the inclusion of his property on
the abandoned property list by appealing that determination to the
public officer within 30 days of the owner's receipt of the certified
§ 157-37 PATERSON CODE § 157-37
153:358
§ 157-38. Removal of property from abandoned property list.
notice or 40 days from the date upon which the notice was sent. An
owner whose identity was not known to the public officer shall have
40 days from the date upon which notice was published or posted,
whichever is later, to challenge the inclusion of a property on the
abandoned property list. For good cause shown, the public officer
shall accept a late filing of an appeal. Within 30 days of receipt of a
request for an appeal of the findings contained in the notice, the public
officer shall schedule a hearing for redetermination of the matter. Any
property included on the list shall be presumed to be an abandoned
property unless the owner, through his submission of an affidavit or
certification asserting that the property is not an abandoned property,
can demonstrate that the property was erroneously included on the
list. The affidavit or certification shall be accompanied by supporting
documentation such as, but not limited to, photographs, repair invoices,
bills and construction contracts. The sole ground for appeal shall be
that the property in question is not abandoned property, as that term is
defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The public officer shall decide any timely
filed appeal within 10 days of the hearing on the appeal and shall
promptly, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular
mail, notify the property owner of the decision and reasons therefor.
E. The property owner may challenge an adverse determination of an
appeal with the public officer pursuant to Subsection D of this section
by instituting, in accordance with the New Jersey Court Rules, a
summary trial proceedings in the Superior Court, Passaic County. Such
action shall be instituted within 20 days of the date of notice of decision
mailed by the public officer. The sole ground for appeal and new
hearing before the Superior Court shall be that the property in question
is not an abandoned property, as that term is defined in N.J.S.A.
55:19-54. The failure to institute an action of appeal on a timely basis
shall constitute a jurisdictional bar to challenging the adverse
determination, except that, for good cause shown, the Court may
extend the deadline for instituting the action.
F. The public officer shall promptly remove any property from the
abandoned property list that has been determined by the public officer
or on appeal not to be abandoned and may, in his discretion, remove
properties from said list whenever he deems such removal appropriate
under the circumstances.
G. The abandoned property list shall become effective, and the City of
Paterson shall have the right to pursue any legal remedy with respect to
the properties on the list, at any time after at least one property has
been placed on the list and following the expiration of the period for
appeal with respect to that first property or upon the denial of an
appeal brought by the property owner of that first property.
A. An owner may request removal of his or her property from the
abandoned properties list prior to the sale of the tax sale certificate by
§ 157-37 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-38
153:359
§ 157-39. Sale of restricted tax liens.
paying all taxes and City liens due, including interest and penalties,
and:
(1) By posting cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating all
conditions because of which the property has been determined to
be abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-54 and by posting cash or
a bond to cover the cost of any environmental cleanup required on
that property, evidenced by a certification by a licensed engineer
retained by the owner and reviewed and approved by the public
officer, stating that the cash or bond adequately covers the cost of
the cleanup.
(2) By demonstrating to the satisfaction of both the public officer and
the City Council that the conditions rendering the property
abandoned have been remediated in full; provided, however, that
where the public officer finds that the owner is actively engaged in
remediating the conditions because of which the property was
determined to be abandoned as evidenced by significant
rehabilitation activity on the property, the public officer may grant
an extension of time of not more than 120 days for the owner to
complete all work, during which time no further proceedings will
be taken against the property owner.
B. If the owner has posted cash or a bond in order to have a property
removed from the abandoned property list and the conditions because
of which the property was determined to be abandoned have not been
fully remediated within one year of the date of posting the cash or bond,
or in the case of a property which required a remediation of any known
or suspected or threatened contaminants, if the owner has failed to
enter into a memorandum of agreement with the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection or an administrative consent
order, as the case may be, or if an agreement or order is in effect but the
owner has failed to perform the remediation in conformance with the
agreement or order, then the cash or bond shall be forfeited to the City
which shall use the cash or bond and any interest which has accrued
thereon for the purpose of demolishing or rehabilitating the property or
performing the environmental remediation. Any funds remaining after
the property has been demolished, rehabilitated or cleaned up shall be
returned to the owner.
A. Notwithstanding the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or the provisions of
any other law to the contrary, if a property is included on the abandoned
property list and the property taxes or other City liens due on the
property are delinquent for six or more quarters as of the date of
expiration of the right to appeal the property's inclusion on the list, or, if
an appeal has been filed, as of the date that all opportunities for appeal
of inclusion on the list have been exhausted, then the tax lien on the
property may be sold in accordance with the procedures of the Tax Sale
§ 157-38 PATERSON CODE § 157-39
153:360
Law, N.J.S.A. 54:5-1 et seq., or on the 90th day following the expiration
of that time of appeal or final determination on an appeal.
B. The City of Paterson may, at its option, require that the sale of tax sale
certificates or any subsequent assignment or transfer of a tax sale
certificate held by the City be subject to the express condition that the
purchaser or assignee shall be obliged to perform and conclude any
rehabilitation or repairs necessary to remove the property from the
abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 and to post a
bond in favor of the City to guarantee the rehabilitation or repair of the
property. The public officer may waive a requirement to post a bond
imposed by the City for any purchaser, assignee or transferee of a tax
sale certificate that provides the documentation acceptable to the
public officer that the purchaser, assignee or transferee is a qualified
rehabilitation entity as defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80. The cost of
rehabilitation and repairs and the cost of the bond shall be added to the
amount required to be paid by the owner for redemption of the
property. The purchaser, assignee or transferee of the tax sale
certificate who is required to rehabilitate and repair the property shall
be required to file the appropriate affidavits with the Tax Collector,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-62, representing the amounts of monies
expended periodically toward the rehabilitation or repair of the
property. A purchaser, assignee or transferee shall be entitled to
interest on the amounts expended, as set forth in the affidavits, at the
delinquent rate of interest for delinquencies in excess of $1,500 in
effect for the time period when the amounts were expended, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:4-67. The tax sale certificate purchaser, assignee or
transferee, with the authority of the City of Paterson, shall be permitted
to enter in and upon the property for the purposes of appraising the
costs of rehabilitation and repair and to perform all other acts required
to guarantee the completion of the rehabilitation or repair of the
property. No rehabilitation or repair works shall be commenced,
however, until proof of adequate liability insurance and an
indemnification agreement, holding the City of Paterson harmless, has
been filed with the public officer.
C. If the City of Paterson acquired the tax sale certificate for a property on
the abandoned property list, then, upon 10 days' written notice to the
property owner and any mortgagee as of the date of the filing the notice
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55, the City shall be permitted to enter upon
the property and remediate any conditions that caused the property to
be included on the abandoned property list. No remediation shall be
commenced, however, if, within that ten-day period, the owner or
mortgagee has elected to perform that remediation itself; it shall be
required to post bond in favor of the City in order to ensure
performance. The amount and conditions of the bond shall be
determined by the public officer.
D. The cost of remediation incurred by the City of Paterson, as so certified
by the entity incurring the cost upon completion of the remediation,
§ 157-39 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-39
153:361
§ 157-40. Special tax sale and criteria for bidders.
shall constitute a lien upon the property first in time and right to any
other lien, whether the other lien was filed prior to or after the filing
of any lien by the City, except for City taxes, liens and assessments and
any lien imposed pursuant to the Spill Compensation and Control Act,
N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11 et seq., together with any interest thereon. The
certification of the cost shall be filed and recorded as a lien by the entity
incurring the cost with the Passaic County Clerk.
E. The clearance, development, redevelopment, or repair of the property
being maintained as an abandoned property pursuant to this article
shall be considered a public purpose and public use for which the power
of eminent domain may be lawfully exercised.
A. The City of Paterson may hold special tax sales with respect to those
properties eligible for tax sale pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 which are
also on the abandoned property list.
B. The public officer, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall
establish criteria for eligibility to bid on properties at the sale, which
may include, but need not be limited to:
(1) Documentation of the bidder's ability to rehabilitate or otherwise
reuse the property consistent with the City's plans and regulations;
commitments by the bidder to rehabilitate or otherwise reuse the
property, consistent with the City's plans and regulations;
(2) Commitments by the bidder to take action to foreclose on the tax
lien by a date certain; and
(3) Such other criteria as the public officer, with the advice and
consent of the City Council, may determine are necessary to ensure
that the properties to be sold will be rehabilitated or otherwise
reused in a manner consistent with the public interest.
C. The public officer, with advice and consent of the City Council, may
establish minimum bid requirements for a special tax sale that are less
than the full amount of the taxes, interest and penalties due, to help
ensure that the properties will be rehabilitated or otherwise utilized in
a manner consistent with the public interest.
D. The public officer, with advice and consent of the City Council, may
combine properties in said special tax sale into bid packages, and
require that bidders place a single bid on each package, rejecting any
and all bids on individual properties that are submitted.
E. The public officer, with advice and consent of the City Council, may sell
said properties subject to the provision that, if the purchaser fails to
carry out any commitment that has been set forth as a condition of sale
or misrepresents any material qualification that has been established as
a condition of eligibility to bid pursuant thereto, then the properties and
§ 157-39 PATERSON CODE § 157-40
153:362
§ 157-41. Expedited action to foreclose right of redemption.
§ 157-42. Abandoned property status during expedited foreclosure.
any interest thereto acquired by the purchaser shall revert to the City,
and any amount paid by the purchaser at the special tax sale shall be
forfeited to the City.
F. In the event there are two or more qualified bidders for any property or
bid package in a special tax sale, the City may designate the
unsuccessful qualified bidder whose bid was closest to the successful
bid as an eligible purchaser. In the event that the selected purchaser of
that property or bid package fails to meet any of the conditions of sale
established by the City pursuant to this section and his or her interest in
the property or properties reverts to the City, the City may
subsequently designate the entity previously designated as an eligible
purchaser as the winning bidder for the property or properties, and
assign the tax sale certificates to that entity on the basis of that entity's
bid at the special tax sale, subject to the terms and conditions of the
special tax sale.
G. The City of Paterson shall provide notice of a special tax sale pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 54:5-26. The notice shall include any special terms of sale
established by the City pursuant to this section. Nothing shall prohibit
the City from holding a special tax sale on the same day as a standard or
accelerated tax sale.
A. When a person or entity other than the City of Paterson acquires a tax
sale certificate for a property on the abandoned property list tax sale,
the purchaser may institute an action to foreclose the right of
redemption at any time after the expiration of just six months following
the date of the sale of the tax sale certificate.
B. When the City of Paterson is the purchaser at tax sale of any property
on the abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-34, an action to
foreclose the right of redemption may be instituted in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:5-157(b).
C. After the foreclosure action is instituted, the right to redeem shall exist
and continue to exist until barred by the judgment of the Superior
Court; provided, however, that no redemption shall be permitted except
where the owner:
(1) Posts cash or bond equal to the cost of remediating the conditions
because of which the property was determined to be abandoned
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-36, as determined by the Court; or
(2) Demonstrates to the Court that the conditions because of which the
property was determined to be abandoned have been remediated in
full.
§ 157-40 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-42
153:363
§ 157-43. Summary action for control and possession of abandoned
property.
A. If an entity other than the City of Paterson has purchased or taken
assignment from the City of a tax sale certificate on a property that has
not been legally occupied for a period of six months, that property shall
not be added to the abandoned property list under the following limited
circumstances:
(1) The owner of the certificate has continued to pay all City taxes and
liens on the property in the tax year when due.
(2) The owner of the certificates takes action to initiate foreclosure
proceedings within six months after the property is eligible for
foreclosure pursuant to either N.J.S.A. 54:5-86(a) or (b), as
appropriate, and diligently pursues foreclosure proceedings in a
timely fashion thereafter.
B. A determination that a property is abandoned under the provisions of
this article and N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall not constitute a finding
that the use of the property has been abandoned for the purposes of
municipal zoning or land use regulation.
C. Upon the request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate
seeking to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-86(b), the public officer or the Tax Collector
shall, in a timely fashion, provide the requestor with a certification that
the property fulfills the definition of an abandoned property according
to the criteria established in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81 and 55:19-82.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City from addressing
concerns regarding the condition of the property through the City of
Paterson property maintenance hearing process, established by
Chapter 157 of the City Code, irrespective of any ongoing foreclosure
proceedings.
A. A summary action or other action to transfer possession and control of
abandoned property in need of rehabilitation to the City of Paterson
may be brought by the City in the Superior Court, Passaic County. If the
Court shall find that the property is abandoned and that the owner or
party in interest has failed to submit and initiate a rehabilitation plan,
then the Court may authorize the City to take possession and control of
the property and to develop its own rehabilitation plan for the property.
B. Where the City has been granted possession and control, the City may
commence and maintain those further proceedings for the
conservation, protection or disposal of the property, or any part thereof,
that are required to rehabilitate the property, recoup the cost and
expenses of rehabilitation and for the sale of the property; provided,
however, that the Court shall not direct the sale of the property if the
§ 157-42 PATERSON CODE § 157-43
153:364
owner applies to the Court for reinstatement of control and possession
of the property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-92.
C. Failure by the owner, mortgage holder or lienholder to submit a plan for
rehabilitation to the City, obtain appropriate construction permits or, in
the alternative, submit formal applications for funding the cost of
rehabilitation to local, state or federal agencies providing that such
funding within the initial six-month period shall be deemed clear
evidence that the owner has failed to take any action to further
rehabilitation of the property.
D. An owner may defend against a complaint filed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:19-84 by submitting a plan for the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property which is the subject of the complaint and by posting a bond
equal to 125% of the amount determined by the public officer or the
Court to be the projected cost of rehabilitation.
E. Any plan submitted by an owner to defend against a complaint shall be
submitted within 60 days after the complaint has been filed, unless the
court provides the owner with an extension of time for good cause
shown. A plan submitted by an owner pursuant to this section shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) A detailed financial feasibility analysis, including documentation of
the economic feasibility of the proposed reuse, including operating
budgets or resale prices, or both, as appropriate;
(2) A budget for the rehabilitation of the property, including sources
and uses of funds, based on the terms and conditions of realistically
available financing, including grants and loans;
(3) A timetable for the completion of rehabilitation and reuse of the
property, including milestones for performance of major steps
leading to and encompassing the rehabilitation and reuse of the
property; and
(4) Documentation of the qualifications of the individuals and firms
that will be engaged to carry out the planning, design, financial
packaging, construction, and marketing or rental of the property.
F. Where the Court approves the rehabilitation plan of the owner or other
party in interest, then it may appoint the public officer to act as monitor
of compliance and progress. If the owner fails to carry out any step in
the approved plan, then the City may apply to the Court to have the
posted bond forfeited, to transfer possession of the building to the City
to complete the rehabilitation plan, and to grant authorization to use
the bond proceeds for the rehabilitation. The owner or other party in
interest shall provide quarterly reports to the public officer on its
activities and progress toward rehabilitation and reuse the property.
G. If an owner is unsuccessful in defending against a complaint filed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-84, the mortgage holder or lienholder may
§ 157-43 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-43
153:365
§ 157-44. City rehabilitation or designation of qualified
rehabilitation entity.
seek to be designated in possession of the property by submitting a
plan and posting bond meeting the same condition as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 55:19-87. The plan must be submitted within 60 days following
the Court's rejection of the owner's plan, unless the Court provides
the mortgage holder or lienholder with an extension of time for good
cause shown. If the Court approves any such mortgage holder's or
lienholder's plan, it shall designate that party to be in possession of the
property for purposes of ensuring its rehabilitation.
H. The mortgage holder or lienholder, as the case may be, shall provide
quarterly reports to the Court and the public officer on its activities and
progress toward rehabilitation and reuse of the property. If the
mortgage holder or lienholder fails to carry out any material step in the
approved plan, then the public officer shall notify the Court, which may
order the posted bond forfeit, grant the City possession of the property,
and authorize the City to use the proceeds of the bond for rehabilitation
of the property.
I. Any sums incurred or advanced for the purpose of rehabilitating the
property by a mortgage holder or lienholder granted possession of a
property, including Court costs and reasonable attorney's fees, may be
added to the unpaid balance due to that mortgage holder or lienholder,
with interest calculated at the same rate set forth in the note or security
agreement; or in the case of a tax lienholder, at the statutory interest
rate for subsequent liens.
J. If no mortgage holder or lienholder meets the conditions of N.J.S.A.
55:19-88, then the City may submit a plan to the Court which conforms
to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-87. Such plan shall designate
whether the City or a qualified rehabilitation entity shall undertake the
rehabilitation plan in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
55:19-90.
A. The public officer, with advice and consent of the City Council, may
designate a qualified rehabilitation entity for the purpose of exercising
the City's rights where that designation will further the rehabilitation or
reuse of the property consistent with the City's plans and objectives.
B. Regardless of whether the City exercises its rights directly or the public
officer designates a qualified rehabilitation entity pursuant to this
section, while in possession of a property, the City shall maintain,
safeguard, and maintain insurance on the property. Notwithstanding
the City's possession of the property, the owner of the property shall not
be relieved of any civil or criminal liability or any duty imposed by
reason of acts or omissions of the owner.
C. The Court may approve the borrowing of funds by the City of Paterson
to rehabilitate the property and may grant a lien or security interests
§ 157-43 PATERSON CODE § 157-44
153:366
§ 157-45. Procedure for City to place liens, obtain title and sell
property.
with priority over all other liens or mortgages other than municipal
liens. Prior to granting this lien priority, the Court must find as follows:
(1) The City sought to obtain the necessary financing from the senior
lienholder which declined to provide such financing on reasonable
terms.
(2) The City sought to obtain a voluntary subordination from the senior
lienholder which refused to provide such subordination.
(3) Lien priority is necessary in order to induce another lender to
provide financing on reasonable terms. No lien authorized by the
Court shall take effect unless recorded with the Clerk of Passaic
County.
D. Where the City has designated a qualified rehabilitation entity to act on
its behalf, the qualified rehabilitation entity shall provide quarterly
reports to the public officer on its activities and progress toward
rehabilitation and reuse of the property. The City or qualified
rehabilitation entity, as the case may be, shall provide such reports to
the Court as the Court determines to be necessary. If the Court finds
that the City or its designee has failed to take diligent action toward
rehabilitation of the property within one year from the grant of
possession, then the Court may request the City to designate another
qualified rehabilitation entity to exercise its rights, or if the City fails to
do so, may terminate the order of possession and return possession and
control of the property to its owner.
E. The City of Paterson shall file notice of completion with the Court, and
shall also service a copy on the owner and any mortgage holder or
lienholder, at such time as the City has determined that no more than
six months remain to the anticipated date on which rehabilitation will
be complete. This notice shall include an affidavit of the public officer,
attesting that the rehabilitation is anticipated to be completed within
six months, and a statement setting forth the actions as it plans to
undertake consistent with the plan.
A. The public officer, with the approval of the Court, may place a lien on
the property to cover any costs of the City in connection with any
proceeding under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., incurred prior to the grant
by the Court of an order of possession, which may include costs
incurred to stabilize or secure the property to ensure that it can be
rehabilitated in a cost-effective manner. Any such lien shall be
considered a City lien for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 54:5-9, with the rights
and status of a City lien pursuant thereto.
§ 157-44 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-45
153:367
§ 157-46. Notice requirements for creditors. [Added 5-12-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-026; amended 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-087]
B. Where the City seeks to gain title to the property, it shall purchase the
property for fair market value on such terms as the Court shall approve,
and may place the proceeds of the sale in escrow with the Court.
C. The Court may authorize the City of Paterson to sell the property free
and clear of liens, claims and encumbrances, in which event all such
liens, claims and encumbrances shall be transferred to the proceeds of
sale with the same priority as existed prior to resale in accordance with
the provision of this section, except that municipal liens shall be paid at
settlement. The proceeds of the purchase of the property shall be
distributed as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
D. Upon approval by the Court, the City shall sell the property on such
terms and at such price as the Court shall approve, and may place the
proceeds of the sale in escrow with the Court. The Court shall order a
distribution of the proceeds of the sale after paying Court costs in the
order of priority set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-97.
E. With exception of the holding of special tax sales pursuant to N.J.S.A.
55:19-101, the remedies available under N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq., shall
be available to the City with respect to any abandoned property,
whether or not the City has established an abandoned property list and
whether or not the property at issue has been included on any such list.
A. A lienholder, mortgage holder or mortgagee (collectively "creditor"),
serving a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose on a
mortgage on residential property, shall, within 10 days of serving the
summons and complaint, notify the Municipal Clerk that a summons
and complaint in an action to foreclose on a mortgage has been filed
against this property.
B. The notice shall contain the name and contact information for the
representative of the creditor, who is responsible for receiving
complaints of property maintenance and code violations, may contain
information about more than one property, and shall be provided by
mail or electronic communication, at the discretion of the Municipal
Clerk. The notice shall also include the street address lot and block
number of the property and the full name and contact information of an
individual located within the State of New Jersey who is authorized to
accept service on behalf of the creditor and who shall be immediately
responsible for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the
exterior of the vacant and abandoned residential property. The
Municipal Clerk shall provide a copy of the notice to the Public Officer.
C. In the event the creditor that has served a summons and complaint in
an action to foreclose on a residential property is located out of state,
the notice shall also contain the full name and contact information of an
in-state representative or agent who shall be responsible for the care,
§ 157-45 PATERSON CODE § 157-46
153:368
§ 157-47. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-12-2015 by Ord. No.
15-026; amended 12-20-2016 by Ord. No. 16-087]
maintenance, security, and upkeep of the exterior of the abandoned
property.
D. Any creditor that has initiated a foreclosure proceeding on any
residential property which is pending in Superior Court shall provide to
the Municipal Clerk, within 30 days, a listing of all residential
properties in the City of Paterson for which the creditor has foreclosure
action pending by street address and lot and block number. The
Municipal Clerk shall provide a copy of the listing to the Public Officer.
E. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
City of Paterson in writing of a change of the authorized agent.
F. Any creditor who fails to designate a registered agent under the
provisions of this section shall further be deemed to consent to receive,
by posting on the building, in plain view, and by service of notice at the
last known address of the owner of the property on record within the
City by regular and certified mail, any and all notices of code violations
and all process in an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code
provisions concerning the property.
G. A creditor located in the State of New Jersey may designate itself as an
agent or as the entity responsible for maintaining the property.
A. A public officer, or any other local official responsible for administration
of any property maintenance or public nuisance code, is authorized to
issue a notice to the creditor filing the summons and complaint in an
action to foreclose, if the public officer or other authorized municipal
official determines that the creditor has violated the ordinance by
failing to provide for the care, maintenance, security, and upkeep of the
exterior of the property. Such notice shall require the person or entity
to correct the violation within 30 days of receipt of the notice, or within
10 days of receipt of the notice if the violation presents an imminent
threat to public health and safety.
B. A creditor found by the municipal court of the municipality in which the
property subject to the ordinance is located, or by any other court of
competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of the requirement to correct a
care, maintenance, security, or upkeep violation cited in a notice issued
pursuant to the ordinance shall be subject to a fine of $1,500 for each
§ 157-46 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-47
153:369
§ 157-48. Registration of foreclosing properties. [Added 12-20-2016
by Ord. No. 16-087]
day of the violation. Any fines imposed pursuant to this subsection
shall commence 31 days following receipt of the notice, except if the
violation presents an imminent risk to public health and safety, in which
case any fines shall commence 11 days following receipt of the notice.
C. An out-of-state creditor found by the municipal court of the municipality
in which the property subject to the ordinance is located, or by any
other court of competent jurisdiction, to be in violation of the
requirement to appoint an in-state representative or agent pursuant to
the ordinance shall be subject to a fine of $2,500 for each day of the
violation. Any fines imposed on a creditor for the failure to appoint an
in-state representative or agent shall commence on the day after the
ten-day period set forth in N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51 for providing notice to the
municipal clerk that a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose
on a mortgage has been served.
A. Any lienholder, mortgage holder or mortgagee (collectively "creditor")
foreclosing on a property within the City must register the property
with the Division of Community Improvements on forms to be provided.
All registrations must state the individual owner's or agent's name,
phone number and mailing address. The mailing address shall not be a
P.O. Box. All owners must also provide proof of utility (gas, electric,
water) connections or disconnections which must be submitted to the
Division of Community Improvement.
B. This registration must also certify that the property was inspected and
identify whether the property is vacant at the time of filing. If property
is vacant, the property must be registered under the Code of Paterson
§ 271-48. The creditor shall have a continuing duty to notify the City of
any changes to information contained in the registration.
C. If the property is in the process of foreclosure, then the registration
must be received within seven days of the initiation of the foreclosure
process. If the enforcement authority determines that the property is
vacant and the foreclosure proceedings have not been initiated, the
registration must be received within 14 days of the enforcement
authority's first notice of violations or summons for improper
maintenance.
D. All property registrations are valid for one year from the date of
registration. The initial registration fee is $500 and must accompany
the registration form. Subsequent annual registrations fees are $1,000.
All applications and fees are due by January 15. Registration fees and
renewal fees will not be prorated or refunded.
E. Once the property is no longer vacant or is sold or otherwise
transferred, the owner must provide proof of sale, transfer or
§ 157-47 PATERSON CODE § 157-48
153:370
§ 157-49. Maintenance requirements. [Added 12-20-2016 by Ord.
No. 16-087]
§ 157-50. Violations and penalties. [Added 12-20-2016 by Ord. No.
16-087]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
occupancy to the enforcement authority within 30 days of sale, transfer
or occupancy.
A. Properties subject to the requirements of this article must be
maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local
laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The owner, creditor or local
property management company, as appropriate, must inspect the
property once a month for the duration of the vacancy or foreclosure.
B. In addition to, and not in lieu of, meeting all other applicable federal,
state, and local laws, ordinances, rules and regulations:
(1) Properties subject to the requirements of this article shall be kept
free of accumulated snow and ice, weeds, dry brush, dead
vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, unregistered
vehicles, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices
(except those required by law), and discarded personal items
including but not limited to furniture, clothing, large and small
appliances, printed material or any other items giving the
appearance that the property is vacant.
(2) Properties subject to the requirements of this article shall be
maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings. In the
event that any graffiti, tagging or similar markings are placed on
the property, it shall either be removed or painted over with an
exterior-grade paint matching the color of the portion of the
structure where the graffiti, tagging or similar marking was placed.
(3) Front yards, rear yards, and side yards of properties subject to the
requirements of this article shall be landscaped and maintained to
neighborhood standards. Landscaping and maintenance shall
include, but is not limited to, care of grass, mulch, decorative rock,
artificial turf/sod specifically designed for residential or
commercial installation, or other ground cover, bushes, shrubs,
hedges, trees or similar plantings, removal or repair of gravel,
broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting,
mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material, in addition to
regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of
required vegetation and removal of all trimmings.
§ 157-48 BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS § 157-50
153:371
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 157-50 PATERSON CODE § 157-50
153:372
Chapter 161
BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Builders and contractors — See Ch. 153.
Dangerous and unfit buildings — See Ch. 157.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 165.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Rodent control — See Ch. 385.
§ 157-50 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 157-50
161:373

ARTICLE I
Rat Baiting
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 8, Art. 6, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 161-1. Rat baiting required as condition precedent to issuance of
demolition permit.
§ 161-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
A. Before a permit for the demolition of any building is issued, the
Construction Official shall require the applicant for said demolition to
rat bait the building to be demolished not less than seven days nor more
than 30 days prior to the commencement of said demolition, in a
manner to be approved by the Health Officer.
B. No rat baiting shall be commenced until the premises being rat baited
has been completed vacated and all food materials or edible residues
have been removed from the building.
C. No permit for the demolition of any building shall be issued prior to a
certification from the Health Division signifying its approval of said
demolition.
§ 161-1 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 161-2
161:375

ARTICLE II
Time Limitation on Demolition Permits
[Adopted 12-16-1997 by Ord. No. 97-065]
§ 161-3. Time limit established; extensions; violations and
penalties.
A. The demolition of a building or structure shall be completed within 60
days of the issuance of a demolition permit. The Building Inspector of
the City of Paterson may grant an additional thirty-day extension to
complete the demolition upon written application by the applicant
setting forth reasonable and sufficient reasons for such extension. No
further extensions shall be permitted.
B. In the event that the property owner has not completed the demolition
of the building or structure as set forth herein, the city may take such
action to demolish the building or structure as set forth in Chapter 157,
Buildings, Dangerous and Unfit, of the Code of the City of Paterson. In
that event, the city shall be entitled to any and all remedies provided
within Chapter 157.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 per day for
each day beyond the time period required by this article to demolish the
building or structure, or as may have been extended by the Building
Inspector, be imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
§ 161-3 BUILDINGS, DEMOLITION OF § 161-3
161:377
Chapter 165
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Builders and contractors — See Ch. 153.
Dangerous and unfit buildings — See Ch. 157.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 161.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
§ 165-1. Permit required.
No person shall move any house, building or structure over the streets
of the city without having first secured a permit for that purpose from
the Streets Division Superintendent at least ten (10) days before the
commencement of the moving.
§ 165-2. Application for permit; contents; fee.
§ 165-3. Review of application; issuance of permit.
A. Application for a permit shall be made, in writing, to the Streets
Division Superintendent and filed in his office, upon forms supplied by
the city and obtainable at his office.
B. The application shall be signed by the owner of the building to be
moved and the person to be entrusted with the moving of the same.
C. The application shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person to be entrusted with the
moving of the building.
(3) Dimensions of the building.
(4) Location from which and to which it will be moved.
(5) The exact route for moving the building.
(6) The desired time for the commencement of the moving.
(7) The estimated time for reaching the destination.
D. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of fifty dollars
($50.).
A. Upon the filing of the application in accordance with the provisions of
§ 165-2, a copy of the application shall be forwarded to:
§ 161-3 PATERSON CODE § 165-3
165:378
§ 165-4. Posting of bond required; form.
§ 165-5. Notice in advance of moving operation.
§ 165-6. Hours for moving.
No building shall be moved over the streets of the city except between
sunrise and sunset unless specific authority to do so is given by the Streets
Division Superintendent.
(1) The Chief of Police.
(2) The Chief of the Fire Division.
(3) The Public Property Superintendent if any trees may be affected by
the moving.
B. If there are no objections to the granting of the moving permit by the
Streets Division Superintendent or by the officers described in
Subsection A hereof by reason of endangering public safety, undue
obstruction of traffic, injury or danger to trees along the route, damage
to city streets or other property or public utility and fire hazard, the
Streets Division Superintendent shall issue the permit, provided that
the applicant files a bond as provided in § 165-4 hereof.
A. Before issuance of a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall post
a surety bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.) made by
a surety company duly authorized to transact business in this state as
surety, and the owner of the building to be removed and the person in
charge of the removal of said building as principals.
B. The bond shall be in a form approved by the Corporation Counsel and
shall indemnify the city against injury or damage to streets, trees,
shrubbery, utilities and all other kinds or types of property within the
city.
A. At least ten (10) days before commencing the moving of any house,
building or structure, the permittee shall give written notice to:
(1) The Streets Division Superintendent.
(2) The Chief of Police.
(3) The Chief of the Fire Division.
(4) The Public Property Superintendent if any trees may be affected by
the moving.
(5) Utility companies which may be affected by the moving.
B. Said notice shall state the time of commencement of moving operations
and the estimated time for reaching the destination.
§ 165-3 BUILDINGS, MOVING OF § 165-7
165:379
§ 165-7. Display of permit.
Every permit shall be conspicuously displayed upon the vehicle during the
course of any moving.
§ 165-8. Violations and penalties.89
Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein, any person who
violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.), by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 169
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 169-1. Duty of owner or occupant to display street number.
§ 169-2. Violations and penalties.90
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof.
A. The owner or occupant of every building in the city shall, at his or its
own cost and expense, place and maintain upon such building,
immediately upon completion or within sixty (60) days of ownership or
occupancy, the street number of such building. The street number shall
be conspicuously displayed on the side of the building facing the street.
B. The number shall conform to the lot number as shown on the current
Tax Map of the city and shall be made large enough so that the same
may be clearly visible from the street.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 165-7 PATERSON CODE § 169-2
169:380
Chapter 175
CERTIFICATES OF RE-RENTAL APPROVAL AND COMPLIANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous and unfit buildings — See Ch. 157.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 169.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
§ 169-2 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 169-2
169:381

ARTICLE I
Certificate of Re-Rental Approval
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 14, Art. 6, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 175-1. Statement of policy.
§ 175-2. Definitions.
The following terms, whenever used or referred to in this article, shall have
the following respective meanings for the purposes of this article, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
DIVISION — The Division of Community Improvements in the Department
of Community Development.
DWELLING — Any building or structure rented or offered for rent to one or
more tenants for family residential units.
HOUSING SPACE — Includes that portion of a dwelling rented or offered
for rent for living and dwelling privileges, services, furnishings, furniture,
equipment, facilities and improvements connected with the use or
occupancy of such portion of the real property, save that the term "housing
space" shall not apply to a two-family dwelling in which one housing space
is occupied by the owner of such dwelling and the other housing space is
rented or altered for rent.
MINOR VIOLATION — A departure from Chapter 271, Housing-Property
Maintenance, which still leaves the housing space in substantial compliance
with such chapter.
A. The City of Paterson is committed to the preservation of good housing
and the enhancement of high-quality neighborhood environments, and
in this regard the governing body finds the rental of housing space in
dwellings to be an appropriate focus of policymaking.
B. Further, the rental of housing space in dwellings in the City is an
important area of concern to the governing body in consideration of the
fact that the majority of households in the City occupy rented housing
space.
C. Under the police powers granted to the City and in order to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City, it is necessary to
regulate the circumstances under which housing space may be rented.
D. Whereas existing programs have not kept pace with the need for code
enforcement, an appropriate opportunity to intervene in the downward
cycle of housing deterioration is presented on the re-renting of a
housing space; therefore, this article makes provision for code
enforcement through requiring the obtaining of a certificate of re-rental
approval in each instance of the re-rental of housing space. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 175-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 175-2
169:383
SERVICE — The provision of electric power, heat, hot water, maintenance,
painting, elevator service, air conditioning, storm windows, screens,
superintendent service and any other benefit, privilege or facility connected
with the use or occupancy of any dwelling or housing space.
§ 175-3. Certificate of re-rental approval required. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 175-4. Inspections; temporary certificate of re-rental approval;
request for expedited certificate and inspection. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
A. A certificate of re-rental approval shall be obtained from the Division of
Community Improvements, Department of Community Development, by
the landlord of every dwelling which is subject to the provisions of this
article immediately prior to allowing a new tenant to take possession of
a housing space.
B. The inspection mentioned in the following section must be conducted
while the housing space is vacant. In no case shall an inspection be
considered as immediately prior to a new tenant's possession if it is
conducted more than 30 days prior to such new tenant's possession.
A. The required certificate of re-rental approval shall be granted in
respect of any housing space within a dwelling only after such housing
space shall have been physically inspected to ascertain its compliance
with Chapter 271, Housing-Property Maintenance.
B. The inspection shall be carried out within three business days of the
request for a certificate of re-rental approval. If such inspection is not
completed by 4:00 p.m. of the afternoon of the third business day after
the inspection is requested, the landlord shall consider himself to have
received a temporary certificate of re-rental approval and may permit a
tenant to occupy the housing space until the inspection is completed.
All time computations under this article shall be made in compliance
with R. 1:3-1 of Rules Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey.
C. The Division, at the request of a landlord, shall inspect any housing
space on an expedited basis within one business day of receipt of the
request, provided that an expedited inspection is needed by the
landlord to avoid loss of rental and the need for such expedited
inspection is not due to a lack of diligence on the part of the landlord. In
determining whether to supply an expedited inspection, the Division
shall consider the application for an expedited inspection submitted by
the landlord which shall contain the landlord's certification under oath:
(1) Stating the housing space is needed for occupancy by a tenant
before the passing of three working days.
(2) Giving the name and address of the tenant.
(3) Stating the day on which the tenant needs occupancy.
§ 175-2 PATERSON CODE § 175-4
169:384
§ 175-5. Inspection fee; issuance or denial of certificate; results to
landlord. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 2-22-2011 by
Ord. No. 11-009]
§ 175-6. Requests for reinspections; fee. [Amended 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 11-009]
The Division shall entertain under the rules set forth in § 175-4 requests
for reinspection of dwelling spaces for which no certificate of re-rental
approval was issued after a prior inspection because of the existence of
code violations. Any such request shall be accompanied by a reinspection
fee per dwelling space. See § 175-7, below.
§ 175-7. Fees for inspections. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
11-009]
Number of Housing
Spaces Initial Inspection Reinspection
First housing space $50 $25
Additional housing
spaces
$20 each $15 each
§ 175-8. Tenant's contribution toward inspection fee. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
A landlord may require a tenant proposing to occupy a housing space in
respect of which certificate of re-rental approval was issued to pay not more
(4) Stating the day on which the landlord knew the housing space
would be vacant, the day on which it became vacant and the day on
which an agreement was reached with a new tenant as to
occupancy.
A. Requests for inspection to the Division shall be accompanied by a fee
per housing space. See § 175-7, below. If no violations of standards
mentioned in § 175-4A are found in the housing space, the Division shall
issue a certificate of re-rental approval. If violations are found and are
not deemed to be minor violations, no certificate of re-rental approval
shall issue. The results of any inspection (or reinspection) under this
article shall be reported to the landlord on the day they are known by
first class mail or in person if the landlord presents himself at the
Division's office.
B. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, at the time of such
inspection it shall not be grounds for denial of a certificate of re-rental
approval that utilities (electricity, gas or water) have been temporarily
discontinued pending occupancy of a new tenant; provided, however,
that landlords still shall be required at the time of such inspection to
have housing spaces supplied and connected with all facilities and
equipment required by Chapter 271, Housing-Property Maintenance.
§ 175-4 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 175-8
169:385
than $5 towards the cost of obtaining said certificate, such payment to be
made in one lump sum.
§ 175-9. When tenant to pay cost of reinspection.
In case a tenant fails to take possession on a date he indicated to a landlord
and a reinspection is required because a prior inspection or reinspection is
not deemed to be immediately prior to the tenant's possession, the landlord
may require the tenant to pay the entire cost of such reinspection.
§ 175-10. Promulgation of rules and regulations and forms.
To enforce the terms of this article, the Division shall have the authority to
promulgate:
§ 175-11. Appeal from denial of certificate of re-rental approval;
procedures; records.
A. Such rules and regulations as are necessary.
B. Inspection application forms, expedited inspection application forms,
certificate of re-rental approval forms and any other necessary forms.
[Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
A. Any person aggrieved by a denial of a certificate of re-rental approval
may appeal, in writing, to the Director of the Department of Community
Development. The Director of the Department of Community
Development shall hear the appeal, render a decision thereon and file
his decision with a statement of the reasons therefor with the Division
not later than five business days following the submission of the appeal,
unless such period of time has been extended with the consent of the
applicant. Such decision may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of
the Division or remand the matter for further action. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
B. A copy of the decision shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail
to the party taking the appeal.
C. Failure to hear an appeal and render and file a decision thereon within
the time limits prescribed in this section shall be deemed a denial of the
appeal for purposes of a complaint, application or appeal to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
D. A record of all decisions made by the Director of the Department of
Community Development, properly indexed, shall be kept and shall be
subjected to public inspection during business hours.
E. The Director of the Department of Community Development shall
provide rules for his procedure in accordance with this article and
regulations established hereunder.
§ 175-8 PATERSON CODE § 175-12
169:386
§ 175-12. Distribution of copies of certificates to tenants.
The Division of Community Improvements shall in all cases supply the
landlord with enough copies of any certificate or temporary certificate
to distribute to tenants. The landlord shall distribute such copies to the
tenants.
§ 175-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 175-12 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 175-13
169:387

ARTICLE II
Certificate of Compliance Prior to Transfer of Title
[Adopted 9-15-1971; amended in its entirety 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
§ 175-14. Authority to conduct inspections and issue certificates of
compliance.
The Department of Community Development of the City of Paterson is
hereby authorized to conduct inspections of residential dwellings and
dwelling units and to certify the result thereof by the issuance of a
certificate of compliance.
§ 175-15. Contents of certificate.
The certification issued shall list any violations of Chapter 183, Uniform
Construction Codes; Chapter 271, Housing-Property Maintenance; Chapter
275, Housing Standards; Chapter 483, Zoning and Land Development;
and shall in prominent type contain the statement that, "THE CITY OF
PATERSON DOES NOT GUARANTEE TO PURCHASER, MORTGAGOR OR
MORTGAGEE THAT THE PREMISES INSPECTED ARE FREE FROM
LATENT DEFECTS; NOR IS THE CITY LIABLE FOR DAMAGES OR INJURY
CAUSED ANY PERSON AS THE RESULT OF ANY VIOLATION NOT
REPORTED HEREIN."
§ 175-16. Requests for certification.
All requests for certification shall be in writing to the Community
Development Director and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fees set
forth in § 175-18 below.
§ 175-17. Issuance of certificates.
§ 175-18. Fees.
The fees for inspections and notices, orders or statements issued under this
article shall be as follows:
A. The certifications shall be issued by the Department of Community
Development within three weeks of receipt of the written request. If the
request is mailed, the date of receipt shall be presumed to be three days
after the date of mailing.
B. In no event shall the City be liable for any delay in issuance of
certification.
A. Dwelling units:
(1) One- and two-family dwellings: $50.
(2) Three-family dwelling units: $75.
§ 175-14 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 175-18
169:389
(3) Four-dwelling units and over: $100.
B. Rooming houses, hotels and furnished rooms shall pay a fee of $15 per
unit, with no fee less than $15 for such inspection.
C. Mixed occupancy fees shall be computed on the occupancy categories
listed above.
D. The reinspection fee shall be half of the required fee for inspection.
§ 175-18 PATERSON CODE § 175-18
169:390
Chapter 179
CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices — See
Ch. 117.
Public billiard and pool rooms — See Ch. 133.
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 227.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 367.
Smoking — See Ch. 421.
§ 179-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GOVERNMENT BUILDING — A building or portion of a building owned or
leased by a government entity.
MECHANICAL VENDING MACHINE — A device which, upon the insertion
of a coin, paper money, slug or token into any slot or receptacle attached to
said machine or device or connected therewith, or which by remote control,
mechanical or manual means, dispenses cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco
products.
TOBACCO RETAILER — An individual or entity who or which owns, leases
or otherwise exercises control over mechanical vending machines which
dispense tobacco products.
§ 179-2. Control of sale from vending machines in certain locations.
A. Within three hundred (300) feet of school property. It shall be unlawful
for any person or entity to dispense, sell or offer for sale cigarettes,
cigars or other tobacco products from mechanical vending machines
located within three hundred (300) feet of property used for school
purposes which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school, school board or district.
B. Government buildings. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to
dispense, sell or offer for sale cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco
products from mechanical vending machines located within any
government building as defined herein.
C. Locking devices for other machines. It shall be unlawful for any person
or entity to dispense, sell or offer for sale cigarettes, cigars or other
tobacco products from mechanical vending machines from any location
except where the operation is possible only by the activation of an
electronic switch or other device, which is controlled by the tobacco
retailer or his designated adult employee, and only after the tobacco
retailer or his adult employee has made a reasonable determination
§ 175-18 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 179-2
179:391
§ 179-3. Tampering with mechanical vending machines or
electronic devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to remove, disconnect or
otherwise disable or permit another person to remove, disconnect or
otherwise disable the remotely activated electronic switch or device on a
mechanical vending machine at any location within the City of Paterson.
§ 179-4. Seizure of devices.
§ 179-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity violating this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.), by
imprisonment for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed for each machine and on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 179-6. Application to existing cigarette vending machines.
Any person or entity who or which owns or possesses a cigarette vending
machine shall have sixty (60) days from the effective date of this chapter
to remove the machines from locations within three hundred (300) feet of
school property and from any government building as set forth above, and
as to all other machines, to bring them into compliance with the electronic
locking devices as set forth above.
that the person wishing to use the vending machine is eighteen (18)
years of age or older. In addition, all mechanical cigarette vending
machines shall be under the visual supervision of the tobacco retailer
and/or his or her adult employee, so that purchases from the machine
are readily observable by the retailer or his or her adult employee.
A. If a police officer of the City of Paterson Police Division, an inspector or
officer of the Division of Health or Licensing or any law enforcement
officer within the authority to act within this jurisdiction shall have
probable cause to believe that a mechanical vending machine is being
used for the sale or distribution of cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco
products, in contravention of this chapter, such device may be seized,
removed from the premises and impounded by such individuals or other
designated agent or authorized personnel. Said device shall not be
released until proper ownership documents are presented together
with a removal/storage fee of not less than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.) per device seized, together with any and all fines imposed by
the Municipal Court.
B. If no person asserts a claim for return of a vending machine seized
under this chapter within six (6) months from the date of its seizure,
said vending machine may be disposed of pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-157 et seq.
§ 179-2 PATERSON CODE § 179-6
179:392
Chapter 181
COMMERCIAL HOURS OF OPERATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 113.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 195.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 231.
Littering — See Ch. 313.
Loitering — See Ch. 315.
Noise — See Ch. 337.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
Outdoor cafes — See Ch. 349.
§ 181-1. Purpose; findings.
A. The purposes of this chapter regulating the hours of operation of places
of commerce, as defined below, in specific street areas noted below, are
as follows:
(1) Decrease noise and disturbance associated with the large crowds
of juveniles, young adults and others congregating around retail
food establishments and other late-night businesses on the
specified streets.
(2) Decrease overnight accumulation of litter, which the said crowds
generate.
(3) Discourage criminal activities, especially drug-related criminal
activities and violent crime, in the said crowds.
B. Based on residents' complaints and Paterson Police records, the
Municipal Council finds as follows:
(1) Retail food establishments and other businesses in the street areas
set forth below provide a haven for criminal activities, and these
activities are difficult to control while these establishments remain
open.
(2) Crowds of juveniles, young adults and others are attracted to the
street areas set forth below in part by retail fast food
establishments and other businesses that remain open during the
late-night hours.
(3) Encouraged by the presence of retail food establishments and
other businesses, the said unruly crowds congregate on the main
streets and may spill over into parking lots and side streets.
(4) The said unruly crowds create a disturbance in the neighborhood
which prevents residents from sleeping and walking the streets and
from enjoying the peace and quiet of their homes.
§ 179-6 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 181-1
179:393
§ 181-2. General hours; terms defined; alcoholic beverages;
exceptions; specified street areas.
(5) The said unruly crowds cause residents and pedestrians to fear for
their personal safety, thus causing an increase in the need for
police presence and calls for police service.
(6) The presence of all-night food establishments and retail sales and
services businesses has increased the volume of noise in these
neighborhoods as a result in the increase of automobile and
pedestrian traffic. The increase in automobile traffic is
accompanied by loud radios, car horns and running automobile
engines; the increase in pedestrian traffic by loud belligerent
behavior, fights and general commotion on the streets.
(7) The all-night operation of restaurants and retail sales and services
businesses has left the streets in these areas covered with debris
from food wrappings, bottles, cans and decomposing food products.
A. Generally: Places of commerce, as defined below, located in specified
street areas, as defined below, generally may operate in the City of
Paterson during only from 5:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.
B. Terms defined; alcoholic beverages.
(1) Terms defined. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
PLACE OF COMMERCE — Any business where goods or services
are offered in exchange for payment, economic gain, or paid
membership (other than membership in a charitable or benevolent
organization) to persons whose presence is invited or permitted,
regardless of whether the business is fixed or mobile. A place of
commerce shall include, but shall not be limited to, a store, a
restaurant, a take-out restaurant, a cafe, a market, a barber shop,
or a place of entertainment or amusement.
(2) Additionally, if and only if Paterson Code Chapter 113, entitled
"Alcoholic Beverages," is amended to provide that alcoholic
beverage licensees shall be subject to this chapter, or subject to
any stated portion of the duties imposed by this chapter, then
alcoholic beverage licensees shall be regulated as provided by the
amended Chapter 113.
C. Exceptions: The time limitations in this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
(1) Industrial activities: the operations of factories, warehouses,
wholesale food producers that are not open to the general public
for retail sales, and other such activities that do not involve
providing goods or services directly to the general public; or
§ 181-1 PATERSON CODE § 181-2
179:394
(2) Health care treatment: the commercial or not-for-profit operations
of hospitals, clinics, or other providers of health care services; or
(3) Housing, hotels, and rooming houses: the commercial offering of
long-term or short-term housing or hotel accommodations, or any
similar accommodations; or
(4) Athletic fields, athletic courts or parks: Such sites are excluded
from this chapter's time limitations, even in instances where
admission is charged for a nighttime event; or
(5) Schools, houses of worship, charitable or benevolent organizations:
Such sites are likewise excluded from this chapter's time
limitations, even in instances where admission is charged for a
nighttime event; or
(6) Maintenance, cleaning, administrative and clerical activities:
activities commonly performed in places of commerce, as defined
above, during hours when they are closed to the general public,
including but not limited to stacking shelves, taking inventory,
cleaning floors, or miscellaneous document preparation or
organization.
(7) Drive-through-only service, without indoor service, and with access
to on-site parking barred: places of commerce that meet all of the
following standards when operating during the hours of 12:00
midnight to 5:00 a.m.:
(a) The place of commerce shall at those times be accessible to
patrons solely by means of a drive-through facility;
(b) The place of commerce shall at those times sell only to
customers driving through in motor vehicles, with curb service
and walk-up service prohibited; and
(c) If the place of commerce has a parking area, then at those
times the place of commerce shall physically close all sections
of its parking area not utilized for requesting, awaiting, or
receiving the said drive-through service, such that it shall not
be physically possible for patrons to remain parked on the site
in their cars.
D. Specified street areas, also including entire intersections:
(1) Street areas: The specified street areas in which this chapter limits
the hours of places of commerce are as follows: [Amended
4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 16-028]
§ 181-2 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 181-2
179:395
Street Start Finish
Sides
of
Street
Terminal
Intersections
Included
10th Ave. E. 16th E. 28th St. Both Entire Tintersection
of 10th
Ave. and E. 16th
All four corners of
10th Ave. and E.
28th
17th Ave. Rosa Parks
Blvd.
E. 32nd St. Both Entire Tintersection
of 17th
Ave. and Rosa
Parks Blvd.
All four corners of
17th Ave. and E.
32nd St.
Broadway Straight St. Madison
Ave.
Both All four corners of
Broadway and
Straight St.
All four corners of
Broadway and
Madison Ave.
E. 18th St. 8th Ave. Broadway Both All four corners of
E. 18th St. and 8th
Ave.
All four corners of
E. 18th St. and
Broadway
Governor
St.
Auburn St. Carroll St. Both Entire Tintersection
of
Governor St. and
Auburn St.
All four corners of
Governor St. and
Carroll St.
Temple St. N. 6th St. N. 7th St. Both All four corners of
Temple St. and N.
6th St.
All four corners of
Temple St. and N.
7th St.
§ 181-2 PATERSON CODE § 181-2
179:396
Street Start Finish
Sides
of
Street
Terminal
Intersections
Included
Main St. Robert St. Goshen St. East Both corners of
Main St. and
Robert St.
Both corners of
Main St. and
Goshen St.
Main St. Montclair
Ave.
Gould Ave. West Both corners of
Main St. and
Montclair Ave.
Both corners of
Main St. and Gould
Ave.
Rosa Parks
Blvd.
Broadway Lyon St. Both Entire Tintersection
of Rosa
Parks Blvd. and
Lyon St., extending
to the corner of
Lyon St. and North
York
All four corners of
Rosa Parks Blvd.
and Broadway
Park Ave. Straight St. E. 23rd St. Both All four corners of
Park Ave. and
Straight St.
All four corners of
Park Ave. and E.
23rd St.
N. Main St. Haledon
Ave.
Clinton St. Both All four corners of
N. Main St. and
Haledon Ave.
Entire Tintersection
of N.
Main St. and
Clinton St.
§ 181-2 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 181-2
179:397
Street Start Finish
Sides
of
Street
Terminal
Intersections
Included
Straight St. Market St. Van
Houten St.
Both All four corners of
Straight St. and
Market St.
All four corners of
Straight St. and
Van Houten St.
Market St. Straight St. Madison
Ave.
Both All four corners of
Market St. and
Straight St.
All four corners of
Market St. and
Madison St.
W.
Broadway
Presidential
Blvd.
Cliff St. Both All four corners of
W. Broadway and
Presidential Blvd.
Entire Tintersection
of W.
Broadway and Cliff
St.
Carroll St. 16th Ave. Park Ave. Both All four corners of
Carroll St. and 16th
Ave.
All four corners of
Carroll St. and Park
Ave.
12th Ave. E. 18th St. E. 24th St. Both All four corners of
12th Ave. and E.
18th St.
All four corners of
12th Ave. and E.
24th St.
12th Ave. Straight St. Auburn St. Both Entire TIntersection
of 12th
Ave. and Straight
St.
All four corners of
12th Ave. and
Auburn St.
(2) Determining whether a site is within a specified street area:
§ 181-2 PATERSON CODE § 181-2
179:398
§ 181-3. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(a) Generally: A place of commerce located in one of the specified
street areas set forth above is subject to this chapter's
limitations upon hours of operation.
(b) Off-street locations: Where a place of commerce operates in an
off-street location, such as, for example, where there is a
parking area, lawn, or other grounds between the place of
commerce and the specified street area, then in such an
instance if any borders of the real property on which the place
of commerce operates are located on a specified street area,
then the place of commerce is deemed to be within the
specified street area.
(c) Multiunit structures: Within a multiunit structure, any place of
commerce shall be deemed to be in the specified street area if
and only if there are no other units, whether residential or
nonresidential, between the place of commerce and the
specified street area.
(d) Upper story businesses: Notwithstanding the preceding
provision, within a multiunit structure, a place of commerce
operating solely on a floor above street level shall be deemed
to be within a specified street area if any public street level
entrances via which it is accessed fall within a specified street
area.
A. This chapter may be enforced by the Police Department or by any
department or division otherwise having jurisdiction over the place of
commerce in question. Any person, firm or corporation found in
violation of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000
or the maximum permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, or any successor law, or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both.
B. The said recitation of penalties is stated without limitation, and as such
is not under any circumstances intended to preclude the City of
Paterson from pursuing any other remedies, including but not limited to
any applicable zoning actions, complaints to regulatory bodies, or court
actions seeking similar remedies via injunctive relief.
§ 181-2 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 181-3
179:399
Chapter 183
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Builders and contractors — See Ch. 153.
Dangerous and unfit buildings — See Ch. 157.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 161.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 165.
Certificates of re-rental and
compliance — See Ch. 175.
Illegal conversions — See Ch. 187.
Fire safety — See Ch. 215.
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
Lead-based paint — See Ch. 351.
§ 183-1. Enforcing agency designated.
The State Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency, also known as the
"Paterson Construction Code Enforcing Agency," as heretofore established,
is hereby continued. The agency shall be a subdivision in the Community
Improvements Division of the Department of Community Development.
§ 183-2. Officials.
§ 183-3. Office location of enforcing agency. [Amended 12-19-1995
by Ord. No. 95-068]
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location which, except for emergencies, unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances, shall be located at 111 Broadway, Paterson,
New Jersey.
§ 183-4. Total construction permit fee; prepayment; proof of
payment of taxes required. [Amended 10-22-1985 by Ord. No.
A. The enforcing agency shall consist of a Construction Official, building
subcode official, plumbing subcode official, electrical subcode official,
fire protection subcode official and other subcode officials for such
additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be
the chief administrator of the enforcing agency.91
B. Each official position created in this section shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq. and
N.J.A.C. 5:23.
91.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 8-2(b), regarding the fire protection subcode official, was
deleted 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068.
§ 181-3 PATERSON CODE § 183-4
179:400
85-093; 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-009; 5-23-2017 by Ord. No.
17-053]
§ 183-5. Building subcode fee. [Amended 10-22-1985 by Ord. No.
85-093; 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025; 12-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-086; 1-25-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003]
The building subcode fee shall be:
A. A fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in §§ 183-5 through 183-7 in addition to a $20 safe disposal fee for
debris, which shall be paid before the permit is issued.
B. Before a construction permit shall be issued, the applicant shall file
with the Construction Official a certification from the Tax Collector that
all municipal taxes and/or assessments have been paid and are current
with respect to the property for which the application for a construction
permit is made.
C. The applicant shall file documentation with the Construction Official
verifying that all debris has been disposed of at a licensed facility prior
to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
A. For new construction: $0.034 per cubic foot of building or structure
volume, provided that the minimum fee shall be $50.
B. For renovation, alterations and repairs, estimated cost of the work:
$1,000 to $50,000: $30 per $1,000; $50,001 to $100,000: $23 per
$1,000; and exceeding $100,000: $19 per $1,000, provided that the
minimum fee shall be $90.
C. For additions: $0.034 per cubic foot of building or structure volume for
the added portion, provided that the minimum fee shall be $50.
D. Plan review fee shall be 20% of the original permit fee.
E. For underground storage tank removal abandonment in place:
Size of Tank
(gallons) Fee
Each tank up to 550 $50
551 to 1,999 $75
2,000 to 3,999 $100
4,000 to 10,000 $125
10,001 to 20,000 $175
20,001 and up $225
F. Fees for retaining walls shall be as follows:
§ 183-4 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 183-5
179:401
§ 183-6. Plumbing subcode fee. [Amended 10-22-1985 by Ord. No.
85-093; 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025; 12-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-086; 1-25-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003]
The plumbing subcode fee shall be based on the following fee schedule:
All Fixtures/Equipment
Type of Fixture/Equipment Fee
Water closet $20
Urinal/bidet $20
Bathtub $20
Laboratory $20
Shower $20
Floor drain $20
Sink $20
Dishwasher $20
Drinking fountain $20
Washing machine/clothes dryer $20
Gas piping $75
Fuel oil piping $75
Water heater $40
Steam boiler $50
Hot-water boiler $50
Sewer pump $25
Interceptor/separator $75
Backflow preventer, residential $15
Stacks $15
Hose bib $15
(1) A retaining wall with a surface area greater than 550 square feet
that is associated with a Class 3 residential structure shall have a
flat fee of $189.
(2) A retaining wall with a surface area of 549 square feet or less that
is associated with a Class 3 residential structure shall have a flat
fee of $95.
(3) A newly constructed retaining wall of any size other than Class 3
residential structures shall be based on the cost of construction as
follows:
(a) Fifteen dollars per $1,000.
(b) Minimum fee of $50.
§ 183-5 PATERSON CODE § 183-6
179:402
All Fixtures/Equipment
Type of Fixture/Equipment Fee
Seepage pit $75
HVAC unit $50
Condensate drain $25
Backflow preventer, commercial 2 inches or less $25; over 2 inches
$60
Grease trap $75
Water-cooled air conditioning or
refrigeration
$75
Sewer/water connection $75
Gas service connection $82
Active solar $75
Other (storm drains) $25
§ 183-7. Electrical subcode fee. [Amended 12-18-1979 by Ord. No.
79-112; 10-22-1985 by Ord. No. 85-093; 9-9-1986 by Ord. No.
86-035; 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068; 12-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-086; 1-25-2011 by Ord. No.
11-003; 8-21-2012 by Ord. No. 12-033]
The electrical subcode fee shall be based upon the following fee schedule:
A. Class 1.
(1) Wiring. Wiring for lighting outlets, fluorescent fixtures, pool
bonding, intercom devices, thermostats, telephone outlets, CRT
outlets and light standards, ARC lamps, mercury vapor lamps,
mogul sockets and low sodium lamps, lighting fixtures, receptacles,
switches, detectors light poles, motors-fract. HP, emergency and
exit lights, communications points, alarm devices/F.A.C. panel shall
be calculated as follows:
Number of Fixtures Fee
1 to 25 $46 each unit
Increments of 25 additional items $8
Fire alarm or burglar alarm 1 to
25
$46
Increments of 25 additional items $8
B. Class 2.
(1) Motors (including control equipment).
(a) For any of these items:
§ 183-6 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 183-7
179:403
Number of Units Fee
1 to 10 horsepower $46 1st unit, $10 each
additional unit
11 to 50 horsepower $70 each unit
51 to 100 horsepower $184 each unit
Over 100 horsepower $612 each unit
(b) There will be no extra fee charged for a motor equipped with a
capacitor during the original installation.
(2) Electric furnaces, electric ranges, heaters, hot-water heaters and
similar devices and/or welders. The fee for electric furnaces,
electric ranges, heaters, hot-water heaters and similar devices and/
or welders shall be based upon the following fee schedule:
Number of Units Fee
1 to 10 horsepower $46 1st unit, $10 each additional
unit
11 to 50 horsepower $60 each unit
51 to 100 horsepower $92 each unit
Commercial kitchen hood
system
$150
(3) Reserved.
(4) Oil burner units and gas boilers. The fee for oil burner units and
gas burners shall be based upon the fee schedule for motors.
(5) Generators, transformers and capacitors.
Number of Units Fee
1 to 10 KVA $46
11 to 45 KVA $70
46 to 112.5 KVA $184
Greater than 112.5 KVA $612
C. Class 4.
(1) Service and meter equipment.
(a) The fee for the relocation, replacement or new and temporary
services, service conductors, feeders, metering devices,
switches, switchboards and panel boards or for adding the
same to the original or existing installation shall be based upon
the total rated carrying capacity of switches, fuse holders or
circuit breakers controlling this type of equipment.
§ 183-7 PATERSON CODE § 183-7
179:404
Number of Units Fee
1 to 225 amperes $70
250 to 350 amperes $184
400 to 800 amperes $300
1,000 amperes and over $612
Each additional meter, panel and
sub-panel
$46 each
Reintroduction/reconnect service same as above based on
amperes
(2) Pneumatic electric or electric pneumatic circuits. For this item:
(a) One circuit: $46.
(b) Each additional unit: $15.
D. Class 5.
(1) Electric signs and electric discharge systems.
(a) Section 1.
Number of Units Fee
1 to 100 volt-amperes $46
For each additional 100 voltamperes
$10
(b) Section 2.
Number of Units Fee
Lamps (any amount) $46
Each sign $5
Light poles $25
Street light poles under 8 feet $20
Street light poles over 8 feet $46
(2) The fee for decorative lighting shall be based upon the fee schedule
for electric signs and electric discharge systems.
E. Class 7, transformer vaults, outdoor transformer enclosed, outdoor
substations, switch and meter vaults, over 600 volts shall be based on
the following fee schedule:
Number of Units Fee
1 to 200 amperes $70
250 to 350 amperes $184
§ 183-7 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 183-7
179:405
Number of Units Fee
400 to 800 amperes $300
1,000 amperes and over $612
Each additional meter, panel and
subpanel
$46 each
Reintroduction/reconnect service same as above based on Amperes
F. Class 8, temporary installations. Temporary installations shall be based
on Class 4 service and meter fee schedule.
G. Class 11, dentists' chairs and x-ray machines.
(1) For any of these items:
(a) Each unit, including feeders: $46.
(b) Examination table or rooms: $46.
H. Class 13, swimming pools, spas or hot tubs.
(1) Residential in-ground.
(a) Under 550 square feet: $150.
(b) Five hundred fifty-one square feet or greater: $250.
(2) Commercial in-ground: $500.
(3) Bonding and aboveground: $46 minimum fee charge.
(4) Yearly inspection, bonding/grounding (CA): $58.
(5) Aboveground pool.
(a) Under 550 square feet: $75.
(b) Five hundred fifty-one square feet or greater: $150.
I. Photovoltaic system (P.V. system).
Number of Units Fee
1 to 50 kw $70
51 to 100 kw $150
Greater than 100 kw $612
J. Elevators.
Type of Installation Fee
New installation
1 to 10 floors $350
Over 10 floors $612
§ 183-7 PATERSON CODE § 183-7
179:406
§ 183-8. Plan review fee; credit. [Amended 10-22-1985 by Ord. No.
85-093; 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 99-028; 12-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-086; 8-21-2012 by Ord. No. 12-033]
The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the fee charged for the construction
permit and shall be paid before the plans are reviewed. The amount paid for
this fee shall be credited toward the amount of the fee to be charged for the
construction permit.
§ 183-9. Demolition permit fee; proof of payment of taxes required.
[Amended 10-22-1985 by Ord. No. 85-093; 5-26-1992 by Ord. No.
92-025; 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-009; 12-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-086; 1-25-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003; 8-21-2012 by Ord. No.
12-033]
Type of Installation Fee
Replacement, same as above
Repairs $100
K. Class 15, permits.
(1) For this item:
(a) Yearly permit: $175.
(b) Working without a permit: $1,500 a day plus fees for permits.
L. Class 16. Electrical license test is given by the State of New Jersey
Electrical Examiners, Department of Community Affairs.
A. The fee for a permit for demolition of a building or structure shall be
based on the following fee schedule:
Type of Building Fee
Garages (up to 3 cars) or sheds $50
One- and two-family dwellings $100
Three-family dwellings $100
All commercial buildings under 5,000
square feet
$200
All commercial buildings 5,000 square feet
or greater and residential properties over
three-family
$500
B. Before a demolition permit shall be issued, the applicant shall file with
the Construction Official a certification from the Tax Collector that all
municipal taxes and/or assessments have been paid and are current
with respect to the property for which the application for a demolition
permit is made.
§ 183-7 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 183-10
179:407
§ 183-10. Permit fee for moving of buildings. [Amended 10-22-1985
by Ord. No. 85-093; 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025; 12-21-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-086; 8-21-2012 by Ord. No. 12-033]
The fee for a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one lot to
another or to a new location on the same lot shall be computed the same as
new construction, namely, $0.03 per cubic foot, provided that the minimum
fee shall be $50.
§ 183-11. Sign fees. [Amended 10-22-1985 by Ord. No. 85-093;
5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025; 12-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-086;
1-25-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003; 8-21-2012 by Ord. No. 12-033]
§ 183-12. Certificate of occupancy fees. [Amended 10-22-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-093; 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025; 12-21-2004 by Ord.
No. 04-086; 1-25-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003; 8-21-2012 by Ord. No.
12-033]
The fees for certificates of occupancy required for compliance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.23 shall be as follows:
A. The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be based on the following
fee schedule:
Type of Sign Fee
Flat signs and
projecting signs
$2.50 per first 100 square feet; $1.90 per
square foot from 101 to 400 square feet;
$1.25 per square foot over 400 square feet
Minimum fee $58
Roof, pole and
billboards signs
$5 per first 100 square feet; $3.75 per
square foot from 101 to 400 square feet;
$2.50 per square foot over 400 square feet
Minimum fee $75
B. In the case of double-faced signs, the area of the surface of only one
side of the sign shall be used for the purposes of fee computation.
A. The fee for a certificate of occupancy for a new building and continuing
certificate of occupancy on an existing building shall be $151 if the
building is solely for residential purposes with no more than two
residential units.
B. The fee for a certificate of occupancy for a new building and continuing
certificate of occupancy on an existing building shall be $30 per unit if
the building is solely for residential purposes over two units with a
minimum fee of $151.
C. The fee for a certificate of occupancy for a new building and continuing
certificate of occupancy on an existing building shall be $0.03 per
§ 183-10 PATERSON CODE § 183-12
179:408
§ 183-13. Fire protection equipment fees. [Added 10-22-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-093; amended 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025;
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 12-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-086;
1-25-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003; 8-21-2012 by Ord. No. 12-033]
square foot with a minimum charge of $151 if the building is solely for
commercial purposes.
D. The fee for a certificate of occupancy for a change of use shall be $0.03
per square foot or a minimum fee of $151.
E. The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be $35.
F. (Reserved)92
A. Pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code, Fire Subcode section, a
permit shall be obtained from the fire subcode official of the Fire
Division of the City of Paterson or his designee for all automatic
sprinkler systems, special suppression systems, standpipes and any and
all other related fire protection equipment, prior to the installation or
use of any such system or equipment.
B. The fee for permits shall be based on the following fee schedule for
suppression systems and other related fire protection equipment:
(1) Wet or dry sprinkler heads.
(a) One to 50 heads: $150.
(b) Fifty-one to 200 heads: $200.
(c) Two hundred one to 400 heads: $600.
(d) Four hundred one to 800 heads: $900.
(e) Eight hundred one to 1,000 heads: $1,200.
(f) Each additional 25 heads over 1,000 heads: $50.
(2) Alarm systems.
(a) Smoke and heat detector systems.
[1] One to 12 detectors: $45.
[2] Thirteen to 35 detectors: $55.
[3] Thirty-six to 100 detectors: $100.
[4] One hundred one to 200 detectors: $150.
[5] Each additional 12 detectors over 200 detectors: $8.
92.Editor's Note: Original Sec. 8-13, Elevator fees, which immediately followed this section,
as amended 10-22-1985 by Ord. No. 85-093 and 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025, was deleted
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068.
§ 183-12 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 183-13
179:409
(b) Pull stations, water/flow supervisory devices, emergency/exit
signal devices.
[1] One to 12 devices: $45.
[2] For each additional 12 devices: $15.
(3) Suppression systems.
(a) Fire pump/GPM type, dry pipe/alarm valves, pre-action valves:
$175.
(b) Standpipes: $250.
(4) Pre-engineering systems.
(a) Wet chemical: $110.
(b) Dry chemical: $110.
(c) CO2 suppression: $110.
(d) Foam suppression: $110.
(e) FM200 suppression: $110.
(5) Miscellaneous.
(a) Kitchen hood exhaust system: $100.
(b) Smoke control system: $100.
(c) Oil/gas fire appliance: $50.
(d) Fireplace venting/metal chimney: $100.
(e) HVAC unit (commercial): $100.
(f) Space heaters (commercial): $50.
(g) Oil/gas fire appliance (replacement): $50.
(h) Incinerators: $400.
(i) Crematoriums: $400.
(j) Replacement tanks (same use): $25.
(6) For above- and underground storage tank installation.
(a) Flammable and combustible liquid tank installations; gasoline
for own use.
[1] Up to 1,000 gallons: $100 per tank.
[2] One thousand one to 5,000 gallons: $150 per tank.
[3] Five thousand one gallons and upward: $200 per tank.
§ 183-13 PATERSON CODE § 183-13
179:410
§ 183-14. Asbestos removal and lead-based paint abatement.
[Added 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025; amended 3-26-1996 by Ord.
No. 96-024; 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 99-028; 12-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-086; 1-25-2011 by Ord. No. 11-003]
Fees for asbestos removal and lead-based paint removal shall be as follows:
(b) Liquids, except gasoline under 100° F.
[1] Fifty to 1,000 gallons: $50.
[2] One thousand one gallons and upward: $100.
(c) Diesel oil for own use/commercial.
[1] Fifty to 1,000 gallons: $50.
[2] One thousand one gallons and upward: $150.
(d) Fuel oil for own use.
[1] Sixty to 500 gallons: $25.
[2] Five hundred fifty-one to 1,000 gallons: $50.
[3] One thousand one to 3,000 gallons: $75.
[4] Three thousand one to 4,000 gallons: $100.
[5] Four thousand one and upward: $150.
(e) Gasoline and kerosene for sale and storage.
[1] Fifty to 1,000 gallons: $80.
[2] Over 1,000 gallons: $150.
(f) Liquids, except fuel oil, between 100° F and F. flash point.
[1] Fifty to 1,000 gallons: $50 per tank.
[2] Over 1,000 gallons: $150 per tank.
(g) Diesel oil for sale and storage.
[1] Fifty to 1,000 gallons: $50 per tank.
[2] Over 1,000 gallons: $150 per tank.
(h) Fuel oil for sale and storage.
[1] Fifty to 1,000 gallons: $50.
[2] Over 1,000 gallons: $150.
A. Permit fee: $176.
§ 183-13 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES § 183-14
179:411
§ 183-15. Special Inspections; fee. [Added 12-21-2004 by Ord. No.
04-08693]
In addition to any permit fee charged herein, the fee for any inspections on
a Saturday, Sunday or holiday shall be $175.94
§ 183-16. Fee surcharge; annual report. [Amended 10-22-1985 by
Ord. No. 85-093; 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068; 12-21-2004 by Ord. No. 04-086; 1-25-2011 by Ord. No.
11-003]
§ 183-17. Biannual fee recommendations.
B. Certificate of compliance: $35.
A. In order to provide for the training, certification and technical support
programs required by the Uniform Construction Code Act95 and the
regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect, in addition to the fee
specified above, a surcharge fee of $0.00334 per cubic foot of volume of
new construction and $1.70 per $1,000 for alterations. Said surcharge
fee shall be remitted to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department
of Community Affairs, on a quarterly basis for the fiscal quarter ending
September 30, December 31, March 31 and June 30, and not later than
one month next succeeding the end of the quarter for which it is due. In
the fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said fee
shall be collected and remitted for the first and fourth quarters only.
B. The enforcing agency shall report annually at the end of each fiscal year
to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, and not later than July 31, the
total amount of the surcharge fee collected in the fiscal year. In the
fiscal year in which the regulations first become effective, said report
shall be for the third and fourth quarters only.
A. The Construction Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the City Council, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to
the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.96
B. The report shall be structured in accordance with such guidelines as
shall be issued from time to time by the Commissioner of the
93.Editor's Note: Former § 183-15, Fee for inspections on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
added 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-112, as amended 9-9-1986 by Ord. No. 86-035, was
repealed 5-25-1999 by Ord. No. 99-028.
94.Editor's Note: Original Section 3, Minimum fee, added 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-112 and
amended 9-9-1986 by Ord. No. 86-035, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025. Original Section 4, regarding reinspection fees,
added 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-112 and amended 9-9-1986 by Ord. No. 86-035 and
5-26-1992 by Ord. No. 92-025, which followed this section, was deleted 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068.
95.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
96.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq.
§ 183-14 PATERSON CODE § 183-17
179:412
§ 183-18. Construction Board of Appeals established; membership;
qualifications.
§ 183-19. Appointment of Construction Board of Appeals members
and alternates; restriction; compensation.
Chapter 187
CONVERSIONS, ILLEGAL
Department of Community Affairs so as to accurately portray true
enforcing agency expenses in general and for structures of different use
groups.
A. There is hereby established a Construction Board of Appeals to hear
appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency.
B. The Board shall consist of five members. At least one Board member
shall be a registered architect or a licensed professional engineer of
building construction experience, and at least one Board member shall
be as qualified as a plumbing subcode official and one as qualified as an
electrical subcode official. No more than two Board members shall be
selected from the same business or profession.
C. Each Board member shall have had at least three years' experience in
construction, design or supervision as a licensed engineer or registered
architect; or, in the alternative, five years' experience in construction,
design or supervision as an architect or engineer with a bachelor's
degree in architecture or engineering, respectively, from an accredited
institution of higher education; or, as a further alternative, 10 years'
experience in construction, design, or supervision as a journeyman in
the construction trade or as a construction contractor, subcontractor or
inspector.
A. The Mayor shall appoint the Board members by and with the consent of
the Council. For the members first appointed, the Mayor shall designate
the appointees' terms so that one shall be appointed for a term of one
year, one for a term of two years, one for a term of three years and two
for terms of four years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
B. The Mayor shall appoint such number of alternates as may be
appropriate, by and with the consent of the Council, for terms not to
exceed four years or may, in the alternative, appoint alternates on a
case-by-case basis.
C. No regular or alternate Board member may be a member of the
enforcing agency, the decisions of which are subject to the review of the
Board.
D. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
§ 183-17 CONVERSIONS, ILLEGAL § 187-1
187:413
§ 187-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
IMPERMISSIBLE RENTAL UNIT — An impermissible unit which is rented
or offered for rent for dwelling purposes for one (1) or more tenants or
family units.
IMPERMISSIBLE UNIT — A residential unit which is:
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — A single dwelling unit providing living facilities for
one (1) or more persons, said unit having provisions for any of the following:
sleeping, cooking and/or sanitation.
§ 187-2. Rental of impermissible units prohibited.
No person shall rent or suffer to be occupied an impermissible unit in a
building which such person owns or otherwise controls.
§ 187-3. Responsibilities of landlord towards tenant.
Upon a tenant being required to vacate an impermissible rental unit, the
landlord of said tenant shall pay to said tenant:
§ 187-4. Violations and penalties.
A. A residential unit for which no certificate of occupancy has been issued;
A residential unit which is in excess of the number of such units
for a particular building or zone according to the Zoning and Land
Development Ordinance;97 or
B.
A residential unit which was created without the required plumbing,
electrical or building permits.
C.
A. All reasonable moving and relocation expenses incurred by said tenant,
including a real estate broker's commission incurred in the procuring of
a new rental unit.
B. Any security deposit.
C. Any pro rata rent which may be due to the tenant because of the tenant
being required to vacate the unit prior to the expiration of the tenancy.
A. Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less
than one hundred dollars ($100.), not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.) or a confinement of not more than ninety (90) days in jail, or
both.
B. For purposes of determining violations of § 187-2 of this chapter, each
and every day of continued rental or occupancy shall be deemed to be a
separate and distinct violation.
97.Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 187-1 PATERSON CODE § 187-4
187:414
Chapter 191
DANCE HALLS AND DANCING ACADEMIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices — See
Ch. 117.
Entertainment and shows — See Ch. 203.
C. For purposes of determining violations of § 187-3 of this chapter, each
and every day of refusal to pay to the tenant the moneys required
thereunder shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation.
§ 187-4 CONVERSIONS, ILLEGAL § 187-4
187:415

ARTICLE I
Dance Halls
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 4, Art. 5, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 191-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANCE HALL — Any room, premises, structure or other place in the City in
which dancing is carried on and to which the public may obtain admission
by payment of a fee or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a
ticket or token or in which a charge is made for caring for clothing or other
property.
§ 191-2. Applicability.
Dancing, as used in this article, shall not apply to exhibitions or
performances in which the persons paying for admission do not participate.
§ 191-3. Dance hall license required.
No person shall conduct or operate a dance hall in the City without a license
for that purpose obtained as provided for in this article.
§ 191-4. Application for license; contents.
A. Each application for a license required by this article shall be filed with
the Licensing Division on forms approved by the Council and shall be
accompanied by payment of the license fee prescribed in § 191-6.
B. The application shall state:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) Location of the premises to be licensed.
(3) Trade name of the applicant, if any.
(4) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation.
(5) The name and residence of the applicant, if an individual; the name
and residence of each partner, if a partnership; the name, title and
residence of each director and officer, if a corporation.
(6) Address of principal office and date of incorporation, if the
applicant is a corporation. [Added 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
(7) Whether or not any person named in the application has ever been
convicted of:
§ 191-1 CONVERSIONS, ILLEGAL § 191-4
187:417
§ 191-5. Issuance of license; grounds for denial.
§ 191-6. License fee; term of license. [Amended 4-5-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-023; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-061]
(a) Any crime.
(b) A disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly persons
offense relating to gambling. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
(c) Any violation of a City ordinance involving breach of the peace
or immorality.
(8) What portion of the building in which the dance hall is located will
constitute the licensed premises.
(9) The number of fire exits.
(10) Whether the applicant owns the premises to be licensed and, if not,
from whom the premises is leased or rented.
C. If the answer to either Subsection B(7)(a), (b) or (c) is "yes," the
applicant shall state the date and nature of each conviction.
D. The application shall be signed by each individual applicant; by each
partner, if a partnership; or by the President or other authorized officer
of any corporate applicant.
A. The license shall be issued by the Licensing Division after approval
thereof by the Council.
B. No license under this article shall be granted unless it appears that the
place, premises or structure to be licensed complies with the applicable
requirements of the laws of New Jersey and of the building, zoning, fire
prevention and health ordinances of the City; that the place, premises
or structure to be licensed is a safe and proper place for the purpose for
which it is to be used, is properly ventilated and is supplied with
sufficient toilet conveniences and an adequate supply of pure, cold
water in an accessible place; and that it does not constitute a hazard to
the health, safety or morals of the public. A favorable written report of
the Fire Chief and of the Health Division, after investigation and
inspection, shall be taken as evidence of compliance with the
requirements of this subsection.
C. No license under this article shall be granted unless the applicant and
all persons named in the application are of good moral character. A
favorable written report of the Chief of Police shall be taken as evidence
of good moral character.
A. The fee for each license issued under this article shall be $110.
§ 191-4 PATERSON CODE § 191-6
187:418
§ 191-7. Display of license; transferability.
§ 191-8. Prohibited acts.
No licensee or owner or operator of any licensed room, premises, structure
or other place shall permit or allow:
§ 191-9. Prohibited hours of operation; exception.
Dancing shall not be permitted in any premises licensed under this article
between 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., except on January 1 of any year.
§ 191-10. Inspections; reports; right of access.
§ 191-11. Revocation of license.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 191-12, any license issued under
this article may be revoked upon proof, after due notice and hearing before
the Council, that the licensee has permitted any disorderly or immoral
conduct to take place on or in the place, premises or structure licensed
or that the premises licensed constitutes a hazard to the health, safety or
morals of the public or that there has been a violation of the provisions of
any applicable state law or ordinance of the City or of this article or for any
cause that would be grounds for a denial of the license in the first instance.
B. Each license issued under this article shall be valid for one year from
the date of issuance thereof.
A. Each license issued pursuant to this article shall be posted at the main
entrance of the place, premises or structure licensed.
B. Said license shall not be transferable.
A. Dancing to be taught therein for a fee unless a license therefor is
obtained as provided by Article II of this chapter.
B. The use of confetti or any other matter of a similar nature in any dance
hall licensed under this article.
C. The extinguishment of any lights which are necessary for proper
lighting a reasonable time before, during and after the dancing
program is to commence or to be terminated.
A. A license inspector shall make inspections of all dance halls licensed
under this article where a complaint with respect thereto has been
made of a violation therein of an applicable state law or of the
provisions of this article or of any applicable ordinance of the City. The
inspector shall make full reports of his inspections to the Council.
B. The licensee, owner or operator of every dance hall shall give the
license inspector free access to all dance halls licensed under this
article, at all reasonable times and whenever they are open.
§ 191-6 CONVERSIONS, ILLEGAL § 191-12
187:419
§ 191-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 191-12 PATERSON CODE § 191-12
187:420
ARTICLE II
Dancing Academies
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 4, Art. 6, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 191-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANCING ACADEMY — A building, room or place in which the business
conducted or carried on is the teaching of dancing for a fee.
§ 191-14. Dancing academy license required.
No person shall conduct or operate a dancing academy in the City without
a license for that purpose obtained as hereinafter provided in this article.
§ 191-15. Application for license; contents.
A. Each application for a license required by this article shall be filed with
the Licensing Division, upon forms approved by the Council, and shall
be accompanied by payment of the license fee prescribed in § 191-17.
B. The application shall state:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) Location of the premises to be licensed.
(3) The trade name of the applicant, if any.
(4) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation.
(5) The name and residence of applicant, if an individual; the name and
residence of each partner, if a partnership; the name, title and
residence of each director and officer, if a corporation.
(6) The address of the principal office and date of incorporation, if the
applicant is a corporation.
(7) Whether or not any person named in the application has ever been
convicted of:
(a) Any crime.
(b) A disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly persons
offense relating to gambling. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
(c) Any City ordinance involving breach of the peace or
immorality.
§ 191-13 CONVERSIONS, ILLEGAL § 191-15
187:421
§ 191-16. Issuance of license; grounds for denial.
§ 191-17. License fee; term of license. [Amended 4-5-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-016; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-061]
§ 191-18. Display of license; transferability.
(8) What portion of the building in which the dancing academy is
located will constitute the licensed premises.
(9) The number of fire exits.
(10) Whether the applicant owns the premises to be licensed and, if not,
from whom the premises is leased or rented.
C. If the answer to either Subsection B(7)(a), (b) or (c) is "yes," the
applicant shall state the date and nature of each conviction. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
D. The application shall be signed by each individual applicant; by each
partner, if a partnership; or by the president or other authorized officer
of any corporate applicant.
A. The license shall be issued by the Licensing Division, after approval
thereof by the Council.
B. No license under this article shall be granted by the Council if it
appears that the place, premises or structure to be licensed does not
comply with the applicable requirements of the laws of New Jersey and
the building, zoning, health and fire prevention ordinances of the City
or otherwise constitutes a hazard to the health, safety or morals of the
public. A favorable written report of the Fire Chief and of the Health
Division, after investigation and inspection, shall be taken as evidence
of compliance with the requirements of this subsection.
C. No license under this article shall be granted by the Council unless the
applicant and all persons named in the application are of good moral
character. A favorable written report of the Chief of Police shall be
taken as evidence of good moral character.
A. The fee for each license issued under this article shall be $66.
B. The license shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance thereof.
A. Each license issued pursuant to this article shall be displayed in a
conspicuous part of the place, premises or structure licensed.
B. Said license shall not be transferable.
§ 191-15 PATERSON CODE § 191-19
187:422
§ 191-19. Revocation of license.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 191-20, any license issued under
this article may be revoked upon proof, after due notice and hearing before
the Council, that:
§ 191-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
A. The licensee has permitted any disorderly or immoral conduct to take
place on or in the place, premises or structure licensed.
B. The place, premises or structure licensed constitutes a hazard to the
health, safety or morals of the public.
C. The premises has been used for general dancing without a license as
required by § 191-3 of this chapter.
D. The licensee has violated any applicable state law or ordinance of the
City.
§ 191-19 CONVERSIONS, ILLEGAL § 191-20
187:423
Chapter 195
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 113.
Amusements and amusement devices — See
Ch. 117.
Public billiard and pool rooms — See Ch. 133.
Block parties — See Ch. 137.
Dance halls and dancing academies — See Ch.
191.
Entertainment and shows — See Ch. 203.
Garage sales and flea markets — See Ch. 249.
Graffiti — See Ch. 255.
Littering — See Ch. 313.
Noise — See Ch. 337.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
Obscene materials — See Ch. 345.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 355.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 363.
Roller-skating rinks — See Ch. 389.
Registration of sexual offenders — See Ch.
411.
Smoking — See Ch. 421.
Spitting — See Ch. 431.
Public telephones — See Ch. 452.
§ 195-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall commit any of the acts enumerated below, each of which
shall be deemed and considered disorderly conduct or a breach of the
peace:
A. Use loud, offensive, disorderly, threatening, abusive or insulting
language or conduct himself or behave in any offensive, disorderly,
threatening, abusive or insulting manner.
B. Act in such a manner as to annoy, disturb, interfere with, obstruct or be
offensive to others.
C. By his actions cause a crowd to collect, except when lawfully
addressing such a crowd.
D. Interfere with any person in any place by jostling against such person or
unnecessarily crowding him or by placing a hand in the proximity of
such person's pocket, pocketbook or handbag.
E. Station himself in any place or follow or accost any person for the
purpose of obtaining money or other property from said person by any
trick, artifice, swindle, confidence game or in any other illegal manner.
F. Station himself on the streets or follow any pedestrian for the purpose
of soliciting alms or solicit alms on the streets unlawfully.
§ 191-20 PATERSON CODE § 195-1
187:424
§ 195-2. Discharge of firearms, weapons or missiles.
No person shall:
§ 195-3. Resisting or interfering with police, fire fighters and other
officials.
No person shall resist any police officer or member of the Police Department
or other city official in the discharge of his duties or in any way interfere
with or hinder or prevent any police officer, fire fighter or city official
from discharging his duties as such police officer or member of the Police
Department, fire fighter or city official, or threaten him or attempt to rescue
any person so in custody.
§ 195-4. Prostitution.
G. Stand on sidewalks or street corners and make insulting remarks to or
about passing pedestrians or annoy such pedestrians.
H. Accost or approach another unknown to him, on a public street or other
public place in the city, and then knowingly and by word, sign or
gesture attempt to speak to or become acquainted with such person
against his will, except in the transaction of legitimate business.
A. Set off or discharge any revolver, pistol, gun, cannon or firearm of any
description using cartridges or gunpowder for ammunition; provided,
however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to extend to
any military maneuvers, to any authorized target practice, to the
explosion of dynamite or similar material used for blasting purposes
under proper supervision and to any police officer in the line of duty.
B. Discharge or hurl any missile of any kind from any air gun or slingshot.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
KNOWN PROSTITUTE or PANDERER — A person who, within one
(1) year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section,
has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted of
violating any ordinance of the city defining and punishing acts of
soliciting, committing or offering or agreeing to commit prostitution.
PROSTITUTION — Engaging for hire in sexual activity, including
homosexual or other deviate sexual relations.
B. Unlawful acts. No person shall:
(1) Commit or offer or agree to commit an act of prostitution.
(2) Secure or offer to secure another for the purpose of committing an
act of prostitution.
§ 195-1 CONVERSIONS, ILLEGAL § 195-4
187:425
§ 195-5. Urination in public. [Added 11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-065;
amended 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-047]
Urinating on any street, sidewalk or any other public place in the City
of Paterson is prohibited. Any person who violates the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine in the amount
of $50. Fines for violation of § 195-5 are payable at the Violations Bureau
without court appearance. Costs of court of $30 will be imposed, consistent
with New Jersey Court Rule 7:11-4, for all such payments.
§ 195-6. Disruption of lawful activities of commercial or retail
establishments. [Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 14-023]
(3) Knowingly transport a person into or within the city for the purpose
of promoting that persons engaging in prostitution or procuring or
paying for transportation with that purpose.
(4) Knowingly receive, offer or agree to receive another into any place
or building for the purpose of performing an act of prostitution or
to knowingly permit another to remain there for any such purpose.
(5) Direct another to any place for the purpose of committing an act of
prostitution.
(6) Knowingly in any way aid, abet or participate in an act of
prostitution.
(7) Loiter in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public in a
manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of
inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act
of prostitution. Among the circumstances which may be considered
in determining whether such purpose is manifested are:
(a) That such person is a known prostitute or panderer, repeatedly
beckons to, stops or attempts to stop or engages male
passersby in conversation; or
(b) Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators
by hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily gesture. No
arrest shall be made for a violation of this subsection unless
the arresting officer first affords such person an opportunity to
explain such conduct, and no one shall be convicted of
violating this subsection if it appears at trial that the
explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose.
A. Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms will have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL OR RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment used
for commercial purposes, including but not limited to bars, restaurants,
private offices, law offices, fitness clubs, retail stores, barbershops,
salons, banks and financial institutions, supermarkets or grocery
§ 195-4 PATERSON CODE § 195-6
187:426
Chapter 203
ENTERTAINMENT AND SHOWS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bazaars — See Ch. 129.
Dance halls and dance academies — See Ch.
191.
Municipal facilities — See Ch. 209.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 355.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 363.
§ 203-1. License required.
§ 203-2. Application for license; contents.
stores, liquor stores, auto dealerships, and any other establishments
operating in the ordinary course of commerce.
B. Unlawful acts. No person shall:
(1) Interfere, obstruct, or otherwise disrupt, by means of force,
violence, physical interference or obstacle, the lawful activities of
any commercial establishment in a manner outside the purview of
speech or conduct normally protected under the First Amendment
of the United States Constitution; or
(2) Prevent a person from lawfully entering a commercial
establishment at specified business hours in a manner outside the
purview of speech or conduct normally protected under the First
Amendment of the United States Constitution.
C. Any person who violates any provision of T.C.O.P. § 195-6 shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000, by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
A. No performance, show or entertainment of any kind shall be given on
any street or in any building or other place in the City for any price or
gain without first having obtained a license therefor as hereinafter
provided by this chapter.
B. No owner, occupant or other person having the ownership, possession
or control of any house or other building or of any lot or premises in the
City shall knowingly suffer or permit any of the performances, shows or
entertainment specified in this chapter to be shown, given or performed
thereon or therein unless a written license therefor has been issued as
provided by this chapter.
§ 195-6 CONVERSIONS, ILLEGAL § 203-2
187:427
§ 203-3. Issuance of license; contents; grounds for denial.
A. Each application for a license required by this chapter shall be filed
with the Licensing Division upon forms approved by the Council and
shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate license fee
prescribed in § 203-4 of this chapter.
B. The application shall state:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The trade name of the applicant, if any.
(3) The location of the premises to be licensed.
(4) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation.
(5) The name and residence of the applicant, if an individual; the name
and residence of each partner, if a partnership; the name, title and
residence of each officer, if a corporation.
(6) The address of the principal office and date of incorporation, if the
applicant is a corporation.
(7) The number of balconies in the auditorium, if any.
(8) Maximum seating capacity of each floor.
(9) Number of fire exits on each floor.
(10) Whether or not any person named in the application has ever been
convicted of:
(a) Any crime.
(b) A disorderly persons offense or petty disorderly persons
offense relating to gambling. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
(c) Any City ordinance involving breach of the peace or
immorality.
(11) The period for which the license is sought, viz., the days, weeks,
months or other longer period and the dates thereof if less than the
entire year.
(12) Such other information as the Council may require.
C. If the answer to either Subsection B(10)(a), (b) or (c) is "yes," the
applicant shall state the date and nature of each conviction.
D. The application shall be signed by each individual applicant; by each
partner, if a partnership; or by the President or other authorized officer
of any corporate applicant.
§ 203-2 PATERSON CODE § 203-3
187:428
§ 203-4. License fees.
The fees of licenses required by this chapter shall be as follows:
§ 203-5. Revocation of license.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 203-6, any license issued under
this chapter may be revoked upon proof, after due notice and hearing before
the Council, that an immoral, obscene or indecent performance has been
held in the building or place licensed pursuant to this chapter or that the
building or place licensed constitutes a hazard to the health, safety or
morals of the public or that there has been a violation of the provisions of
any applicable state law or state regulation or ordinance of the City or of
this chapter.
A. The license shall be issued by the Licensing Division after approval
thereof by the Council and shall specify the place in which and the
period (days, weeks, months or year) during which the performance,
show or entertainment is authorized to be given.
B. No license under this chapter shall be granted or approved by the
Council if it appears that the place, premises or structure to be licensed
does not comply with the applicable requirements of the laws or
regulations of New Jersey and the building, zoning, health or fire
prevention ordinances of the City or otherwise constitutes a hazard to
the health, safety or morals of the public.
A. Theatrical performances or moving pictures, per year: $350.
B. Circus or menagerie: [Amended 4-5-1983 by Ord. No. 83-017;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-057]
(1) For the first day of performance: $225.
(2) For each subsequent day of performance: $125.
C. Any other kind of show or entertainment: [Amended 11-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 10-057]
(1) For the first day of performance: $50.
(2) For each subsequent day of performance: $25.
(3) Maximum fee for any continuous show or entertainment in any one
year: $400.
D. Any show or entertainment of any kind, consisting of moving pictures,
for gain or reward not exceeding one show per week, given or
sponsored by a public or private school or religious or charitable
organization of the City, where such gain or reward is to be devoted to
some educational, philanthropic, religious, charitable or similar
purpose, for each day of performance: $1.
§ 203-3 CONVERSIONS, ILLEGAL § 203-6
187:429
§ 203-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 209
FACILITIES, MUNICIPAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Entertainment and shows — See Ch. 203.
§ 209-1. Purpose.
In the interest of the preservation of public safety, no governmental agency
or department, including the Board of Education, shall issue any permit
for any activities, other than a municipally sponsored program, in any
municipal facility or on public streets or public land where a fee is charged
to gain admittance to or a fee is charged to take part therein unless and
until the following procedure is complied with.
§ 209-2. Preliminary application procedure.
Any person applying for the permit shall:
§ 209-3. Application for permit.
Any person applying for the permit shall submit proof of compliance with
the procedure set forth in § 209-2 to the agency having jurisdiction to issue
the permit required, together with an application for the permit and the
necessary fee.
A. First request for the Director of Public Safety, Chief of Police or his
designee to determine specifically the number of uniformed personnel
required to ensure the safety and welfare of all concerned.
B. Agree to engage the required number of off-duty police officers,
constables, special police or private security personnel as determined
by the Director of Public Safety, Chief of Police or his designee.
C. Post with the Division of Revenue Collection security in an amount
sufficient to guarantee that the required police protection service will
be secured.
§ 203-6 PATERSON CODE § 209-4
209:430
§ 209-4. Forfeiture of posted security.
In the event that the permittee fails to thereafter provide the necessary
police protection as set forth in § 209-2, the security posted with the
Division of Revenue Collection shall be forfeited for deposit to the city
treasury.
§ 209-5. Violations and penalties.98
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 212
FILMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Division — See Ch. 39.
Police Division — See Ch. 81.
Littering — See Ch. 313.
Noise — See Ch. 337.
§ 212-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FILMING — The taking of still or motion pictures, either on film or
videotape or similar recording medium, for commercial purposes intended
for viewing on television or in theaters. The provisions of this chapter shall
not be deemed to include the filming of news stories by recognized news
gathering programs and organizations.
PUBLIC LANDS — Any and every public street, highway, sidewalk, square,
public park or playground or any other public place within the City which is
within the jurisdiction and control of the City of Paterson.
§ 212-2. Permit required.
A. No person or organization shall film or permit filming on public lands
within the City of Paterson without first having made an application for
a permit to the Department of Community Development, Office of
Special Events, which permit shall set forth the approved location of
such filming and the approved duration of such filming by specific
98.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 209-4 FILMING § 212-2
212:431
§ 212-3. Issuance of permits.
reference to day or dates. No permit shall authorize filming for more
than seven consecutive days in any one location. If filming exceeds
seven days, an application for an extension of the permit must be made
to the Office of Special Events. Said permit must be readily available
for inspection by City officials at all times at the site of the filming.
B. All permits shall be applied for and obtained from the Office of Special
Events during normal business hours. Applications for such permits
shall be in a form approved by the Law Department and be
accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by this chapter
in § 212-4 herein. The permit fee and the application received from the
applicant shall immediately be forwarded by the Special Events
Director to the City Clerk along with a description of the film, proposed
film rating, rate status, etc.
C. The City Clerk will then submit the application for approval of the
permit to the City Council in the same manner as loudspeaker permits
are submitted to the City Council.
D. The permit when issued shall include alternate dates in the event
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified due to
inclement weather or other good cause.
A. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the City with satisfactory proof of the following:
(1) Proof of insurance coverage as follows:
(a) For bodily injury to any one person in the amount of $500,000
and any occurrence in the aggregate amount of $1,000,000.
(b) For property damage for each occurrence in the aggregate
amount of $300,000.
(2) An agreement, in writing, shall be in a form to be approved by the
Law Department, whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify and
save harmless the City of Paterson from any and all liability,
expense, claim or damages resulting from its use of public lands.
(3) An agreement, in writing, shall be in a form to be approved by the
Law Department, whereby the applicant agrees that the location
utilized will be left after filming in a satisfactory condition, free of
debris, rubbish and equipment and that due observance of all City
ordinances, laws and regulations will be followed.
(4) The hiring of qualified security personnel, as recognized by state
law.
B. The holder of the permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians and traffic over public
lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the Paterson
§ 212-2 PATERSON CODE § 212-3
212:432
Police Department with respect thereto. An emergency lane must be
kept open and available to police, fire and other emergency vehicles at
all times, and there must be sufficient space available for public access
at all times.
C. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable, abate
noise and not park vehicles associated with such filming on public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit, to the extent possible,
any interference with normal public activity on such public lands.
Where the applicant's production activity, by reason of location or
otherwise, will directly involve and/or affect any business, merchants or
residents, these parties shall be given written notice of the filming prior
to the City Council meeting at which the applicant's permit will be
considered by the City Council and be informed that objections may be
filed with the City Clerk. Said objections will become a part of the
applicant's application and be considered during a review of the same.
Proof of service of notification to adjacent owners shall be submitted to
the City Clerk within two days of the City Council meeting.
D. The City Council may refuse to issue a permit whenever it determines,
on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the application and a
report thereon by the Police Department and by other City agencies
involved with the proposed filming site, that filming at the location and/
or the time set forth in the application would violate any law or
ordinance or would unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment
of adjoining properties, unreasonably impede the free flow of vehicular
or pedestrian traffic or otherwise endanger the public's health, safety
or welfare. Further, the City reserves the right to require one or more
on-site patrolmen in situations where the proposed production may
impede the proper flow of traffic, the cost of said patrolmen to be borne
by the applicant as a cost of production. Where existing electrical
power lines are to be utilized by the production, an on-site licensed
electrician is required if the production company does not have a
licensed electrician on staff.
E. Copies of the approved permit will be maintained by the City Clerk and
the Police and Fire Departments.
F. The applicant shall permit the Fire Prevention Bureau or other City
inspectors to inspect the site and the equipment to be used. The
applicant shall comply with all safety instructions issued by the Fire
Prevention Bureau or other City inspectors.
G. In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this chapter, the
applicant shall reimburse the City for any lost revenue, such as parking
meter revenue, repairs to public property or other revenues that the
City was prevented from earning because of filming.
§ 212-3 FILMING § 212-3
212:433
§ 212-4. Fees.
The schedule of fees for the issuance of permits authorized by this chapter
is as follows:
§ 212-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $1,000 per day or by imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
H. The applicant must provide sufficient pedestrian access. Local
residents, business people and their customers must have access to and
from their residences or businesses. If access is denied it will be
considered a violation of this chapter.
I. The regulation of noise is subject to the Code of Paterson, Chapter 337.
The applicant must comply with said noise ordinance. Music playback
must cease by 8:00 p.m.
J. The applicant must keep the location swept and free of debris at all
times. All catering, craft service, construction debris and personal trash
must be removed from the location each day at wrap and disposed of by
private garbage disposal. The applicant may not use Department of
Public Works trash cans for production trash.
K. All production crew members cannot block driveways without the
express permission of the owner or lessee.
L. All signs that are erected by the applicant must be removed at the
completion of filming.
M. The applicant must provide a written plan providing for an emergency
right-of-way for all vehicles. The plan must be approved by Traffic
Division of the Department of Public Works.
A. Basic filming permit: $100. The basic filming permit fee may be waived
by the City Council if, in their judgment, the applicant for the permit is
filming a public service announcement, educational program,
documentary or an activity sponsored by a not-for-profit organization.
No waiver of the fee shall be allowed for a for-profit company or for a
film which does not satisfy the aforementioned criteria.
B. Daily filming fee payable in addition to the basic filming permit: $1,500
per day for five or more hours of use of public lands per day or $750 per
day for less than five hours of use of public lands per day. The daily
filming fee may be waived by the City Council if, in their judgment, the
applicant for the permit is filming a public service announcement,
educational program, documentary or an activity in support of a not-forprofit
organization.
§ 212-3 PATERSON CODE § 212-5
212:434
Chapter 215
FIRE SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Division — See Ch. 39.
Alarm systems — See Ch. 109.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 149.
Dangerous and unfit buildings — See Ch. 157.
Certificates of re-rental and
compliance — See Ch. 175.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Illegal conversions — See Ch. 187.
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 283, Art. I.
§ 215-1. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, P.L. 1983, c. 383,99
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the City of
Paterson.
§ 215-2. Local enforcing agency designated.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention of the
Department of Public Safety, Fire Division, in the City of Paterson.
§ 215-3. Duties of local enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted pursuant thereto in buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the City of Paterson and
shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 215-4. Inspections of life-hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency shall carry out the periodic inspections of lifehazard
uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Department
of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey.
§ 215-5. Organization of local enforcing agency.
The local enforcing agency shall be a part of the Department of Public
Safety, Fire Division, of the City of Paterson and shall be under the
supervision and control of the Chief of the Fire Division of the City of
Paterson.
99.Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202.
§ 212-5 FILMING § 215-6
212:435
§ 215-6. Fire Official.
The local enforcing agency shall be under the direct supervision of a Fire
Official who shall be the Supervisor of the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the
Department of Public Safety, Fire Division, of the City of Paterson. The Fire
Official shall serve at the discretion of the Chief of the Fire Division of the
Department of Public Safety.
§ 215-7. Inspectors and employees.
Such inspectors and other employees as may be necessary for the local
enforcing agency to properly fulfill its responsibility shall be assigned by the
Chief of the Fire Division of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 215-8. Construction Board of Appeals. [Amended 11-25-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-074]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,100 any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals for the County of Passaic.
§ 215-9. Non-life-hazard uses and miscellaneous fees. [Amended
5-14-1991 by Ord. No. 91-024; 11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-074]
A. In addition to the registrations required by the State of New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code, the following non-life-hazard uses shall register
with the Bureau of Fire Prevention. Uses required to register with the
state as life-hazard uses shall not be required to register under this
section. These non-life-hazard uses shall be inspected once per year for
possible fire hazards and compliance with State of New Jersey Uniform
Fire Codes and shall pay an annual registration fee as set forth below:
Any Occupancy Fee
Up to 999 square feet $50
1,000 to 4,999 square feet $100
5,000 to 9,999 square feet $250
10,000 square feet and over $400
(1) Duplicate copy of photographs: $5 per photograph.
(2) Duplicate copy of fire report or inspection report: $5.
(3) Duplicate copy of Investigation Report: $50.
B. Registration applications are nontransferable. Any changes in use or
occupancy shall require a new registration.
C. False fire alarm service fees. [Added 9-8-2009 by Ord. No. 09-024]
100. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 52:27D-208.
§ 215-6 PATERSON CODE § 215-9
212:436
(1) Definitions. As used in this section, the following shall have the
meanings indicated:
ALARMS — Any mechanical or electronic signal, reporting by
means of telephone cables, municipal fire alarm system or other
means of transmission, which signals are monitored by the Police
Department of the City of Paterson at its headquarters, or an
audible alarm which is heard and/or called in by another, and
which signals, upon receipt or upon activation, indicate to the
Department that an emergency exists at the sending location. Said
alarms shall include those types installed to indicate fires at the
sending location.
FALSE ALARM — Any report or request for fire service directed
to the Police Department or Fire Department by any means of
any communication wherein the situation, condition, incident, or
emergency as subject of the report or request did not and does
not exist. This definition shall include alarms caused by testing,
repairing, tampering or altering an alarm system on both
commercial and residential property and also alarms caused by a
failure to properly maintain an alarm system. This definition shall
not include alarms caused by extraordinary circumstances or acts
of God.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, firm, trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency, or
other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
(2) In the event that the Paterson Fire Department responds to an
active fire alarm that is determined to be a false alarm, a service
fee shall be paid to the Bureau of Fire Prevention by the person,
persons, corporation, owner or lessee of any commercial property
or residence in which a fire alarm has been installed who shall
cause, suffer, allow or permit the accidental or purposeful
transmission of a false fire alarm signal from any property in the
City of Paterson to the Paterson Police Department or the Paterson
Fire Department.
(a) Commercial property.
[1] For the first, second, or third false fire alarm in a calendar
year, a warning shall be issued.
[2] For the fourth false fire alarm in a calendar year, a false
fire alarm service fee of $50 shall be paid to the Bureau of
Fire Prevention.
[3] For the fifth false alarm in a calendar year, a false fire
alarm service fee of $75 shall be paid to the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
§ 215-9 FILMING § 215-9
212:437
[4] For the sixth through 19th false fire alarm in a calendar
year a false fire alarm service fee of $100 shall be paid to
the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
[5] For the 20th and subsequent false fire alarm in a calendar
year, a false fire alarm service fee of $500 shall be paid to
the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
(b) Residential property.
[1] For the first, second, or third false fire alarm in a calendar
year, a warning shall be issued.
[2] For the fourth false fire alarm in a calendar year, a false
fire alarm service fee of $25 shall be paid to the Bureau of
Fire Prevention.
[3] For the fifth false alarm in a calendar year, a false fire
alarm service fee of $50 shall be paid to the Bureau of Fire
Prevention.
[4] For the sixth and subsequent false fire alarm in a calendar
year, a false fire alarm service fee of $100 shall be paid to
the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
D. Multiple-family dwelling registration fees. [Added 11-9-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-070]
(1) As used in this section, "multiple-family dwelling" shall mean any
residential property which contains three dwelling units or more.
(2) All owners of multiple-family dwellings shall be required to register
and pay an annual fee to the Bureau of Fire Prevention based upon
the following fee schedule:
Number of Dwelling
Units Fee
3 $180
4 $190
5 $200
6 $210
7 $220
8 $230
9 $240
10 $250
11 $260
12 $270
13 $280
§ 215-9 PATERSON CODE § 215-9
212:438
§ 215-10. Prohibited use of kerosene heaters. [Added 11-25-2003 by
Ord. No. 03-074101]
The use of kerosene heaters, stoves and other similar fuel-burning
appliances is hereby prohibited in the City of Paterson. A portable kerosene
heater is a non-fuel-connected, self-contained, self-supported heater with
integral reservoir, designed to be carried from one location to another. The
sale of kerosene heaters in the City of Paterson is hereby prohibited unless a
conspicuous sign is posted indicating "The use of portable kerosene heaters
is prohibited in the City of Paterson."
§ 215-11. Issuance of a certificate of smoke detector and carbon
monoxide compliance. [Added 11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-074]
Number of Dwelling
Units Fee
14 $290
15 $300
16 $310
17 $320
18 $330
19 $340
20 $350
21 $360
22 $370
23 $380
24 $390
25 $400
(3) For those residential properties which contain more than 25
dwelling units, the fee shall be calculated as follows: $150
(common area fee) plus $10 for each dwelling unit.
(4) Multiple-family dwellings that are registered with the New Jersey
Division of Fire Safety as a life-hazard use shall not be required to
pay the common area fee of $150 but will be required to register
the dwelling units located within these structures at the rate of $10
per dwelling unit.
A. As per the Uniform Fire Code of the State of New Jersey, N.J.A.C. 5:70 et
seq., the issuance of a certificate of smoke detector and carbon
monoxide compliance, CSDCMC, is required before any one- or twofamily
dwelling (R-3 or R-4) is sold, leased or otherwise made subject to
101. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 215-10, Technical Amendments to
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
§ 215-9 FILMING § 215-11
212:439
§ 215-12. Notice of violation; service. [Added 2-28-2006 by Ord. No.
006-016]
Notice of violation shall be served upon the owner of record provided that
such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a
copy thereof is delivered to him personally or, if not found, by leaving a
copy thereof at his usual place of abode with a person of suitable age and
discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof or by sending a
copy thereof by mail to his last known address or, if the letter with the copy
is returned showing it has not been delivered to him, by posting a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by the
notice.
a change of occupancy. This inspection requirement applies only to oneand
two-family dwellings and not to multiple dwellings (R-2) that are
inspected by the State Division of Multi-Dwellings. The CSDCMC is
valid for a period of six months and is not transferable.
B. At least one smoke detector must be present on each level of the home,
including the basement and attic. All smoke detectors must be located
on the ceiling, no closer than 18 inches from any wall. A smoke detector
must be located outside of every bedroom but not more than 10 feet
from the bedroom doorway. If the bedrooms are close enough, it is
possible that one detector will provide coverage for multiple bedrooms.
If in order to comply with the code, a required detector is to be installed
in the kitchen, the detector must be a photoelectric-activated detector
as opposed to an ionization detector. An acceptable alternative to using
the photoelectric detector would be to install a standard ionization-type
detector inside that bedroom on the ceiling.
C. As per recent code revisions, N.J.A.C. 5:70-4-19(d), carbon monoxide
detectors are required to be installed in the immediate vicinity of all
sleeping rooms. The carbon monoxide detectors may be installed on the
ceiling or a wall; however, the manufacturer's installation instructions
must be followed. Carbon monoxide detectors are required to be
manufactured, listed and labeled in accordance with UL 2034. Each
carbon monoxide detector must be labeled indicating that it meets this
requirement.
D. All detectors must be installed and operating properly prior to the
inspection. The fee for the inspection is as follows: [Amended
6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 04-058]
(1) Inspections requested with a lead time of less than four days: $125.
(2) Inspections requested with a lead time of four to 10 days: $70.
(3) Inspection requested with a lead time of more than 10 days: $35.
§ 215-11 PATERSON CODE § 215-13
212:440
§ 215-13. Contents of notice of violation. [Added 2-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 006-016]
Whenever the Fire Official determines that there has been or is a violation
or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been or is
a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such
violation or alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor.
Such notice shall:
§ 215-14. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-28-2006 by Ord. No.
006-016]
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to
exceed $2,000, imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or a period
of community service for no more than 90 days, or any combination thereof,
at the discretion of the court. Every day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof,
shall be deemed a separate offense.
Chapter 219
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood Control Commission — See Ch. 41. Stormwater control — See Ch. 433.
§ 219-1. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of Paterson, New
Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 219-2. Findings of fact.
A. Be in writing.
B. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
C. Specify the violation which exists and the remedial action required.
D. Allow a reasonable time for performance of any act it requires.
A. The flood hazard areas of the City of Paterson are subject to periodic
inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
§ 215-13 FILMING § 219-2
212:441
§ 219-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
§ 219-4. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. To protect human life and health;
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an areas
of special flood hazard; and
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
§ 219-2 PATERSON CODE § 219-4
212:442
§ 219-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Construction Official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on a
community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a one-percent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one foot to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A nonbasement building built, in the case of a
building in an area of special flood hazard, to have the top of the elevated
floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts
and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water; and adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of special flood
hazard, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 219-4 FILMING § 219-5
212:443
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the
Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
B.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
C.
§ 219-5 PATERSON CODE § 219-5
212:444
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, useable solely for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than
a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but
as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal
use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348), includes substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 219-5 FILMING § 219-5
212:445
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank and that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter that
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
§ 219-6. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the City of Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey.
§ 219-7. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the City of Paterson, Community
No. 340404, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Passaic
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated September 28, 2007.
(2) Flood Insurance Rate Map for Passaic County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions), as shown on Index and Panel Numbers 0209, 0212,
0214, 0216, 0217, 0218, 0219; the effective date of which is
September 28, 2007.
§ 219-5 PATERSON CODE § 219-7
212:446
§ 219-8. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $1,250 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Paterson from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
§ 219-9. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 219-10. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 219-11. Warning; disclaimer of liability.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at 155
Market St., Paterson, NJ 07505-1408.
A. Considered as minimum requirements;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Paterson,
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 219-7 FILMING § 219-12
212:447
§ 219-12. Establishment of development permit.
§ 219-13. Designation of local administrator.
The Construction Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
§ 219-14. Duties and responsibilities of administrator.
Duties of the Construction Official shall include, but not be limited to:
A. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazard established
in § 219-7. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Construction Official and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature,
location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or
proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and
the location of the foregoing.
B. Specifically, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
(2) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure has
been floodproofed;
(3) Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in § 219-17B; and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Permit review.
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of § 219-18A are met.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with § 219-7,
Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Construction
Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
§ 219-12 PATERSON CODE § 219-14
212:448
§ 219-15. Variance procedure; Appeal Board.
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 219-17, Specific standards for flood
hazard reduction, Subsection A, Residential construction, and
Subsection B, Nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 219-12B(3).
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section,
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 219-15.
A. Appeal board.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustments as established by the City of
Paterson shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Zoning Board of Adjustments shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
§ 219-14 FILMING § 219-15
212:449
determination made by the Construction Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of
Adjustments, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the New
Jersey Superior Court.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of
Adjustments shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection A(4) and the
purposes of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Adjustments may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
§ 219-15 PATERSON CODE § 219-15
212:450
§ 219-16. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
(6) The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions, including technical information, and report any variances
to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the
items in § 219-15A(4) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 219-15A(4), or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. Anchoring.
§ 219-15 FILMING § 219-16
212:451
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
(2) All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(2) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
§ 219-16 PATERSON CODE § 219-16
212:452
§ 219-17. Specific standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 219-7, Basis for establishing areas of special
flood hazard, or in § 219-14B, Use of other base flood data, the following
standards are required:
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: a minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices, provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation; Require
within any AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); and require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
B. Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or require within any
AO Zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as
the depth number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number
is specified); and require adequate drainage paths around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures;
or together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities shall:
(1) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
§ 219-16 FILMING § 219-17
212:453
§ 219-18. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 219-7 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
Chapter 223
FLORISTS, RETAIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 367.
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in § 219-14C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 219-16A(2).
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. If Subsection A is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with §§ 219-16 through 219-18.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of that base flood more than two-tenths of a foot
at any point.
§ 219-17 PATERSON CODE § 223-1
212:454
§ 223-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RETAIL FLORIST — A person engaged in the business of selling at retail cut
flowers, trees, shrubs, vines, growing flowers or plants, potteries containing
plants or flowers and bedding stock. "Retail florist" shall not mean or
include retail sellers of cut Christmas trees; transient merchants or
itinerant vendors as defined in § 367-44; or farmers selling vegetables,
green foods, farm produce, shrubbery, plants, bulbs or products of the
nursery or farm in any common or public market place within the limits of
the city.
§ 223-2. License required; separate license for each location.
§ 223-3. Application for license; contents.
§ 223-4. Publication of notice of intention to obtain license; proof
thereof.
Following the filing of the application, the applicant shall forthwith cause to
be published a notice of his intention to obtain a license to engage in the
business of a retail florist. Said notice shall be published for two consecutive
weeks, once each week, in a newspaper published and circulated in the city.
A. No person shall engage directly or indirectly in the retail florist
business without first having obtained a license, as hereinafter
provided in this chapter.
B. A separate license shall be obtained for each location in which such
business is to be conducted.
A. Every application for an initial license under this chapter shall be made
in writing under oath and addressed to the Council upon forms
approved by the Council. The application shall be filed with the
Licensing Division. A separate application shall be made for each
location in which such business is to be conducted.
B. The application for an initial license shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name of the applicant.
(2) The permanent home address of the applicant, if an individual; and
if the applicant is a corporation, the permanent home address of
each officer of said corporation.
(3) The address at which it is proposed to conduct such business.
(4) The character of the business to be conducted.
(5) Such other information as may be required.
§ 223-1 FILMING § 223-4
212:455
Proof of such publication shall be filed with the Licensing Division prior to
consideration of the application by the Council.
§ 223-5. Issuance of license.
The license shall be issued by the Licensing Division after approval thereof
by the Council.
§ 223-6. License fees; term of license; renewal.
§ 223-7. Restrictions on persons granted licenses.
§ 223-8. Display of license.
Every license shall be conspicuously displayed in the place of business
conducted by the licensee.
§ 223-9. Transfer of licenses; fee.
A. The fee for a license under this chapter for each establishment or place
of business of the applicant shall be as follows: [Amended 4-19-1983
by Ord. No. 83-033; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-065]
(1) For initial licenses: $125 per year or part thereof.
(2) For renewal of a license: $55 per year or part thereof.
B. All applications shall be accompanied by the prescribed license fee.
[Amended 4-19-1983 by Ord. No. 83-033]
C. The term of the license issued under this chapter shall be one year or
any portion thereof, beginning on March 1 and ending on the last day of
the next succeeding February.
D. Any person who shall fail to renew his license within 30 days following
the expiration date shall forfeit his renewal privileges. He shall
thereafter be required to make the same application and to follow the
same procedure as an applicant for initial license and shall pay the
stipulated license fee for initial licenses.
A. No license shall be issued under this chapter to any person except one
engaged in the retail florist business or about to establish such a retail
florist business.
B. The license issued under this chapter shall not be deemed to authorize
any other person except the designated person named in said license to
engage in business thereunder.
A. The license shall not be subject to transfer from the licensee to any
other person.
B. No license shall be transferable from one location to another except
upon:
§ 223-4 PATERSON CODE § 223-9
212:456
§ 223-10. Suspension or revocation of license.
In addition to the penalty provided in § 223-11, the Council may, after
due notice and hearing, suspend or revoke the license of any person who
violates any provision of this chapter or who falsifies or makes
misstatements in the application for a license under this chapter.
§ 223-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 227
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 179.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 231.
Food handler's certificate — See Ch. 235.
Preparation and sale of food — See Ch. 239.
Food vending vehicles — See Ch. 243.
Sale of ice — See Ch. 279.
Milk and milk products — See Ch. 325.
Ice cream peddlers — See Ch. 367, Art. II.
§ 227-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
Whenever the following words, terms or phrases are used in N.J.S.A.
26:1A-7 and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, they shall have the
following meanings herein given:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Health Division in the Department of Health and
Human Services of the City.[Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078]
(1) The filing of an application by the licensee for such transfer with
the Licensing Division;
(2) Publication of notice of intention to transfer said license and filing
of proof of publication, in accordance with the requirements of
§ 223-4;
(3) Payment of a transfer fee of $5; and
(4) Approval of said transfer by the Council.
§ 223-9 FILMING § 227-1
212:457
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The Health Division or its authorized
representative.
MUNICIPALITY — The City of Paterson.102
§ 227-2. Permits and licenses required. [Amended 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068]
No person shall:
§ 227-3. Application for and issuance of permits and licenses;
transferability. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
Application for and issuance of the permits and licenses referred to in
§ 227-2 shall be made to the City Health Officer in conformity with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:1A-7 and regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto. Permits and licenses are not transferable.
§ 227-4. Permit and license fees; expiration of permits and licenses.
A. Engage in the business of operating one or more vending machines, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 26:1A-7 and regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto, without first having applied to and obtained a permit from the
Health Division in the Department of Health and Human Services of the
City to operate said business, in the manner provided as to permits by
N.J.S.A. 26:1A-7 and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and
paid the fee therefor to the City; or [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-078]
B. Maintain or allow to be maintained on or in any location in the City one
or more vending machines without first having applied to and obtained
from the Health Officer of the City a license for each such vending
machine, in the manner provided as to licenses by N.J.S.A. 26:1A-7 and
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and paid the fee therefor to
the City.
A. The annual fees for permits and licenses referred to in § 227-2 are
hereby fixed as follows: [Amended 5-19-1981 by Ord. No. 81-025;
12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-047; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-073;
12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-088]
(1) Permit fee for operation of business, per year: $150.
(2) License fee for each vending machine, per year: $50.
B. The fees for permits and licenses set forth in Subsection A are imposed
for the purpose of raising revenue and for regulation and control.
102. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 13-11, Adoption of Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code
of New Jersey (1961), which immediately followed this section, was deleted 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068.
§ 227-1 PATERSON CODE § 227-4
212:458
§ 227-5. Suspension, revocation or reinstatement of permits and
licenses.
Permits and licenses issued under authority of this chapter may be
suspended, revoked or reinstated by the Health Division of the City after
notice to the permittees or licensees involved and hearing conducted by the
Health Officer.
§ 227-6. Construal of provisions.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed or applied so as to impose
any unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the
state or federal government.
§ 227-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, including the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:1A-7 and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto
incorporated herein by reference, or order promulgated pursuant thereto
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000,
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 231
FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS, RETAIL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 113.
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 227.
Food handler's certificate — See Ch. 235.
Preparation and sale of food — See Ch. 239.
Food vending vehicles — See Ch. 243.
Sale of ice — See Ch. 279.
Milk and milk products — See Ch. 325.
Ice cream peddlers — See Ch. 367, Art. II.
§ 231-1. Definitions. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068;
10-24-2007 by Ord. No. 97-056]
The words and phrases defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5 shall govern the
meanings of such words and phrases in this chapter, except as indicated
otherwise.
C. All permits and licenses issued under authority of this chapter shall
expire on the 31st of December of each year.
§ 227-4 FILMING § 231-1
212:459
ALTERATION — Any physical change in a retail food establishment that will
change its Division of Health licensing category, change its annual licensing
fee, or otherwise significantly change the nature of the operation.
PREPACKAGED FOOD AND BEVERAGE STORE — A retail food
establishment selling no food or beverages other than prepackaged or
wrapped foods, such as but not limited to soft drinks, bottled alcoholic
beverages, candy, snacks, etc., which are packaged, wrapped,
manufactured or processed outside of such establishments. Provisions of
this Code governing prepackaged food and beverage stores shall be
applicable to any liquor stores accurately described by the above definition,
except where application of such provisions conflicts with state law or
Chapter 113 of this Code.
PUBLIC EATING PLACE — A retail food establishment that, for monetary
compensation, prepares and serves ready-to-eat meals, snacks,
refreshments or desserts, even where no seating is offered on premises.
Examples include, but are not limited to, restaurants, take-out restaurants,
cafes, coffee shops, bakeries, donut shops, and ice cream parlors. Provisions
of this Code governing public eating places shall be applicable to any
taverns accurately described by the above definition, except where
application of such provisions conflicts with state law or Chapter 113 of this
Code.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An operation that stores, prepares,
packages, serves, vends, or otherwise provides food for human
consumption, consistent with the illustrations provided by N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.5.
Examples include, but are not limited to, butchers, meat markets, fish
stores, produce stores offering cut fruit and vegetables, prepackaged food
and beverage stores as defined herein, and public eating places as defined
herein. However, abattoirs, slaughterhouses, food vending machines and
food vending vehicles shall be excluded from the definition, and shall be
governed by other provisions of this Code.
§ 231-2. License required; additional requirements. [Amended
1-23-2007 by Ord. No. 07-001]
A. No person shall operate a retail food establishment as defined and
governed by N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et seq. without first having applied to and
obtained a license from the Health Division of the City to operate said
business.
B. Every retail food establishment as defined and governed by N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.1 et seq. having 10 or more seats for the public must provide
reasonable access to toilet facilities for the public. Said facilities shall
be kept clean and in working order during hours of operation. In
addition, said facilities must be separated from food preparation and
dining areas by walls and doors, in order to provide sanitary conditions
and privacy for individuals using such facilities.
C. Every retail food establishment as defined and governed by N.J.A.C.
8:24-1.1 et seq. must submit to a health inspection conducted by the
§ 231-1 PATERSON CODE § 231-2
212:460
§ 231-3. Fees for licenses and services. [Amended 5-19-1981 by Ord.
No. 81-026; 4-5-1983 by Ord. No. 83-022; 12-27-1988 by Ord. No.
88-047; 4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-009; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No.
98-073; 12-29-2003 by Ord. No. 03-093; 10-24-2007 by Ord. No.
97-056; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-073]
§ 231-4. Suspension or revocation of license; hearing;
reapplication.
Paterson Division of Health upon its initial application and annually
upon the renewal of said application. [Added 6-28-2016 by Ord. No.
16-049]
A. The fees for licenses and services provided to retail food establishments
providing food in exchange for monetary compensation under this
chapter shall be as follows:
(1) The annual license fee for retail food establishments (5,000 or more
square feet) other than those specifically set forth below in
Subsection A(3) through (7): $500.
(2) The annual license fee for retail food establishments (less than
5,000 square feet) other than those specifically set forth below in
Subsection A(3) through (7): $250.
(3) The annual license fee for prepackaged food and beverage stores:
$175.
(4) The annual license fee for public eating places seating zero to 49:
$200.
(5) The annual license fee for public eating places seating 50 to 299:
$350.
(6) The annual license fee for public eating places seating 300 and
over: $1,000.
(7) The permit fee for temporary food stands (two weeks or less): $50.
(8) The fee for food establishment plan review (new establishment):
$250.
(9) The fee for food establishment plan review (alteration): $250.
(10) The fee for late renewal of licenses under Subsection A(1), (2), (3),
(4) (5) and (6) herein (more than 30 days after expiration date):
$25.
B. Any amendments to the licensing categories set forth above shall not be
construed as invalidating licenses previously issued.
A. Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
suspended or revoked by the Health Division of the City for the violation
§ 231-2 FILMING § 231-4
212:461
§ 231-5. Time period of suspension; reinspection; termination of
suspension.
by the licensee of any provision of this chapter or N.J.A.C. 8:24-1.1 et
seq. or whenever it shall appear that the business, trade, calling or
occupation of the person to whom the license was issued is conducted
in a disorderly or improper manner or in violation of any state or federal
law or any ordinance of the City or that the person conducting the retail
food establishment is of an unfit character to conduct the same or that
the purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to
the detriment of the public or is being used for a purpose foreign to that
for which the license was issued.
B. A license issued under this chapter shall not be revoked or suspended
until a hearing thereon shall have been had by the Health Division.
Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be served
upon the licensee at least three days prior to the date set for such
hearing. Such notice shall contain a brief statement of the grounds to
be relied upon for revoking or suspending such license. Notice may be
given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or
be deposited in the United States Post Office in a sealed envelope,
postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at the
business address appearing upon said license. At the hearing before the
Health Division, the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to
answer and may thereafter be heard. Upon due consideration and
deliberation by the Health Division, the complaint may be dismissed or,
if the Division concludes that the charges have been substantiated, it
may revoke or suspend the license held by the licensee.
C. If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license to carry on the same business within the City unless the
application for such license shall be approved by the Health Officer.
A. A licensee whose license to operate has been suspended shall cease
operations until the suspension has been terminated by either the
Health Officer or Health Division action.
B. The period of suspension shall be for such period of time as the Health
Officer may determine to be necessary for the correction of the
conditions which are in violation of § 231-4A except that such period of
suspension shall not exceed seven days.
C. The Health Officer shall cause a reinspection of the licensed premises
to be performed within three days of the suspension to determine if
violations causing the suspension have been corrected and to
determine if the premises are currently in compliance with § 231-4A.
D. If the operational practices and premises of the licensee are found,
upon such reinspection, to be in compliance with § 231-4A, the
§ 231-4 PATERSON CODE § 231-5
212:462
§ 231-5.1. Hours of operation. [Added 2-13-2007 by Ord. No.
07-003]
The hours of operation of a retail food establishment with 10 tables or less
subject to the provisions of this chapter shall not be earlier than 5:00 a.m.,
nor later than 12:01 a.m., the following day. The regulations provided for by
this section shall not affect businesses which are subject to Chapter 113 of
the Code of the City of Paterson.
§ 231-6. Construal of provisions.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed, applied or enforced so as to
impose any unlawful burden on either interstate commerce or any activity
of the state or federal government.
§ 231-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-14-1992 by Ord. No.
92-009]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by one or more of the following: a fine not exceeding
$1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 235
FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 227.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 231.
Preparation and sale of food — See Ch. 239.
Food vending vehicles — See Ch. 243.
Sale of ice — See Ch. 279.
Milk and milk products — See Ch. 325.
Ice cream peddlers — See Ch. 367, Art. II.
suspension shall be terminated and the licensee permitted to resume
operations.
E. If the operational practices or premises of the licensee are found, upon
such reinspection, to be in noncompliance with § 231-4A, the
suspension shall be continued. The licensee will not be permitted to
resume operations and shall be required to appear before the Health
Division for a hearing.
§ 231-5 FILMING § 235-1
212:463
§ 235-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD — Includes any drink or beverage for human consumption.
FOOD HANDLER — Any person who is engaged in or employed in preparing
and processing food for sale intended for human consumption, whether for
immediate on-premises or off-premises consumption, and who handles or
comes in personal contact with such food.
FOOD HANDLER'S CERTIFICATE — A permit issued to any food handler as
defined by this chapter.
§ 235-2. Food handler's certificate required.
§ 235-3. Application for certificate; fee.
§ 235-4. Time limit for making application for certificate.
Every person engaged in the business of food handling or employed as
a food handler shall, within 30 days from the date of commencing such
business or employment, apply for a food handler's certificate as required
by the provisions of this chapter.
§ 235-5. Requirements for issuance of certificate.
The food handler's certificate required by this chapter shall not be issued or
granted to any person unless he has first completed a course of instruction
generally in health education, sanitation, personal hygiene, food poisoning,
dishwashing procedures and other related health matters. The course of
instruction shall be under the supervision or direction of the Health Officer.
No charge or fee shall be imposed or exacted for attendance at said course
of instruction.
A. Subject to the provisions of § 235-4, no person shall engage in or be
employed as a food handler without first having obtained a food
handler's certificate in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Subject to the provisions of § 235-4, no employer shall employ any
person as a food handler unless the person so employed has first
obtained a food handler's certificate in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
A. Application for the food handler's certificate required by this chapter
shall be made in writing to the Health Division and shall be
accompanied by the fee provided for by Subsection B.
B. The fee for each food handler's certificate is $30. [Amended
4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-009; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-073;
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 03-097; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-072]
§ 235-1 PATERSON CODE § 235-6
212:464
§ 235-6. Term of certificate; suspension or revocation.
§ 235-7. Transfer to or use of certificate by another prohibited.
No person to whom a food handler's certificate is issued shall give, loan,
transfer or permit the same to be used by any other person, for any purpose
whatsoever.
§ 235-8. Records of employers.
All employers engaged in the business of food handling shall at all times
keep and maintain accurate records of the name and address of each
employee, date of employment, date of issuance of food handler's certificate
issued to each employee and the number thereof. Such records shall be
available at all times for inspection by the Health Division or any of its
accredited agents or representatives.
§ 235-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-14-1992 by Ord. No.
92-009]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by one or more of the following: a fine not exceeding
$1,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 239
FOOD, PREPARATION AND SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 227.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 231.
Food handler's certificate — See Ch. 235.
Food vending vehicles — See Ch. 243.
Sale of ice — See Ch. 279.
Milk and milk products — See Ch. 325.
Ice cream peddlers — See Ch. 367, Art. II.
A. The food handler's certificate, when issued, shall be valid until
suspended or revoked in the manner provided by this chapter.
B. For good cause shown and on written notice to any person holding a
food handler's certificate, the Health Officer may suspend or revoke any
food handler's certificate issued pursuant to this chapter.
§ 235-6 FOOD, PREPARATION AND SALE OF § 235-9
239:465

ARTICLE I
Misrepresentation of Kosher Meat and Food Products
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 13, Art. 9, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 239-1. Falsely representing nonkosher foods as kosher.
No person shall sell or expose for sale in any restaurant, hotel or other place
where food products are sold any article of food which is falsely represented
to be kosher, either:
§ 239-2. Misrepresentation as to kosher and nonkosher meats.
No person shall:
A. By direct statements, orally or in writing, which are untrue, deceptive
or misleading;
B. By the display of the word "kosher" in English or Hebrew letters or by
the display of any sign or mark in simulation of that word;
C. By having or permitting to be inscribed on any food product or on any
package or container or its contents the word "kosher" in any language;
or
D. By display of any insignia, six-pointed star or any mark which might
reasonably be calculated to deceive or lead a reasonable person to
believe that a representation is being made that the food exposed for
sale or sold is kosher or prepared in accordance with orthodox Hebrew
religious requirements.
A. With intent to defraud, sell or expose for sale any meat or meat
preparation, whether the same is raw or prepared for human
consumption, and falsely represent the same to be kosher or as having
been prepared under and of a product or product sanctioned by the
orthodox Hebrew religious requirements.
B. Sell or expose for sale in the same place of business both kosher and
nonkosher meat or meat preparations, either raw or prepared for
human consumption, unless he shall indicate on his window signs and
all display advertising, in block letters at least four (4) inches in height,
"Kosher and nonkosher meat sold here."
C. Expose for sale in any show window or place of business both kosher
and nonkosher meat or meat preparations, either raw or prepared for
human consumption, unless he shall display over each kind of meat or
meat preparation so exposed a sign in block letters at least four (4)
inches in height, reading "kosher" or "nonkosher," as the case may be.
§ 239-1 FOOD, PREPARATION AND SALE OF § 239-3
239:467
§ 239-3. Evidence of attempt to defraud.
The removal of any seal or inscription from meat or food preparation
already certified as "kosher" and the affixing of such seal or inscription on
some other product will be deemed evidence of attempt to defraud.
§ 239-4. Violations and penalties.103
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.), imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 239-3 PATERSON CODE § 239-4
239:468
ARTICLE II
Sale of Uninspected Meat
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 13, Art. 19, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 239-5. Meat to be sold only from inspected carcasses bearing
official stamp.
No meat shall be sold or offered for sale for human consumption in the city
unless the same shall be procured from the carcass of an animal which:
§ 239-6. Carcass as evidence of intended sale.
The presence of any carcass of any cattle, calf, sheep, lamb, goat or swine
in any market or store within the city shall be deemed prima facie evidence
that said carcass is for sale or is exposed for sale.
§ 239-7. Counterfeiting or tampering with official stamps
prohibited.
No person shall forge, counterfeit, simulate or falsely represent or without
authority use or detach or wrongfully alter, deface or destroy any of the
stamps, brands or marks recognized by the Health Division on any cattle,
calf, sheep, lamb, goat or swine or on any part or parts of any carcass or
carcasses of any of the above-mentioned animals.
§ 239-8. Condemnation and destruction of carcasses not bearing
official stamp.
The carcass of any cattle, calf, sheep, lamb, goat or swine or any part
thereof offered or exposed for sale in the city which does not bear the
meat inspection marks or brands recognized by the Health Division shall be
condemned and destroyed by the Health Officer or by his order.
§ 239-9. Right of entry for inspections.
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Article, the Health Officer
or his agents shall have the right to enter at any hour in or upon any land or
premises wherein or whereon any meat, carcass or carcasses of any cattle,
calf, sheep, lamb, goat or swine may be held or found.
A. Has been inspected, at the time of slaughter, by the United States
Department of Agriculture or by the Health Division or an agent
thereof; and
B. Bears the official stamp of the United States Department of Agriculture
or the official stamp of the Health Division of the city or such other
stamp approved by the Health Division.
§ 239-5 FOOD, PREPARATION AND SALE OF § 239-10
239:469
§ 239-10. Construal of provisions.
Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as repealing any of
the following sections of the Sanitary Code of the City of Paterson, passed
January 24, 1905: Sections 7, 8, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 69, 70 and 72.
§ 239-11. Violations and penalties.104
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 239-10 PATERSON CODE § 239-11
239:470
Chapter 243
FOOD VENDING VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 227.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 231.
Food handler's certificate — See Ch. 235.
Preparation and sale of food — See Ch. 239.
Sale of ice — See Ch. 279.
Milk and milk products — See Ch. 325.
Ice cream peddlers — See Ch. 367, Art. II.
§ 243-1. Definitions. [Amended 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-006]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADDITIONAL DRIVER/OPERATOR — A driver or operator of the food
vending vehicle other than the owner.
FOOD VENDING VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles and carts from which
food and foodstuffs are offered for retail sale or delivery to consumers or
other persons on the public sidewalks, streets and highways, also including
all peddlers within the scope of Chapter 367, Article II, entitled "Ice Cream
Peddlers."
PUSH CART — Any nonmotorized cart or such that is transported by human
means from an approved source and approved for use by the Paterson
Division of Health or his/her designee prior to issuance of license.
§ 243-2. License requirements and change of ownership. [Amended
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 03-095; 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-006]
A. No person shall offer any food for sale from a food vending vehicle in
the City without first obtaining a license therefor from the Paterson
Division of Health.
B. An applicant and any additional driver/operator for a food vending
vehicle license shall hereby be deemed to consent to the check by the
Passaic County Sheriff's Office or the New Jersey State Police of both
his motor vehicle record and his criminal record. In addition, an
applicant and any additional driver/operator shall be fingerprinted by
the NJ authorized vendor at their own expense.
C. To assist the Passaic County Sheriff's Office or the New Jersey State
Police make the required record checks, an applicant and any
additional driver/operator shall submit a copy of the applicant's motor
vehicle license and any other document requested and reasonably
necessary for the completion of the required record checks, including,
but not limited to, his social security number, certified motor vehicle
§ 239-11 FOOD, PREPARATION AND SALE OF § 243-2
239:471
§ 243-3. Annual license fee and late fees. [Amended 10-19-1982 by
Ord. No. 82-026; 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-047; 7-9-1991 by Ord.
No. 91-034; 11-22-1994 by Ord. No. 94-076; 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-011; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-073; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
03-095; 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-006]
abstract and a certified certificate of disposition for any criminal or
quasicriminal matters that an applicant may have.
D. A food vending vehicle license shall not be issued where the Director of
the Division of Health or his designee may reasonably conclude, based
upon the information contained in an applicant's or any additional
driver/operator's application or relating thereto, that the issuance of
said license would be detrimental to the health or safety of the public,
such as, for example, where an applicant or any additional driver/
operator seeking a license for a motorized food vending vehicle does
not have a valid motor vehicle license.
E. No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one
person to another.
F. Each applicant shall present proof that he or she is a citizen of the
United States or a legal resident eligible to hold gainful employment in
the United States. Each applicant shall be required to produce a
certificate of registration from the Director of the Division of Taxation of
the New Jersey State Department of Treasury. Each applicant who
possessed a license during the preceding year shall present proof of
payment of New Jersey sales tax required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:32B-1
et seq.
G. Both the applicant and any additional driver/operator must have a valid
food handler certificate prior to the issuance of a food vending vehicle
license.
A. The annual fee for the license for food vending vehicles dealing only
with prepackaged foods, such as but not limited to soft drinks, candy,
snacks, ice cream excluding soft-serve and scooped, etc., which are
packaged, manufactured or processed at an approved licensed facility,
shall be $250, to be increased as of January 1, 2016, to $390, payable to
the Paterson Division of Health before issuance of the license.
B. The annual fee for the license for food vending vehicles that prepare
food on site, regardless of whether they also offer prepackaged foods
manufactured or processed at an approved licensed facility, shall be
$300, to be increased as of January 1, 2016, to $440, payable to the
Paterson Division of Health before issuance of the license.
C. The fee for each additional driver/operator shall be $50.
D. A late fee of $25 per month shall be assessed for an applicant applying
after January 31. All food vending vehicles must come into compliance
with all Paterson Division of Health requirements by March 31.
§ 243-2 PATERSON CODE § 243-4
239:472
§ 243-4. Display of license and other requirements. [Added
7-9-1991 by Ord. No. 91-034; amended 2-9-2016 by Ord. No.
16-006]
§ 243-5. Compliance with other laws.
No license shall issue unless and until it is established that the food vending
vehicle and its food handlers comply fully with all ordinances and state
codes appertaining to the sale, preparation and protection of food and
foodstuffs.
§ 243-6. Parking restriction. [Amended 10-19-1982 by Ord. No.
82-026; 11-22-1994 by Ord. No. 94-076; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
03-095; 2-14-2006 by Ord. No. 06-013; 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-006]
A. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the vehicle
licensed under this chapter.
B. Clean-up and removal of litter generated by the food vending vehicle
and its patrons shall be the responsibility of the food vending vehicle
owner/operator.
C. A preoperational inspection is required prior to operating or any other
time deemed necessary by the Paterson Division of Health.
D. All food items must be approved for sale by the Division of Health and
shall be prepared according to Division of Health specifications and
also in accordance with N.J.A.C. 8:24 et seq.
E. All machinery used in the preparation of food items must be approved
by the Division of Health.
F. All products sold, disposed of or offered for sale under this article shall
comply with all state laws and ordinances of the City relating to food
and food products.
G. The hours of operation of an ice cream peddler subject to the provisions
of this chapter shall not be earlier than 8:00 a.m. nor later than 10:00
p.m. the same day. The Paterson Police Department shall enforce the
said time provisions after 4:30 p.m.
A. The sale or attempted sale of goods from a food vending vehicle while it
is parked on a public street in a residential area shall be prohibited,
except for the sale or attempted sale of ice cream products, as
described by Chapter 367, Article II.
B. No person shall station, place, set up or maintain his cart or goods at
any location:
(1) Between the curbline and an entranceway to any building, store,
library, school, museum, or other place of public assembly; or
§ 243-4 FOOD, PREPARATION AND SALE OF § 243-6
239:473
§ 243-7. Expiration of licenses. [Added 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
03-095105; amended 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-006]
§ 243-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-9-1991 by Ord. No.
91-034; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
03-095]
(2) On the portion of the sidewalk or roadway abutting a food licensee
with a fixed location.
C. For purposes of this section, "entranceway" shall include a door
providing ingress and egress to such places and any recessed area in
the vicinity of the door.
A. The term of said licenses shall expire on December 31 of the same
calendar year said license was issued, regardless of the date said
license was issued.
B. An application is considered new each year.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter and the
amendments or supplements thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not less than $100 and not exceeding $1,000, by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. In addition to the penalties set forth herein, any person operating a food
vending vehicle or cart who violates any provisions of this article, or the
applicable provisions of Chapter 24 of the New Jersey State Sanitary
Code, the vehicle or cart shall be deemed a public safety hazard.
Accordingly, in the instance of such violation the vehicle or cart in
question may be impounded (and, in the instance of an operator not
bearing the required license, shall be impounded) by either the
Paterson Police Department, Division of Health or the Department of
Public Works. In the event that any such vehicle is impounded, the
vehicle, cart, or truck may be redeemed by the person upon payment of
the cost of impounding and the storage charges established by the
Department of Public Safety. The said storage charge and cost of
impounding shall be the same as are established for the impounding of
motor vehicles. [Added 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-006]
105. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former § 243-7,
Violations and penalties, as § 243-8.
§ 243-6 PATERSON CODE § 243-8
239:474
Chapter 249
GARAGE SALES AND FLEA MARKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 125.
Bazaars — See Ch. 129.
Close-out sales — See Ch. 395.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 399.
§ 249-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FLEA MARKET SALES — Includes all sales of tangible personal property
which are advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be
made aware of said sales and which are not sponsored by a homeowner and
do not take place on the premises of said homeowner.
GARAGE SALES — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale,"
"attic sale," "rummage sale" or similar casual sale of tangible personal
property which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is
or can be made aware of said sale and which is sponsored by a homeowner
and takes place on the premises of said homeowner.
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
HOMEOWNER — Includes any occupant, lessee or owner of an individual
dwelling unit within the city.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
§ 249-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale or flea market
sale within the City of Paterson without first filing with the City Clerk the
information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such Clerk a license to
do so.
§ 249-3. License fees; waiver of fees.
A. The fee for all garage sale licenses shall be and the same is hereby fixed
at ten dollars ($10.).
B. The fee for all flea market licenses shall be fixed at twenty dollars ($20.)
per dealer or vendor in the case of multiple dealers or vendors.
§ 243-8 GARAGE SALES AND FLEA MARKETS § 249-3
249:475
§ 249-4. Restriction on number of licenses; postponement of sale;
display of license.
§ 249-5. Information to be filed.
The information to be filed with the City Clerk pursuant to this chapter shall
be as follows:
C. In the case of flea markets without multiple vendors, the fee shall
hereby be fixed at twenty-five dollars ($25.). The fees for flea market
licenses in all cases shall be paid by the organizer of said flea market.
D. In cases where charitable, religious or civic organizations have applied
for licenses, the Municipal Council is empowered to waive said license
fee.
A. No license shall be issued to any one (1) applicant or to cover any one
(1) location more than twice within a twelve-month period, and no such
license shall be issued for more than two (2) consecutive calendar days.
However, where the sale is to be conducted on a Saturday and/or
Sunday and the sale shall be postponed because of inclement weather,
the applicant will be permitted to hold the sale on the same day of the
following weekend. Where the sale is being held during the week and
the date is postponed because of inclement weather, the applicant will
be permitted to continue the sale on the next clear day.
B. Any license issued under this chapter must be prominently displayed on
the premises upon which the sale is conducted throughout the entire
period of the licensed sale. The license shall be a minimum size of eight
by eleven (8 x 11) inches and bright orange in color.
A. The name of person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting said sale.
B. The name of the owner and/or lessee of the property on which the sale
is to be conducted, together with consent in writing by the owner if the
applicant is other than the owner.
C. The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
D. The number of days of sale and the hours of sale.
E. Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's license
by any other local, state or federal agency.
F. An affirmation or sworn statement by the person signing that the
information given is true.
G. A general description of the type of goods to be sold.
H. The date of any past sale within an eighteen-month period preceding
the date of the proposed sale.
§ 249-3 PATERSON CODE § 249-6
249:476
§ 249-6. Hours of sale.
All garage sales and flea markets shall be conducted between the hours of
9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. only.
§ 249-7. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to nor affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 249-8. Enforcement; investigations.
§ 249-9. Good order and safety to be maintained.
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on
the premises during all hours of such sale or activity. No such person shall
permit any loud or boisterous conduct on said premises nor permit vehicles
to impede the passage of traffic or any roads or streets in the area of such
premises or block ingress or egress to driveways of adjoining premises. All
such persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any member of the Police
or Fire Divisions of the City of Paterson in order to maintain the public
health, safety and welfare.
§ 249-10. Restrictions on sales.
Licenses issued shall be subject to the following restrictions:
A. Persons selling goods according to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their duties and powers as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five (5) in
number.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Chief of Police or designee.
B. The Chief of Police shall cause to be investigated any violations of this
chapter coming to his attention, whether by complaint or arising from
his own personal knowledge. If a violation is found to exist, a complaint
shall be prosecuted before the local Municipal Court pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Police Division of
the City of Paterson to bring to the attention of the Chief of Police for
further investigation any violations of this chapter of which the Police
Division becomes aware during the course of its normal duties.
§ 249-6 GARAGE SALES AND FLEA MARKETS § 249-10
249:477
§ 249-11. Violations and penalties.106
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a maximum penalty of a fine of not more
than one thousand dollars ($1,000.), imprisonment for not more than ninety
(90) days or a period of community service for not more than ninety (90)
days, or any combination thereof. Each day that such sale continues without
the required license shall be considered a separate violation.
Chapter 255
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vacant lots — See Ch. 319.
A. No items of merchandise may be displayed on the street, front sidewalk
and between the front sidewalk and curb of the street. Merchandise
may be displayed in the front yard, driveway or rear yard, but not
beyond ten (10) feet from the face of the dwelling house.
B. Signs advertising said sale are authorized to be displayed the day of the
sale during the hours permitted by this chapter on the premises for
which the permit is issued. Said signs shall be removed immediately
upon the conclusion of the sale.
C. Any sale of any item of merchandise at any garage sale must comply
with all appropriate provisions of the law with reference to any such
sales, including but not limited to N.J.S.A. 26:10-1 et seq.
D. The applicant for the license or the persons in actual control of the
activity or the agent thereof shall be responsible for cleaning up the
licensed premises between the closing hour of the first day of operation
and the opening hour of the next day and within twenty-four (24) hours
after termination of the activity.
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 249-10 PATERSON CODE § 249-11
255:478
ARTICLE I
Prohibited Acts; Parental Responsibility
[Adopted 9-4-1984 as Ord. No. 84-085 (Ch. 18, Art. 11, of the 1979
Revised General Ordinances of Paterson)]
§ 255-1. Prohibited acts.107
No person shall purposely or knowingly vandalize, deface or otherwise
damage the tangible property of another by painting, writing, drawing or
otherwise inscribing in any fashion or materials what is commonly known
as "graffiti." For the purposes of this Article, "graffiti" includes any form of
painting, writing or inscription, regardless of the content of said painting,
writing or inscription or the nature of materials used in the commission of
the act.
§ 255-2. Violations by minors.108
If, at the time of the offense charged, any persons shall be under the age
of eighteen (18) years, the Family Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction
of the trial of such infant or infants, and such infant or infants shall be
surrendered to the Family Court and the case, including all papers and
process thereto, shall be transferred to the court as provided in N.J.S.A.
2C:4-11.
§ 255-3. Violations and penalties; restoration of property. [Amended
9-22-1992 by Ord. No. 92-049109 ]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90)
days or a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.) and not exceeding
one thousand dollars ($1,000.) or a period of community service for not
more than ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof, at the discretion of
the Municipal Court. As a condition of sentencing, the Municipal Court shall
have the authority to order that the offender be responsible for cleaning,
repairing, painting or otherwise restoring the damaged property to the
condition it was in prior to being damaged. In the event that the offender is
unable, for any reason, to comply with the above, the Municipal Court shall
have the authority to order that said offender make the necessary monetary
restitution to restore the property to its original undamaged condition.
§ 255-4. Parental liability.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:53A-15, any parent, guardian or other person having
legal custody of an infant under eighteen (18) years of age who fails or
neglects to exercise reasonable supervision and control of the conduct of
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 255-1 GRAFFITI § 255-4
255:479
such infant shall be liable in a civil action for any destruction or damage
caused by such infant offender under § 255-1.
§ 255-4 PATERSON CODE § 255-4
255:480
ARTICLE II
Sale of Spray Paint
[Adopted 3-28-1989 as Ord. No. 89-015 (Secs. 18-9 through 18-9.4
of the 1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson)]
§ 255-5. Definitions.
Within the terms of this Article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
IDENTIFICATION — Documentation establishing the identity of a person,
including but not limited to a driver's license, social security card or student
identification card.
SPRAY PAINT — Any paint or other pigmented substance which is in an
aerosol or similar spray container or which is intended for use in an aerosol
or similar spray container.
§ 255-6. Identification required prior to sale.
No person engaging in the business of selling or offering for sale to the
general public any spray paint or any hobby kit or similar kits of any kind
containing spray paint shall sell, exchange or transfer in any manner said
items to any individual without requiring said individual to produce proper
identification.
§ 255-7. Records of sales to be kept.
Any person engaging in the business of selling or offering for sale to the
general public any spray paint or any hobby kit or similar kits of any kind
containing spray paint shall keep a record of all purchases or exchanges
of these items. The record shall contain the full name and address of each
person who purchases or exchanges spray paint or hobby kits or similar kits
containing spray paint, the date of purchase and, in addition, shall contain a
description of the spray paint, including the quantity, brand name and color
of the spray paint.
§ 255-8. Time period for maintaining records; inspection of records.
Any person required to record purchases or exchanges of spray paint
pursuant to this Article shall maintain such records for a minimum period of
one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of purchase or exchange and
shall, upon reasonable request, allow the inspection of such records by any
law enforcement officer.
§ 255-9. Violations and penalties.110
Any person who violates any provision of this Article either by failure
to maintain said records as required or by assuming a false identity or
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 255-5 GRAFFITI § 255-9
255:481
providing false identification documents in connection with the purchase
of spray paint shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.), by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of community service not
exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
§ 255-9 PATERSON CODE § 255-9
255:482
Chapter 257
GREEN TEAM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Environmental Commission — See Ch. 37.
Air pollution — See Ch. 105.
Littering — See Ch. 313.
§ 257-1. Establishment and purpose.
The City of Paterson shall establish and maintain a Green Team, whose
mission, goals and objectives shall be as follows:
§ 257-2. Membership of Green Team and appointment thereto.
The Green Team shall be comprised of persons who reside, study or are
employed in the City of Paterson, and are to be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Municipal Council to three-year terms
commencing July 1, 2010, or as soon thereafter as the appointments can be
made. The Green Team shall be comprised of the following members:
A. To facilitate the successful completion of the requirements for
certification of Sustainable Jersey (www.sustainablejersey.com).
B. Educate and encourage all City employees, residents and businesses to
participate in green initiatives.
C. Collaborate with public and private green committees to ensure the
replication of best practices and to ensure a coordinated effort within
the City of Paterson and with neighboring communities.
A. Nine regular members, including representatives from the following:
(1) The Department of Public Works, with selection preference given to
any person also serving as a Clean Communities Coordinator within
the intendment of N.J.S.A. 13:1E-218d(6);
(2) The Department of Community Development, with selection
preference given to any person having expertise in brownfields
within the intendment of N.J.S.A. 58:10B-1.2;
(3) The Department of Human Services, Division of Health, with
selection preference given to any person having expertise in
environmental health;
(4) The Planning Board;
(5) The Paterson public schools;
§ 255-9 GRAFFITI § 257-2
255:483
Chapter 259
HANDICAPPED PARKING POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open-air parking lots — See Ch. 359.
§ 259-1. Application for handicapped parking space; procedure.
(6) A nonprofit charitable organization active in the City of Paterson,
whose stated charitable purpose may be religious, educational, or
other;
(7) The members of the Municipal Council;
(8) Youth representative; and
(9) Citizen representative.
B. Two alternate members, including representatives from the following:
(1) The County of Passaic; and
(2) An additional nonprofit charitable organization active in the City of
Paterson, whose stated charitable purpose may be religious,
educational, or other.
A. All residents requesting the issuance of a designated handicapped
parking space in the City of Paterson must complete and file a formal
application with the Department of Public Works, Traffic Division.
B. The application shall require the applicant to provide the following
documentation:
(1) The applicant must possess a disabled person identification card
issued by the New Jersey Motor Vehicles Commission.
(2) The applicant must furnish to the Traffic Division a valid motor
vehicle registration for the vehicle requiring the space and, if the
applicant is the vehicle operator, a valid motor vehicle operator
license.
(3) The applicant may request a designated handicapped parking
space only for the applicant's place of residence.
(4) If the applicant is not the owner of the property at which the
handicapped parking space is to be designated, a written statement
from the property owner must be submitted to the Traffic Division,
stating that the owner has no objection to the restriction of parking
§ 257-2 PATERSON CODE § 259-1
255:484
§ 259-2. Grounds for denial of application.
Notwithstanding an applicant's compliance with § 259-1 above, an
application for handicapped parking space shall be denied if:
in front of the property. Said written statement may not be
unreasonably withheld by the property owner.
C. An applicant wishing to further restrict the space to use only by a
vehicle bearing a specific license plate number may expressly request
the said restriction in his or her application, while noting the license
number in the said application. An applicant wishing to add such a
restriction to an already existing handicapped space or, conversely, an
applicant wishing to remove such a restriction, may so request by filing
an amended application.
D. The completed application, together with the required documentation
as required in Subsection B, shall be filed with the Division of Traffic
and shall constitute a request for a designated handicapped parking
space.
E. The fee for restricted handicapped parking space will be predicated
upon whether it is a handicap space restricted to a specific license plate
or instead is open to any handicapped driver. Current holders of
handicapped parking spaces who wish to upgrade to a plate-specific
parking space shall pay a processing fee of $50. All handicapped
parking spaces shall be subject to annual renewal. Applicants shall be
required to provide a copy of the current status of valid New Jersey
handicapped status, driver's license and vehicle registration. The
annual fee for a plate-specific space shall be $75 for the first year
(except for current holders of non-plate specific spaces, who are subject
instead to the fee of $50 set forth above) and $50 for each year
thereafter. There shall be no fee for a handicapped space that is not
plate-specific.
F. The Traffic Division shall approve or deny requests for the issuance of
designated restricted handicapped parking spaces on the basis of the
standards set forth in § 259-2 of this chapter.
A. Pursuant to applicable state or municipal law, the parking of motor
vehicles is prohibited at the location of the requested handicapped
parking space or the permitting of such parking would interfere with
the normal flow of traffic;
B. The applicant or handicapped person is the owner of the property at
which the space is to be designated and has reasonable access to a
driveway on the property or reasonable access to some other area of
the property which may permit the transport of the handicapped
person;
C. The applicant is not the operator of the vehicle for which the
handicapped parking space is required, unless the State of New Jersey,
§ 259-1 GRAFFITI § 259-2
255:485
§ 259-3. Appeal procedure; fee.
§ 259-4. Notice of approval of space; annual notification of city
regarding continued need of space.
Motor Vehicles Commission, has issued the applicant a windshield
placard or wheelchair symbol license plates for a vehicle owned by the
handicapped person or owned by another occupant of the residence
who is a member of the immediate family of the handicapped person; or
D. The applicant resides, either as a tenant or an owner, in a housing
complex which provides off-street parking and has reasonable access to
said parking and an on-site handicapped parking space has been
provided by the owner of the housing complex.
A. When an applicant has been denied a request for a handicapped
parking space by the Traffic Division on the basis of the criteria
contained in § 259-2 of this chapter, the applicant has the right to
appeal, within 10 days of such denial, to the Municipal Council of the
City of Paterson.
B. The fee for an appeal to the Municipal Council of the City of Paterson
shall be free if the applicant has sought a space not limited to a specific
license plate, or $50 if the applicant has sought a plate-specific space.
C. Denials based upon parking restrictions or traffic considerations
outlined in § 259-2A of this chapter, however, are not subject to appeal
and require a revision of the location for the space.
D. The Office of Aging and Handicapped Services of the Department of
Health and Human Services of the City of Paterson shall investigate all
appeals from the denial by the Traffic Division for a handicapped
parking space and report its findings to the Municipal Council of the
City of Paterson within 30 days of the filing of appeal.
A. Upon approval of a request for a designated handicapped parking space
and passage of a resolution or ordinance by the Municipal Council of
the City of Paterson designating said space, the applicant shall receive
a letter notifying the applicant that the space has been so designated
and that it is the applicant's responsibility to notify the Department of
Public Works, Division of Traffic, of the City of Paterson in the event
that the designated handicapped parking space is no longer required.
B. If the space has been requested for use only by a vehicle bearing a
specific license plate number, and if the said request has been
approved, then the letter shall so indicate the said additional
restrictions on the use of the space.
C. Annually, upon the anniversary of the creation of the handicapped
parking space by resolution or ordinance, written notice shall be sent
by the applicant to the Division of Traffic on forms provided by the City,
indicating that a valid and continued need for the handicapped parking
§ 259-2 PATERSON CODE § 259-4
255:486
§ 259-5. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all designated handicapped
parking spaces created within the City of Paterson, except that handicapped
parking spaces requested for general public use by public buildings,
including but not limited to businesses, schools and hospitals, are not
subject to the renewal provision of this chapter.
§ 259-6. Signage.
Where an application has been granted for use by a specific handicapped
person pursuant to § 259-4C of this chapter, the street sign marking that
space must indicate the license plate number to which the space is
restricted and must also state, " USE BY OTHER HANDICAPPED PERSONS
PROHIBITED."
§ 259-7. Violations and penalties.
space exists. In the event that such notice is not received within 30
days of the anniversary date, the handicapped parking space sign at
that location shall be removed and a resolution or ordinance will be
presented to the City Council to repeal the designated handicapped
parking space.
A. Violations of this chapter shall generally be subject to all penalties and
remedies set forth in state law as of the time of violation, where such
penalties and remedies (subject to later amendment by the state)
include but are not limited to the following:
(1) A fine of $ 250 for the first offense and, for subsequent offenses, a
fine of at least $ 250 and up to 90 days' community service on such
terms and in such form as the court shall deem appropriate, or any
combination thereof, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.
(2) An eligible handicapped person may request a law enforcement
officer to arrange for the removal of a vehicle parked in a
handicapped space, and said request may be honored at the
discretion of the Police Department, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-207.7.
B. Notwithstanding § 259-7A of this chapter, and consistent with the intent
and express language of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-207.7:
(1) If the violator has the general legal right to utilize handicapped
parking but has parked in a handicapped space dedicated to a
different car's license plate, then a fine only for parking within
prohibited area shall apply, where the said violation has a penalty
of $50 as of the enactment of this section, but may later be raised
by ordinance.
(2) Similarly, if the violator has the general legal right to utilize
handicapped parking but has parked in a handicapped space
§ 259-4 GRAFFITI § 259-7
255:487
Chapter 263
HEALTH SERVICES
dedicated to a different car's license plate, then, absent
extraordinary circumstances, the general policy of this City shall
be not to exercise its power to arrange for towing pursuant N.J.S.A.
39:4-207.7.
§ 259-7 PATERSON CODE § 259-7
263:488
ARTICLE I
Fee for Tuberculosis Clinic Services
[Adopted 6-3-1981 by Ord. No. 81-031]
§ 263-1. Fee established.
All patients visiting the Tuberculosis Clinic Services of the Division of
Health of the City of Paterson will be charged a fee of $20 for each visit.
§ 263-2. Exemptions from fee.
Exempted from this fee are all residents of the City of Paterson and
residents of municipalities which have contracted with the City of Paterson
for health care benefits.
§ 263-1 HEALTH SERVICES § 263-2
263:489

ARTICLE II
Fees for Tests Conducted by Health Division
[Adopted 4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-009 (Ch. 13, Art. 32, of he 1979
Revised General Ordinances of Paterson); amended in its entirety
12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 03-096]
§ 263-3. Cytology smears.
The fee for cytology smears requests to be done by the Division of Health
shall be $8 for each sample.
§ 263-4. Blood testing.
The fee for blood testing requests to be done by the Division of Health shall
be $12 for each sample.
§ 263-3 HEALTH SERVICES § 263-4
263:491
Chapter 267
HEATING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
§ 263-4 PATERSON CODE § 263-4
267:492
ARTICLE I
Responsibility To Provide Minimum Temperature
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Secs. 14-19 through
14-23 of the 1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 267-1. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTED or AGREED — Includes a written verbal or implied contract
or agreement. The presence of heating outlets, radiators, risers or returns
in any hall or apartment or subdivision of a house shall be prima facie
evidence of an implied contract or agreement.
§ 267-2. Agreement to furnish heat.
Wherever a building or any portion thereof is heated or is to be heated
by means of a furnace, boiler or other apparatus under the control of the
owner's lessee, sublessee, assignee or the agent of any of them, he shall be
deemed to have contracted, agreed, undertaken or to be bound to furnish
heat in accordance with the provisions of this Article.
§ 267-3. Minimum heat to be maintained; responsibility;
functioning heating system; exception. [Amended 1-6-1987 as Ord.
No. 86-046]
A. No owner or owners of any dwelling unit and/or multiple-family unit
shall fail to supply heat from October 1 of each year to the next
succeeding May 1 to every unit of dwelling space and every habitable
room therein, and the heat shall be maintained at least at sixty-eight
degrees Fahrenheit (68° F.) whenever the outside temperature falls
below fifty-five degrees Fahrenheit (55° F.) during daytime hours from
6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. At times other than those specified, interiors of
units of dwelling space shall be maintained at least fifty-five degrees
Fahrenheit (55° F.) whenever the outside temperature falls below forty
degrees Fahrenheit (40° F.).
B. In meeting the aforesaid standards, the owner shall not be responsible
for heat loss and the consequent drop in the interior temperature
arising out of action by the occupants in leaving windows or doors open
to the exterior of the building. The owner shall be obligated to supply
required fuel or energy and maintain the heating system in good
operating condition so that it can supply heat as required herein
notwithstanding any contractual provisions seeking to delegate or shift
responsibility to the occupant or third person, except that the owner
shall not be required to supply fuel or energy for heating purposes to
any unit where the occupant thereof agrees, in writing, to supply heat
to his own unit of dwelling space and said unit is served by its own
exclusive heating equipment for which the source of heat can be
separately computed and billed.
§ 267-1 HEATING § 267-3
267:493
§ 267-4. Defenses to prosecution for violation.
Any person required to heat or to furnish heat under the provisions of this
Article who, in the exercise of good faith and reasonable diligence, fails to
or is unable to heat or to furnish heat by reason of circumstances solely
beyond his control shall not be found guilty of violating any provisions of
this Article.
§ 267-5. Violations and penalties.112
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by community
service for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
C. It shall be the duty of every person who has contracted, agreed or
undertaken or shall be bound to furnish heat to maintain the furnace,
boiler or other apparatus used to furnish heat in proper working order
and in a manner so that the heating system is fully functioning at all
times between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. from October 1 of
each year to the next succeeding May 1.111
D. The provisions of this section shall not apply to owner-occupied
residential rental properties containing two (2) units or fewer.
E. For purposes of this section, "dwelling unit" is defined as one (1) or
more rooms arranged for the use of one (1) or more individuals living
together as a single housekeeping unit with cooking, living, sanitary
and sleeping facilities.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 267-3 PATERSON CODE § 267-5
267:494
ARTICLE II
Emergency Fuel Oil Delivery; Plumbing Emergencies
[Adopted 2-3-1981 as Ord. No. 81-005 (Secs. 14-23.1 through
14-23.9 of the 1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson)]
§ 267-6. Action by city for provision of fuel oil.
The local Health Officer or his designee shall, whenever necessary to
protect the health and safety of residential tenants, act as an agent for a
landlord in engaging a fuel oil dealer to deliver fuel oil at a reasonable
price per gallon and to refire the burner to restore the proper heating of
any residential property rented by said landlord; provided, however, that at
least twelve (12) hours have elapsed if the outside temperature is between
thirty-three degrees Fahrenheit (33° F.) and fifty-five degrees Fahrenheit
(55° F.), inclusive, or at least four (4) hours have elapsed if the outside
air temperature is thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit (32° F.) or less, since the
tenant has lodged a complaint with any municipal officer or agency, prior
to which complaint a bona fide attempt has been made by the tenant or his
representative to notify the landlord of the lack of heat and the landlord has
failed to take appropriate action.
§ 267-7. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LACK OF HEAT — Maintaining less heat than required by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.
§ 267-8. Plumbing emergencies; action by city. [Added 7-24-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-066]
The local Health Officer or his designee shall, whenever necessary to
protect the health and safety of residential tenants, act as an agent for a
landlord in engaging a plumber to resolve plumbing emergencies. Within
this Article, the term "plumbing emergencies" shall include but not be
limited to faulty plumbing, defined as inoperable fixtures, i.e., tub, toilet,
sink, broken water pipes and any plumbing defect which renders a heating
system inoperable pursuant to the terms of §§ 267-6 and 267-7 above. Prior
to taking the above steps, twenty-four (24) hours shall have elapsed since
the tenant has lodged a complaint with any municipal officer or agency,
prior to which complaint a bona fide attempt has been made by the tenant or
his representative to notify the landlord of the plumbing emergency and the
landlord has failed to take appropriate action. Notwithstanding the above,
any plumbing emergency resulting in a lack of heat shall be subject to the
time and notice standards set forth in §§ 267-6 and 267-7 above.
§ 267-9. Billing. [Amended 7-24-1984 by Ord. No. 84-066]
Any fuel oil dealer who delivers fuel oil or refires the burner in accordance
with § 267-6 above or any plumber who performs services in connection
with § 267-8 above may bill the landlord directly or the city may issue a
§ 267-6 HEATING § 267-9
267:495
voucher to the plumber or the fuel oil dealer who delivered the fuel oil for
the money amount due on the fuel oil delivered and the service charge for
refiring the burner, if any. The voucher shall be paid in the manner provided
for the approval and payment of claims pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17.
§ 267-10. Civil penalty. [Amended 7-24-1984 by Ord. No. 84-066113]
Any landlord or his agent whose negligence or failure to act results in
municipal action pursuant to § 267-6 shall be liable to civil penalty of not
more than three hundred dollars ($300.) for each affected dwelling unit in
the residential property. Such penalty shall be recoverable by the city in
civil action by a summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement Law
(N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.). Any action to collect or enforce any such penalty
shall be brought in the Superior Court or Municipal Court. The amount of
such penalty shall be paid to the City Health Division to create a fund to
be used for the emergency purchase of fuel oil or other emergencies as set
forth above.
§ 267-11. Reimbursement of city; collection of costs. [Amended
7-24-1984 by Ord. No. 84-066]
In any penalty enforcement proceeding brought pursuant to this Article,
the court shall also order the landlord or his agent to reimburse the city
for the actual costs incurred for any fuel oil delivered and the service
charge for refiring the burner, if any, or the charge for plumbing services
and for reasonable attorney's fees and costs. The court shall further be
empowered to issue any appropriate injunctive orders and to authorize
immediate collection of reimbursable costs due the city out of the goods and
chattels of the landlord, including all sums due or which may come due as
present or future rents. Any landlord who prevails in such an action shall be
entitled to reimbursement by the city for all reasonable costs and expenses.
Such landlord, however, shall still remain responsible for the cost of any fuel
oil delivered and any charge for refiring the burner incurred by the city.
§ 267-12. Liability.
Except for the gross negligence or malfeasance of any municipal official,
officer or employee, no municipal official, officer or employee shall be liable
for any damages to any person or property in enforcing this Article.
§ 267-13. Lien. [Added 7-24-1984 by Ord. No. 84-066114 ]
Any civil penalty recovered from the landlord or any liability of the landlord
for oil delivered or charges for refiring the burner or plumbing services
which remain unpaid for thirty (30) days after written demand upon the
landlord by regular mail shall form a lien against the real property which
formed the subject of the penalty proceeding or the liability for
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 267-9 PATERSON CODE § 267-13
267:496
reimbursement, and the Health Division shall notify the City Tax Office in
order that said sums shall be reflected as such.
§ 267-14. Exception.
The provisions of this Article shall not apply to owner-occupied residential
rental properties containing five (5) units or fewer.
§ 267-13 HEATING § 267-14
267:497
Chapter 271
HOUSING-PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 105.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 149.
Dangerous and unfit buildings — See Ch. 157.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 169.
Certificates of re-rental approval and
compliance — See Ch. 175.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Fire safety — See Ch. 215.
Heating — See Ch. 267.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
Littering — See Ch. 313.
Vacant lots — See Ch. 319.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
Lead-based paint — See Ch. 351.
Solid waste — See Ch. 427.
§ 267-14 PATERSON CODE § 267-14
267:498
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
§ 271-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Minimum Properties Standards Code
for All Structures and Properties" and is herein referred to as the "Housing-
Property Maintenance Code" or "this code."
§ 271-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare in buildings and on the premises as hereinafter provided by:
§ 271-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all structures and premises
which are now or may become in the future substandard with respect
to structure, premises, protection against fire hazard, equipment or
maintenance, inadequate provisions for light and air, lack of proper heating,
unsanitary conditions, overcrowding or other conditions which may be
deemed to constitute a menace to the safety, health or welfare of their
occupants except as provided in § 271-8. The existence of such conditions,
factors or characteristics adversely affects public safety, health and welfare
and leads to the continuation, extension and aggravation of urban blight.
Adequate protection of the public, therefore, requires the establishment
and enforcement of these minimum standards.
§ 271-4. Compliance required.
Every portion of a building or premises used or intended to be used shall
comply with the provisions of this chapter, irrespective of when such
building shall have been constructed, altered or repaired, except as
hereinafter provided.
§ 271-5. Application of uniform construction codes.115
Any alterations to buildings or changes of use therein which may be caused
directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this chapter shall be done in
accordance with applicable sections of the uniform construction codes.
A. Establishing minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities for
light, ventilation, space heating and sanitation; for safety from fire; for
space, use and location; for safe and sanitary maintenance; and for
cooking equipment in all structures now in existence.
B. Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of all
structures.
C. Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
115. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 183, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 271-1 HEATING § 271-6
267:499
§ 271-6. Application of zoning provisions.116
Nothing in this chapter shall permit the establishment or conversion of
a multifamily dwelling in any zone except where permitted by the zoning
law, nor the continuation of such nonconforming use in any zone except as
provided therein.
§ 271-7. More stringent provisions to prevail.
Except as provided in § 271-8, in any case where a provision of this chapter
is found to be in conflict with a provision of any zoning, building, fire,
safety or health ordinance or code of this municipality existing on the
effective date of this chapter, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and health of the
people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of this chapter is found
to be in conflict with a provision of any other ordinance or code of this
municipality existing on the effective date of this chapter which establishes
a lower standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and health
of the people, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail, and such other
ordinances or codes are hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that
they may be found in conflict with this chapter.
§ 271-8. Existing buildings.
This chapter establishes minimum requirements for the initial and
continued occupancy of all buildings and structures and does not replace
or modify requirements otherwise established for the construction, repair,
alteration or use of buildings, equipment or facilities except as provided in
this chapter.
§ 271-9. Existing remedies.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to abolish or impair existing
remedies of the municipality or its officers or agencies relating to the
removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous,
unsafe or unsanitary.
§ 271-10. Enforcement officer designated.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Coordinator of Community
Improvements to enforce the provisions of this chapter as herein provided.
§ 271-11. Coordination of enforcement.
Inspection of premises and the issuing of orders in connection therewith
under the provisions of this chapter shall be the exclusive responsibility of
the Department of Community Improvements, Housing Bureau. Wherever,
in the opinion of the Building Official, it is necessary or desirable to have
inspections of any condition by any other department, he shall arrange for
116. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 271-6 PATERSON CODE § 271-11
267:500
this to be done in such manner that the owners or occupants of buildings
shall not be subjected to visits by numerous inspectors nor to multiple
or conflicting orders. No order for correction of any violation under this
chapter shall be issued without the approval of the Building Official; and it
shall be the responsibility of that official before issuing any such order to
determine that it has the concurrence of any other department or official of
the government concerned with any matter involved in the case in question.
§ 271-12. Administrative liability.
Except as may otherwise be provided by the statute or local law or
ordinance, no officer, agent or employee of the municipality charged with
the enforcement of this chapter shall render himself personally liable for
any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this chapter. No
person who institutes or assists in the prosecution of a criminal proceeding
under this chapter shall be liable to damages hereunder unbelieving that
the person accused or prosecuted was guilty of any unlawful act or
omission. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the
municipality, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of
his duties under this chapter, shall be defended by the legal representative
of the municipality until the final determination of the proceedings therein.
§ 271-13. Inspections; right of entry; interference.
A. The Building Official shall make or cause to be made inspections to
determine the conditions of all structures and premises in order to
safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public under the
provisions of this chapter. The Building Official is authorized to enter
any structure or premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of
performing his duties under this chapter. The owner, occupant or
operator of every structure or premises or the person in charge thereof
shall give the Building Official free access thereto and to all parts
thereof and to the premises on which it is located at all reasonable
times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entrance to or to impede an
inspector or officer authorized under this chapter in the performance of
his duties, and every such inspector or officer shall have the right to
enter, examine and survey all premises, grounds and structures and
every part thereof at all reasonable times upon display of proper
identification.
C. If any owner, occupant or other person in charge of a structure subject
to the provisions of this chapter refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes
with, restricts or obstructs entry and free access to every part of the
structure or premises where inspection authorized by this chapter is
sought, the administrative authority may seek, in a court of competent
jurisdiction, an order that such owner, occupant or other person in
charge cease and desist with such interference.
§ 271-11 HEATING § 271-14
267:501
§ 271-14. Access by owner or operator.
Every occupant of a structure or premises shall give the owner or operator
thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such structure or
its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection,
maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 271-15. Notice of violation; service.
Notice of violation shall be served upon the owner of record, provided that
such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner if a
copy thereof is delivered to him personally or, if not found, by leaving a
copy thereof at his usual place of abode with a person of suitable age and
discretion who shall be informed of the contents thereof or by sending a
copy thereof by mail to his last known address or, if the letter with the copy
is returned showing it has not been delivered to him, by posting a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by the
notice.
§ 271-16. Contents of notice of violation.
Whenever the Building Official determines that there has been or is a
violation or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been
or is a violation of any provision of this chapter, he shall give notice of such
violation or alleged violation to the person or persons responsible therefor.
Such notice shall:
§ 271-17. Prosecution of violation.
In case any violation order is not promptly complied with, the Building
Official may request the legal representative to institute an appropriate
action or proceeding at law or in equity against the person responsible for
the violation, ordering him:
A. Be in writing.
B. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
C. Specify the violation which exists and the remedial action required.
D. Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
A. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any further
execution of work;
B. To restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of such
building;
C. To require the removal of work in violation;
D. To prevent the occupation or use of the building, structure or part
thereof erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of or not in
§ 271-14 PATERSON CODE § 271-17
267:502
§ 271-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to
exceed $1,000, imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof,
at the discretion of the court. Every day that a violation continues after due
notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof,
shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 271-19. Appeals procedure.
§ 271-20. Saving clause.
This chapter shall not affect violations of any other ordinance, code or
regulation of the municipality existing prior to the effective date hereof, and
any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to
the full extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or
regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed.
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or in violation of a plan
or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was
issued; or
E. To enforce the penalty provisions of this chapter.
A. Any owner or person who is aggrieved with the ruling or decision of the
enforcing officer in any matter relative to the interpretation or
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter may appeal the
decision or interpretation.
B. This appeal must be filed with the appropriate authority, in writing,
within 10 days of the date of the rendition of the decision or
interpretation.
C. The appropriate authority shall be the construction official or his
designee.
§ 271-17 HEATING § 271-20
267:503

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 271-21. Interchangeability of terms.
§ 271-22. Terms defined in uniform construction codes.
Where terms are not defined in this article and are defined in the uniform
construction codes, they shall have the same meanings ascribed to them as
in the uniform construction codes.
§ 271-23. Terms not defined.
Where terms are not defined under the provisions of this chapter or under
the provisions of the uniform construction codes, they shall have ascribed to
them their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context herein may
imply.
§ 271-24. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated:
APPROVED — "Approved," as applied to a material, device or method
of construction, shall mean approved by the Building Official under the
provisions of this chapter or approved by other authority designated by law
to give approval in the matter in question.
BASEMENT — A portion of the building partly underground, but having less
than half its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining ground
(see the definition of "cellar").
BEDROOM — A habitable room, used for sleeping purposes, which affords
privacy equipped with a door.
BUILDING CODE — The building code officially adopted by the legislative
body of this jurisdiction or such other code as may be officially designated
by the legislative body of the jurisdiction for the regulation of construction,
alteration, additional repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy
and maintenance of buildings and structures.117
A. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the singular number
includes the plural and the plural the singular.
B. Whenever the words "multifamily dwelling," "residence building,"
"dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "premises" are used
in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by
the words "or any part thereof."
117. Editor's Note: See Ch. 183, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 271-21 HEATING § 271-24
267:505
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The official designated by the municipality to
enforce building, zoning or similar laws and this chapter, or his duly
authorized representative. Wherever the term "Building Official" appears in
this chapter, it shall mean the Coordinator of Community Improvements or
his duly authorized representative.
CELLAR — The portion of the building partly underground, having half or
more than half of its clear height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms arranged for the use of one or more
individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, with cooking,
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The official designated herein or otherwise
charged with the responsibilities of administering this chapter, or his
authorized representatives.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — The open space on the premises and
on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poison spraying,
fumigating, trapping or by any other approved pest elimination methods.
FAMILY — A group of persons related by blood, marriage or adoption but
limited to:
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total area of all habitable space in a building
or structure.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space arranged for living,
eating and sleeping purposes (not including bathrooms, water closet
A. Husband or wife.
B. Son, daughter, grandchild or great-grandchild.
C. Stepchild.
D. Brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, stepbrother or stepsister.
E. Parent, grandparent or great-grandparent.
F. Stepmother or stepfather.
G. Brother's or sister's son or daughter.
H. Father's or mother's brother or sister.
Son-in-law, daughter-in-law, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law
or sister-in-law of either spouse.
I.
§ 271-24 PATERSON CODE § 271-24
267:506
compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers, hallways and other accessory
floor spaces).
HOTEL — Any building, including but not limited to any related structures,
accessory building and land appurtenant thereto and any part thereof,
which contains 10 or more units of dwelling space or has sleeping facilities
for 25 or more persons.
INCIDENTAL COOKING FACILITIES — Any electric or gas device for the
preparation of food by the application of heat containing not more than one
plate or burner not exceeding eight inches in diameter.
INFESTATION — The presence in or contiguous to a structure or premises
of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
MOTEL — The same meaning as a "hotel."
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building containing three or more dwelling
units. "Multiple dwelling" shall not be deemed to include a hospital, school,
convent, monastery, asylum or other public institution.
NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — All structures except dwellings used or
intended to be used for business, industrial, commercial, institutional work
and activities or shelter or enclosure or property of any kind, including
vacant lots and land, sheds and garages.
OCCUPANT — Any person over one year of age (including owner or
operator) living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or having actual possession
of said dwelling or rooming unit.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which are let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser
estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possessions, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in
control of a building or of premises, or their duly authorized agents.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
PLUMBING or PLUMBING FIXTURES — Water heating facilities, water
pipes, gas pipes, garbage and disposal units, waste lavatories, bathtubs,
shower baths, installed clothes washing machines or other similar
equipment, catch basins, drains, vents or other similarly supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, gas, sewer or vent lines.
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or
structures thereon.
RESIDENCE BUILDING — A building in which sleeping accommodations
or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit are provided;
except when classified as an institution under the uniform construction
codes.
§ 271-24 HEATING § 271-24
267:507
ROOMING HOUSE — Any residence building or part thereof containing one
or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to
more than two persons who are not members of the family.
ROOMING UNIT — A unit of dwelling space located within a multiple
dwelling or hotel forming a single habitable unit.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes,
wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar
materials.
STRUCTURE — An assembly of materials forming a construction for
occupancy or use, including, among others, buildings, stadiums, tents,
reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio towers,
water tanks, trestles, piers, wharves, open sheds, coal bins, shelters, fences
and display signs.
SUPPLIED — Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.
VENTILATION — The process of supplying and removing air by natural or
mechanical means to or from any space.
WORKMANLIKE — Whenever the words "workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair" are used in this chapter, they shall mean that such
maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building
extending along the entire length of a street or rear or interior lot line.
A. MECHANICAL — Ventilation by power-driven devices.
NATURAL — Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows,
skylights, doors, louvers or stacks without wind-driven devices.
B.
§ 271-24 PATERSON CODE § 271-24
267:508
ARTICLE III
Environmental Requirements
§ 271-25. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall govern the minimum conditions of
property and buildings. Every building or structure occupied by humans,
except as exempted by § 271-8, and the premises on which it stands shall
comply with the conditions herein prescribed as they may apply thereto.
§ 271-26. Exterior property areas.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any structure or premises which does not comply with the following
requirements. The Building Official of the municipality shall cause periodic
inspections to be made of all premises to secure compliance with these
requirements.
A. Sanitation. All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or
garbage.
B. Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained so
as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon or within any
building or structure located thereon.
C. Noxious weeds. All exterior property areas shall be kept free from
species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to
the public health.
D. Insect and rodent harborage. Every owner of a structure or property
shall be responsible for the extermination of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests in all exterior areas of the premises, except that the
occupant shall be responsible for such extermination in the exterior
areas of the premises of a single-family dwelling. Whenever infestation
exists in the shared or public parts of the premises of other than a
single-family dwelling, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner.
E. Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.
F. Motor vehicles. No motor vehicle in a residential district shall at any
time be in a state of any major disassembly, disrepair or shall it be in the
process of being stripped or dismantled. At no time shall any vehicle of
any type undergo major overhaul, including body work, in a residential
district.
G. Fences All fences shall be of approved materials and kept in sound
condition and repair.
§ 271-25 HEATING § 271-27
267:509
§ 271-27. Exterior structure.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any structure or portion thereof which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. Foundations, walls and roof. Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and
all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair and shall be kept in such condition as to
exclude rodents.
(1) Foundations. The foundation elements shall adequately support the
building at all points.
(2) Exterior walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks,
loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions which
might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls
or to the occupied spaces of the building. All exposed surfaces
thereof shall be maintained to eliminate conditions reflective of
deterioration or inadequate maintenance, such as loose shingles,
blistered or peeling paint, to the end that the property itself may be
preserved, safety hazards eliminated and adjoining properties and
the neighborhood protected from blighting influences. All exposed
surfaces thereof shall be protected against weathering or
deterioration by a suitable protective coating appropriate for the
particular material involved.
(3) Roofs. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight and have no
defects which might admit rain, and roof drainage shall be
adequate to prevent rainwater from causing dampness in the walls
or interior portion of the building. All leaders, gutters and
downspouts shall be maintained in a state of good repair and
adequate to carry off water from the building.
B. Stairs, porches and railings. Stairs and other exit facilities shall be
adequate for safety, as provided in the uniform construction codes, and
shall comply with the following:
(1) Structural safety. Every outside stair, every porch and every
appurtenance attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe
to use and capable of supporting the loads to which it is subjected
as required by the uniform construction codes and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.
(2) Handrails. For safety, every flight of stairs which is more than three
risers high shall have handrails which shall be located as required
by the uniform construction codes; and every porch which is more
than three risers high shall have handrails so located and of such
design as required by the uniform construction codes. Every
handrail and balustrade shall be firmly fastened and shall be
maintained in good condition.
§ 271-27 PATERSON CODE § 271-27
267:510
C. Windows, doors and hatchways. Every window, exterior door and
basement hatchway shall be substantially tight and shall be kept in
sound condition and repair.
(1) Windows to be glazed. Every window sash shall be fully supplied
with glass window panes or an approved substitute which are
without open cracks or holes.
(2) Windows to be tight. Every window sash shall be in good condition
and fit reasonably tight within its frame.
(3) Windows to be openable. Every window, other than a bed window,
shall be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position
by window hardware.
(4) Doorbells. The main entrance door shall be equipped with a
doorbell, capable of signaling each unit within the structure, and
shall be maintained in working order.
(5) Door hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch
shall be maintained in good condition.
(6) Doors to fit in frame. Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit
reasonably well within its frame.
(7) Window and door frames to fit in wall. Every window, door and
frame shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the
adjacent wall construction so as to exclude rain as completely as
possible and to substantially exclude wind from entering the
dwelling or structure.
(8) Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be so
constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rodents,
rain and surface drainage water into the dwelling or structure.
(9) Exit doors. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being
opened from the inside easily and free from obstructions and
blockages.
D. Screening. Guards and screens shall be supplied for protection against
rodents in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Guards for basement windows. Every basement or cellar window
which is openable shall be supplied with corrosion-resistive
rodentproof shields of not less than No. 22 U.S. gage perforated
steel sheets, or No. 20 B&S gage aluminum or No. 16 U.S. gage
expanded metal or wire mesh screens with not more than one-halfinch
mesh openings or with other material affording equivalent
protection against the entry of rodents, including storm windows.
§ 271-27 HEATING § 271-28
267:511
§ 271-28. Interior structure.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any structure or portion thereof which does not comply with the following
requirements:
A. Free from dampness. In every building, cellars, basements and crawl
spaces shall be maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent
conditions conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure as
required by the uniform construction codes.
B. Structural members. The supporting structural members of every
building shall be maintained structurally sound, showing no evidence of
deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying the
imposed loads in accordance with the provisions of the uniform
construction codes.
C. Interior stairs and railings. Stairs shall be provided in every structure
as required by the uniform construction codes.
(1) Maintained in good repair. All interior stairs of every structure shall
be maintained in sound condition and good repair by replacing
treads and risers that evidence excessive wear or are broken,
warped or loose. Every inside stair shall be so constructed and
maintained as to be safe to use and capable of supporting a load as
required by the provisions of the uniform construction codes.
(2) Handrails. Every stairwell and every flight of stairs which is more
than three risers high shall have handrails or railings located in
accordance with the provisions of the uniform construction codes.
Every handrail or railing shall be firmly fastened and must be
maintained in good condition. Properly balustrated railings,
capable of bearing normally imposed loads as required by the
uniform construction codes, shall be placed on the open portions of
stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells.
D. Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially
impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.
E. Sanitation. The interior of every dwelling and structure shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage. Rubbish, garbage and other refuse
shall be properly kept inside temporary storage facilities as required
under § 271-29D and E of this chapter.
F. Insect and rodent harborage. Buildings shall be kept free from insect
and rodent infestation, and where insects or rodents are found, they
shall be promptly exterminated by acceptable processes which will not
be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions
shall be taken to prevent reinfestation.
§ 271-28 PATERSON CODE § 271-28
267:512
(1) Extermination from buildings. Every owner of a dwelling or
multifamily dwelling shall be responsible for the extermination of
insects, rodents, vermin or other pests whenever infestation exists
in two or more of the dwelling units or in the shared or public parts
of the structure.
(2) Extermination from single dwelling units. The occupant of a
dwelling unit in a dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be
responsible for such extermination within the unit occupied by him
whenever his dwelling unit is the only unit in the building that is
infested.
(3) Responsibility of owner. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions,
whenever infestation of rodents is caused by failure of the owner to
maintain any dwelling or multifamily dwelling in a rodentproof
condition, extermination of such rodents shall be the responsibility
of the owner.
G. Interior walls, ceilings and floors. All interior walls, ceilings and floors
shall be structurally sound, in good repair, free from defects, clean and
painted.
H. Door hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door latch shall be
maintained in good condition.
I. Doors to fit in frame. Every exterior door, when closed, shall fit
reasonably well within its frame.
§ 271-28 HEATING § 271-28
267:513

ARTICLE IV
Space and Occupancy Requirements
§ 271-29. Basic facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling unit for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating
therein which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Sanitary facilities. The following minimum sanitary facilities shall be
supplied and maintained in sanitary, safe working condition:
(1) Water closet. Every dwelling unit shall contain within its walls a
room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy
and which is equipped with a water closet.
(2) Lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain a lavatory which, when
a water closet is required, shall be in the same room with said
water closet or in proximity thereto.
(3) Bathtub or shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which
affords privacy to a person in said room and which is equipped with
a bathtub or shower.
(4) Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart
from the lavatory required under Subsection A(2) of this section.
B. Water and sewer system.
(1) Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower and water
closet required under the provisions of Subsection A of this section
shall be properly connected to either a public water and sewer
system or to an approved private water and sewer system. All sinks,
lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot and
cold running water.
(2) Water-heating facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with
water-heating facilities which are installed in an approved manner,
properly maintained and properly connected with hot-water lines
to the fixtures required to be supplied with hot water under this
section. Water-heating facilities shall be capable of heating water
to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to
be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub,
shower and laundry facility or other similar units at a temperature
of not less than 130° F. at any time needed.
C. Heating facilities.118
(1) Every dwelling and multiple-family dwelling shall have heating
facilities. It shall be the duty of every person who has contracted,
agreed or undertaken or shall be bound to heat or to furnish heat
118. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 267, Heating.
§ 271-29 HEATING § 271-29
267:515
§ 271-30. Installation and maintenance of facilities and equipment.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any building or structure which does not comply with the following
requirements:
for any dwelling or portion thereof designed to be occupied as
living quarters to heat or furnish heat for every occupied room in
such dwelling.
(2) Operation of heating facilities and incinerators. Every heating or
water-heating facility and incinerator shall be installed and shall
operate in accordance with the requirements of the uniform
construction codes or Chapter 105, Air Pollution.
D. Rubbish storage facilities. Every dwelling, multifamily dwelling and
dwelling unit shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for
storage of rubbish, and the owner, operator or agent in control of such
dwelling or multifamily dwelling shall be responsible for the removal of
such rubbish.
E. Garbage storage or disposal facilities. Every dwelling or multifamily
dwelling and every dwelling unit shall be supplied with an approved
garbage disposal facility, which may be any adequate mechanical
garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each dwelling unit or
an incinerator unit, to be approved by the Building Official, in the
structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit or an
approved outside garbage can or cans.
A. Facilities and equipment.
(1) All required equipment and all building space and parts in every
building or structure shall be constructed and maintained so as to
properly and safely perform their intended function in accordance
with the provisions of the uniform construction codes.
(2) Maintained clean and sanitary. All building facilities shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as
not to breed insects and rodents or produce dangerous or offensive
gases or odors.
B. Plumbing fixtures. In buildings and structures, water lines, plumbing
fixtures, vents and drains shall be properly installed, connected and
maintained in working order and shall be kept free from obstructions,
leaks and defects and capable of performing the function for which they
are designed. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of the uniform construction codes.
C. Plumbing systems. In buildings and structures, every plumbing stack,
waste and sewer line shall be so installed and maintained as to function
properly and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects to
prevent structural deterioration or health hazards. All repairs and
§ 271-29 PATERSON CODE § 271-30
267:516
§ 271-31. Occupancy requirements.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit
for the purpose of living therein which does not comply with the following
requirements:
installations shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the
uniform construction codes.
D. Heating equipment. Every space heating, cooking and water-heating
device located in a building or structure shall be properly installed,
connected and maintained and shall be capable of performing the
function for which it was designed in accordance with the provisions of
the uniform construction codes.
E. Electrical outlets and fixtures.
(1) Every electrical outlet and fixture, as required in § 271-32, shall be
installed, maintained and connected to the source of electric power
in accordance with the provisions of the uniform construction
codes.
(2) Correction of defective system. Where it is found, in the opinion of
the Building Official, that the electrical system in a building
constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the building by reason of
inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets, improper
wiring or installation, deterioration or damage or for similar
reasons, he shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate
the hazard.
A. Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable rooms in existing buildings, except
as provided in § 271-8, shall have a clear ceiling height over the
minimum area required by this chapter or the provisions of the uniform
construction codes at not less than 7 1/2 feet. At least 1/2 of the floor
area of every habitable attic room shall have a ceiling height of at least
7 1/2 feet. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those
portions of the floor area of the room having a clear ceiling height of
five feet or more may be included.
B. Required space in dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain a
minimum gross floor area of not less than 150 square feet for the first
occupant and 100 square feet for each additional occupant. The floor
area shall be calculated on the basis of the total area of all habitable
rooms.
C. Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall have a minimum
gross floor area of at least 70 square feet. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50
square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof.
§ 271-30 HEATING § 271-31
267:517
§ 271-32. Light and ventilation.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any building or structure for the purpose of occupancy therein which does
not comply with the following requirements:
D. Access limitation of dwelling unit to commercial uses. No habitable
room, bathroom or water closet compartment which is accessory to a
dwelling unit shall open directly into or shall be used in conjunction
with a food store, barber or beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's
examination or treatment room or similar room used for public
purposes.
E. Location of bath and second sleeping room. No residence building or
dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such
room arrangement that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping
room can be had only by going through another sleeping room, nor shall
the room arrangement be such that access to a sleeping room can be
had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or
water closet compartment. Existing one-family dwellings with no
lodgers as occupants may be exempt from the requirement concerning
access through a first sleeping room.
A. Natural light in habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at
least one window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a
court. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for
every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of such room,
except in kitchens when artificial light may be provided in accordance
with the provisions of the uniform construction codes. Whenever walls
or other portions of a structure face a window of any room and such
obstructions are located less than three feet from the window and
extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window
shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and
shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area for the room.
B. Light in nonhabitable work space. Every laundry, furnace room and all
similar nonhabitable work spaces located in a building or structure
shall have one supplied electric light fixture available at all times.
C. Light in common halls and stairways. Every common hall and inside
stairway in every building, other than one-family dwellings, shall be
adequately lighted at all times with an illumination of at least five
lumens per square foot in the darkest portion of the normally traveled
stairs and passageways.
D. Electric outlets required. All electrical outlets required in this chapter
must be installed and comply with the National Electrical Code, current
edition.
§ 271-31 PATERSON CODE § 271-32
267:518
§ 271-33. Minimum requirements for safety from fire.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for
occupancy any structure which does not comply with the applicable
provisions of the fire prevention sections of the uniform construction codes
and the following additional requirements for safety from fire:
E. Ventilation and light in bathroom and water closet. Every bathroom and
water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation
requirements for habitable rooms as required by Subsections A and D
of this section, except that no window shall be required in bathrooms or
water closet compartments equipped with an approved ventilation
system.
F. Overcrowding of rooms. If any room in a dwelling is overcrowded, the
Building Official may order the number of persons sleeping or living in
said room to be so reduced that there shall be not less than 400 cubic
feet of air to each adult and 200 cubic feet of air to each child under 12
years of age occupying such room.
G. Eating facilities. No cooking or eating shall be permitted in any sleeping
room in any dwelling or dwelling unit, and no cooking facility or
appliance shall be permitted in any sleeping room.
A. Smoke detectors. Each dwelling unit shall contain at least one smoke
detector located within 10 feet of a bedroom.
B. Storage of flammable liquids prohibited. No dwelling, multifamily
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be located within a
building containing any establishment handling, dispensing or storing
flammable liquids with a flash point of 110° F. or lower.
C. Cooking and heating equipment. All cooking and heating equipment,
components and accessories in every heating, cooking and waterheating
device shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions and
kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health and accident
hazards. All installations and repairs shall be made in accordance with
the provisions of the uniform construction codes or other laws or
ordinances of the municipality applicable thereto. Portable cooking
equipment employing flame is prohibited.
§ 271-32 HEATING § 271-33
267:519

ARTICLE V
Responsibility for Compliance
§ 271-34. Scope.
Occupants of structures and/or premises and owners or operators of
rooming houses shall be responsible for maintenance thereof as provided in
this article.
§ 271-35. Cleanliness.
Every occupant of a building or part thereof shall keep that part of the
building or premises thereof which he occupies, controls or uses in a clean
and sanitary condition.
§ 271-36. Disposal of rubbish.
Every occupant of a building or part thereof shall dispose of all his rubbish
in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers
required by § 271-29D of this chapter.
§ 271-37. Disposal of garbage.
Every occupant of a building or part thereof shall dispose of his garbage in
a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities
or, if such facilities are not available, by removing all nonburnable matter
and securely wrapping such garbage and placing it in tight metal garbage
storage containers as required by § 271-29E of this chapter or by such other
disposal method as may be required by applicable laws or ordinances of the
municipality.
§ 271-38. Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures.
Every occupant of a building or part thereof shall keep the supplied
plumbing fixtures therein clean and sanitary and shall be responsible for the
exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation.
§ 271-39. Installation and care of plumbing fixtures furnished by
occupant.
Every plumbing fixture furnished by the occupant of a building or structure
shall be properly installed and shall be maintained in good working
condition, kept clean and sanitary and free of defects, leaks or obstructions.
§ 271-34 HEATING § 271-39
267:521

ARTICLE VI
Nonresidential Structures
§ 271-40. Sanitation.
All exterior property areas shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition, free from accumulation of rubbish, garbage, refuse and
abandoned motor vehicles.
§ 271-41. Noxious weeds.
All exterior property areas shall be kept free from species of weeds or plant
growth which are noxious or detrimental to the public health. All weed
growth over the height of 12 inches shall be cut and raked.
§ 271-42. Grading and drainage.
All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon.
§ 271-43. Exterior walls.
Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or
timbers and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness to
the interior portions of the walls. All exterior surfaces must be kept in good
appearance and be painted in accordance with acceptable standards; and
all siding must be maintained and kept in good repair.
§ 271-44. Foundations, retaining walls, fences and roofs.
Every foundation must be weathertight and watertight and kept in good
repair and maintenance. Retaining walls and fences shall be maintained in
good repair and painted where required. Roofs shall be structurally sound
and weathertight so as not to permit dampness to enter the structure.
§ 271-45. Windows and doors.
Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass window panes or a
substitute approved by the Coordinator of Community Improvements, which
are without open cracks or holes, as provided by the uniform construction
codes. Every door shall be so constructed and maintained in relation to
the adjacent wall construction so as to be weathertight, and such doors, if
required, shall be painted to preserve the finish of the door.
§ 271-46. Driveways.
Where driveways are installed or required, such driveways shall be free of
holes and cracks and shall be maintained in good condition.
§ 271-40 HEATING § 271-46
267:523

ARTICLE VII
Vacant Buildings
[Amended 3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-016; 9-13-2011 by Ord. No.
11-028; 1-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-004]
§ 271-47. Definitions.
For purpose of this article, the following terms are defined as set forth
herein:
OWNER — Includes the title holder, any agent of the title holder having
authority to act with respect to a vacant building, any foreclosing entity that
has filed a notice with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 46:10B-51, P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec. 17, as amended by P.L. 2009, c.
296, or any other entity determined by the City of Paterson to have authority
to act with respect to the building property.
VACANT BUILDING — Any building or structure which is not legally
occupied or at which all lawful business or construction operations or
residential occupancy have substantially ceased, and which is in such
condition that it cannot legally be reoccupied without repair or
rehabilitation, including but not limited to any building meeting the
definition of "vacant building" in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80; provided, however, that
any building where all building systems are in working order, where the
building and grounds are maintained in good order, and which is being
actively marketed by its owner for sale or rental shall not be deemed a
vacant building for purposes of this article.
§ 271-48. Registration of vacant buildings.
A. The owner of any vacant building, as defined herein, shall, within 30
days after the building becomes a vacant building or within 30 days
after assuming ownership of the vacant building, whichever is later, or
within 10 days of receipt of notice from the municipality, file a
registration statement with the Building Official for such vacant
building on forms provided by the Director of the Division of
Community Improvements in compliance with this article. Failure to
receive notice by the municipality shall not constitute grounds for
failing to register the building property.
B. Each vacant building property, as defined herein, having a separate tax
block and lot number shall be registered separately.
C. The registration shall include the information required under
Subsection I of this section, the insurance certificate required under
§ 271-49B, as well as any additional information that the Director of the
Division of Community Improvements may reasonably require.
D. The registration shall remain valid for one year from the date of
registration. The owner shall be required to renew the registration
annually as long as the building remains vacant and shall pay a
§ 271-47 HEATING § 271-48
267:525
registration or renewal fee in the amount prescribed in Subsection M
of this section for each vacant building so registered.
E. The Director of the Division of Community Improvements may establish
for purposes of efficient administration that all registrations shall be
renewed by a single date in each year, which date shall be established
by the Director and in which case the initial registration fee shall be
prorated for registration statements received less than 10 months prior
to that date.
F. Any owner of a vacant building property who plans to restore it to
productive use and occupancy during the twelve-month period
following the date of the initial registration of the building shall file a
detailed statement of the owner's plans for restoration of the building
with the registration statement and shall be exempt from payment of
the registration fee, but shall comply with all other provisions of this
article. In the event that the building has not been restored to
productive use and occupancy at the end of the twelve-month period,
the owner shall be liable for any fee waived. The Director of the Division
of Community Improvements may extend the waiver of the registration
fee for not more than one additional year in response to a written
request by the building owner where the Building Official finds that
compelling conditions outside the owner's control made it impossible
for the owner to restore the building within the initial twelve-month
period.
G. The owner shall notify the Building Official within 30 days of any
change in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement with the Building Official on a form provided by the Director
of the Division of Community Improvements for such purpose.
H. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the City against the owner
or owners of the building.
I. The registration statement shall include the name, street address and
telephone number of a natural person 21 years of age or older,
designated by the owner or owners as the authorized agent for
receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf
of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of any
applicable code and/or this article, and the name, street address and a
telephone number of the firm or individual responsible for maintaining
the building. The individual or a representative of the firm responsible
for maintaining the building shall be available by telephone or in person
on a twenty-four-hours-per-day, seven-days-per-week basis. Such
individuals and entities shown on the statement must maintain offices
in the State of New Jersey or in the County of Passaic.
§ 271-48 PATERSON CODE § 271-48
267:526
§ 271-49. Responsibilities of building owner.
J. At any time after filing a registration statement or a renewal of a
registration statement, the owner of any vacant building shall provide
access to the City to conduct exterior and interior inspections of the
building to determine compliance with municipal codes, on reasonable
notice to the property owner or the designated agent. Any owner who is
a natural person and who meets the requirements of this section with
respect to the location of his or her residence or workplace may
designate himself or herself as agent or as the individual responsible for
maintaining the vacant building.
K. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant building and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on such authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
Director of the Division of Community Improvements, in writing, of a
change of authorized agent or until the owner files a new annual
registration statement.
L. Any owner who fails to register a vacant building under the provisions
of this article shall further be deemed to consent to receive, by posting
at the building, any and all notices of code violations and all process in
any administrative or court proceeding brought to enforce code
provisions concerning the building.
M. The registration and renewal fee for each building shall be as follows:
(1) Initial registration: $500 or prorated amount per Subsection E of
this section.
(2) First renewal: $1,000.
(3) Second renewal: $2,000.
(4) Any subsequent renewal: $3,000.
A. The owner of any structure that has become a vacant building, and any
person responsible for maintaining any such building that has become
vacant shall, within 30 days of the structure becoming vacant or 30
days of the owner taking title to the property:
(1) Enclose and secure the structure as provided in the applicable
codes of the City of Paterson, or as set forth in rules and
regulations adopted by the Director of the Division of Community
Improvements to implement those codes.
§ 271-48 HEATING § 271-49
267:527
§ 271-50. Violations and penalties.
(2) Ensure that the grounds of the structure, including yards, fences,
sidewalks, walks and driveways, are well maintained and free from
trash or debris.
(3) Post a sign affixed to the structure indicating the name, address
and telephone number of the owner and the owner's authorized
agent for the purpose of service of process, and the name, address
and telephone number of the entity responsible for maintenance of
the building, which may be the same as the owner or authorized
agent. If the structure is set back from the street, the sign shall also
be posted on a well-secured post or stake in the front yard of the
property. The signs shall be at least 18 inches by 24 inches in
dimension, shall include the words "to report problems with this
building, call the Building Official at 973-321-1300," and shall be
placed in a location where it is clearly legible from the nearest
public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer.
(4) Maintain the structure in a secure and closed condition, keep the
grounds in a clean and well-maintained condition, and secure that
the sign is visible and intact until the building is again occupied or
demolished or until repair or rehabilitation of the building is
complete.
B. The owner of any vacant building shall acquire or otherwise maintain
liability insurance, in an amount of not less than $300,000 for buildings
designed primarily for use as residential units and not less than
$300,000 for buildings designed primarily for use as residential units
and not less than $1,000,000 for any other building, including, but not
limited to, buildings designed for manufacturing, industrial, storage or
commercial uses, covering any damage to any person or any property
caused by any physical condition of or in the building. Any insurance
policy acquired or renewed after the building has become vacant shall
provide for written notice to the Director of Community Improvements
within 30 days of any lapse, cancellation or change in coverage. The
owner shall attach evidence of the insurance to the owner's registration
statement. Any registration statement submitted that does not include
such evidence shall not be deemed to be a valid registration.
C. The Director of the Division of Community Improvements may issue
rules and regulations for the administration of the provisions of this
article.
A. For purposes of this article, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 days after a building becomes a vacant building, or within 30
days after assuming ownership of a vacant building, whichever is later,
or within 10 days of receipt of notice of the requirement to comply with
this article from the municipality, failure to provide correct information
on the registration statement, failure to comply with the provisions of
§ 271-49 of this article, or such other matters as may be established by
§ 271-49 PATERSON CODE § 271-50
267:528
the rules and regulations of the Director of the Division of Community
Improvements shall be deemed to be violations of this article.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this article or of the rules and
regulations issued thereunder shall be fined not less than $100 and not
more than $1,250 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under
this article shall be recoverable from the owner and shall also be a lien,
in the nature of municipal taxes, on the building until paid.
§ 271-50 HEATING § 271-50
267:529
Chapter 275
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 149.
Dangerous and unfit buildings — See Ch. 157.
Rat baiting — See Ch. 161, Art. I.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 169.
Certificates of re-rental approval and
compliance — See Ch. 175.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Fire safety — See Ch. 215.
Heating — See Ch. 267.
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Littering — See Ch. 313.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
Lead-based paint — See Ch. 351.
Rodent control — See Ch. 385.
Solid waste — See Ch. 427.
§ 275-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Minimum Standards of Dwellings Code
of the City of Paterson" and may be so cited.
§ 275-2. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground,
but having less than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having half or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the
average grade of the adjoining ground.
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized
and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Health Division.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
§ 271-50 PATERSON CODE § 275-2
275:530
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
HEALTH OFFICER — The legally designated health authority of the
Health Division or his authorized representatives.
INCIDENTAL COOKING FACILITIES — Any electric or gas device for
the preparation of food by the application of heat containing not more
than one (1) plate or burner, not exceeding eight (8) inches in diameter.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two (2)
dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any person, over one (1) year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building
or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PLUMBING — Includes all of the following supplied facilities and
equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines,
catch basins, drains, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures,
together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling or that part of any dwelling
containing one (1) or more rooming units, in which space is let by the
owner or operator to three (3) or more persons who are not husband
and wife, son or daughter, mother or father or sister or brother of the
owner or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but
not for cooking or eating purposes.
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of
the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual "owners"
shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter and
of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same
extent as if he were the owner.
(2)
§ 275-2 HOUSING STANDARDS § 275-2
275:531
§ 275-3. Adoption of rules and regulations; effect; filing certified
copy.
§ 275-4. Authority to inspect; right of entry for inspections and
repairs.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.
B. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house,"
"rooming unit" or "premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part
thereof."
A. The Health Division is hereby authorized to make and adopt such
written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that
such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of
this chapter.
B. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the
provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for violation thereof shall be
the same as the penalty for violations of the provisions of this chapter as
hereinafter provided in this chapter.
C. The Health Division shall file a certified copy of such rules and
regulations with the City Clerk.
A. The Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units and premises located within the city, in order that he may
perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants
of dwellings and of the general public.
B. For the purpose of making the foregoing inspections, the Health Officer
is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey, at all reasonable
times, all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises. The
owner or occupant or person in charge of every dwelling, dwelling unit
and rooming unit shall give the Health Officer free access to such
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination and
survey.
C. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner
thereof or his agent or employee access to any part of such dwelling or
dwelling unit or its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of
§ 275-2 PATERSON CODE § 275-4
275:532
§ 275-5. Service of notice of violation; contents.
§ 275-6. Hearing on notice of violation; procedure; effect of
decision; appeal.
making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule
or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Whenever the Health Officer determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he
shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor as provided in Subsections B and C of this section.
Any notice served pursuant to this section shall automatically be
deemed and become an order unless a written petition for a hearing is
filed in the office of the Health Officer within ten (10) days after such
service of notice, as provided in Subsection C hereof.
B. Contents of notice.
(1) Notice of violations given pursuant to Subsection A hereof shall:
(a) Be in writing.
(b) Contain a statement of the alleged violation or violations.
(c) Specify a reasonable time at which the violation or violations
shall be abated, corrected or eliminated.
(2) At the option of the Health Officer, the notice of violation or
violations may contain an outline of remedial action which if taken
will abate, correct or eliminate the violation or violations alleged in
the notice.
C. A copy of the notice of violation given pursuant to Subsections A and B
hereof shall be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as
the case may require, personally or by leaving a copy at his usual place
of abode with a person over the age of fourteen (14) years or by
registered or certified mail addressed to him at his last known address
or by posting said copy in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling
affected by such notice or by any other method authorized or required
by the laws of this state.
A. Any person given notice pursuant to § 275-5 of a violation of this
chapter or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto shall be
entitled to a hearing upon the matter before the Health Officer if a
written petition requesting such hearing and briefly setting forth the
grounds therefor is filed in the office of the Health Officer within ten
(10) days after the day of the service of the notice. Upon receipt of the
petition, the Health Officer shall fix a time and place for the hearing,
§ 275-4 HOUSING STANDARDS § 275-6
275:533
§ 275-7. Emergency order for corrective action; hearing.
but not later than ten (10) days after the filing of the petition, and shall
give the petitioner written notice thereof.
B. The hearing shall be commenced before the Health Officer within ten
(10) days after the day on which the petition was filed unless, on
application of the petitioner and a showing of good cause, the Health
Officer grants a postponement thereof to a fixed date which he deems
reasonable under the circumstances.
C. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
D. The Health Officer, after the hearing, shall sustain, modify or withdraw
the notice in accordance with his findings as to whether the provisions
of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with. If the Health Officer sustains or
modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be and have the effect of an
order.
E. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Health Officer, shall be summarized and reduced to writing and
entered as a matter of public record in his office. Such record shall also
include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the
matter.
F. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Health Officer may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by
the laws and court rules of this state.
A. Whenever the enforcing official finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, safety or
welfare, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken
as he deems necessary. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter to the contrary, such order shall be effective immediately upon
service.
B. The person to whom the order referred to in Subsection A of this
section is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon
petition, in writing, to the Health Officer, shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible for the purpose of reviewing such order. At the
conclusion of such hearing, the Health Officer, depending upon his
findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with,
shall continue the order in effect; or modify it, including, but not by way
of limitation, the time for compliance therewith; or rescind it. A record
of the proceedings of such hearing shall be taken and entered as
provided in § 275-6.
§ 275-6 PATERSON CODE § 275-8
275:534
§ 275-8. Minimum standards for basic equipment and facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system
approved by the Health Officer.
B. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a
person within said room and which is equipped with a flush water closet
and a lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected
to a water and sewer system approved by the Health Officer.
C. Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy
to a person within said room, a bathtub or shower in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system
approved by the Health Officer.
D. Every kitchen sink, lavatory, basin and bathtub or shower required
under the provisions of Subsections A, B and C of this section shall be
properly connected with both hot and cold water lines.
E. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage
facilities, the type and location of which are approved by the Health
Officer.
F. Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers, the type and location of which are
approved by the Health Officer.
G. Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition,
are properly connected with the hot-water lines required under the
provisions of Subsection D of this section and are capable of heating
water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water
to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or
shower at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty degrees
Fahrenheit (120° F.). Hot running water at a temperature of not less
than one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120° F.) shall be supplied
at every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at all times.
H. Every dwelling unit shall have safe unobstructed means of egress
leading to a safe and open space at ground level, as required by the
laws of this state and the ordinances of the city, including, but not by
way of limitation, the building code and fire prevention code of the
city.119
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 183, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 215, Fire Safety.
§ 275-8 HOUSING STANDARDS § 275-9
275:535
§ 275-9. Minimum standards for light, ventilation and heating.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the following requirements:
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight
facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent
(10%) of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions
of structures face a window of any such room and such light-obstruction
structures are located less than three (3) feet from the window and
extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window
shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be
included as contributing to the required minimum total window area.
Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the
top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at
least fifteen percent (15%) of such room.
B. Every habitable room shall have at least one (1) window or skylight
which can easily be opened or such other device as will adequately
ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every
habitable room shall be equal to at least forty-five percent (45%) of the
minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as
required in Subsection A of this section, except where there is supplied
some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the
Health Officer.
C. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in
Subsections A and B of this section, except that no window or skylight
shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet
compartments equipped with a ventilation system which is kept in
continuous operation and approved by the Health Officer.
D. Every dwelling shall be supplied with electric service which shall be
installed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of the
construction code enforcing agency of the city.
E. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed,
are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and
water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a
temperature as required by Chapter 267, Heating, Article I,
Responsibility To Provide Minimum Temperature.120
F. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing
three (3) or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times.
Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling
occupancy and containing not more than two (2) dwelling units may be
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 275-9 PATERSON CODE § 275-9
275:536
§ 275-10. Maintenance of facilities, utilities and equipment.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the following requirements:
supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an
adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed,
instead of full-time lighting.
G. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation and every other opening to a basement which might provide
an entry for rodents shall be supplied with a screen or such other device
as will effectively prevent their entrance.
A. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, capable of affording privacy,
and shall be kept in good repair.
B. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be
reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and shall be kept
in sound working condition and good repair.
C. Every inside and outside stairs, porch and appurtenances thereto shall
be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the
load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept
in sound condition and good repair.
D. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from
defects, leaks and obstructions.
E. Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably
impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.
F. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will
function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory
working condition.
G. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed
from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or
occupied by him, except for such temporary interruptions as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process or during
temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by
the Health Officer.
H. No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling
unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
§ 275-9 HOUSING STANDARDS § 275-11
275:537
§ 275-11. Space and location requirements for habitable rooms.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein which does
not comply with the following requirements:
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150) square
feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at least one
hundred (100) additional square feet of floor space for every additional
occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total
habitable room area; provided, however, that a one-room dwelling unit
shall not be occupied by more than two (2) persons.
B. In every dwelling unit of two (2) or more rooms, every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy
(70) square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50)
square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
C. No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two (2) or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water
closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one (1)
sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room;
nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room
can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom
or water closet compartment.
D. Every habitable room, except attic and basement rooms, shall have a
ceiling height of at least seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet in every part. At
least one-half of the floor area of every habitable attic room shall have a
ceiling height of at least seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet. The floor area
of that part of any room where the ceiling is less than five (5) feet shall
not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor
area of the room for the purpose of determining the permissible
occupancy thereof.
E. No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
F. No basement space shall be used as a dwelling unit unless:
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness.
(2) The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area size as required in § 275-9A.
(3) Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
(4) The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least
the minimum as required under § 275-9B except where there is
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and
approved by the Health Division.
§ 275-11 PATERSON CODE § 275-11
275:538
§ 275-12. Responsibility of owners for maintenance of common
areas.
Every owner of a dwelling containing more than two (2) dwelling units shall
be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared
or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
§ 275-13. Responsibilities of occupants for maintenance; exception.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of every occupant of a dwelling or
dwelling unit to:
§ 275-14. Compliance by rooming houses; exceptions.
No person shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance
(5) The ceiling height shall be not less than seven (7) feet in every part
used as a habitable room.
A. Keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling,
dwelling unit and premises thereof which he occupies and controls.
B. Dispose of all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
the rubbish containers required by § 275-8E.
C. Dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might
provide food for rodents in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in
the garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers required
by § 275-8F. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply such
facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing
more than two (2) dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on
premises where more than two (2) dwelling units share the same
premises. In all other cases, it shall be the responsibility of the
occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.
D. Be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other
pests in or on the dwelling premises, if he occupies a dwelling
containing only one (1) dwelling unit, and to be responsible for such
extermination if he occupies a dwelling unit in a multiple dwelling and
his is the only dwelling unit infected. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure
of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodentproof or reasonably
insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more of the dwelling
units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of a dwelling
containing two (2) or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall
be the responsibility of the owner.
E. Keep all plumbing fixtures in the dwelling unit he occupies in a clean
and sanitary condition, and to be responsible for the exercise of
reasonable care in the proper use of and operation thereof.
§ 275-11 HOUSING STANDARDS § 275-14
275:539
with the provisions of every section of this chapter, except the provisions of
§§ 275-8, 275-12 and 275-13 hereof.
§ 275-15. Regulations for rooming houses.
A. At least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower
properly connected to the city water and sewer system approved by the
Health Division and in good working condition shall be supplied for
each eight (8) persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming
house, including members of the operator's family wherever they share
the use of said facilities. In a rooming house where rooms are let only to
males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half (1/2)
the required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so
located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a
common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water
at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement.
B. The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen
and towels therein at least once each week and prior to the letting of
any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
C. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) person shall
contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor space, and every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) person shall
contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor space for each occupant
thereof. At least one-half (1/2) of the floor area of every habitable room
shall have a ceiling height of at least seven and one-half (7 1/2) feet, and
the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less
than five (5) feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in
computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of
determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
D. Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to a safe and open space at ground level, as required by the
laws of the state and the ordinances of the city, including, but not by
way of limitation, the fire prevention code and building code of the
city.121
E. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and for
maintenance of a sanitary condition in every part of the rooming house.
He shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the
entire premises where the entire structure is leased or occupied by the
operator.
F. Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall
also apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may be
121. Editor's Note: See Ch. 215, Fire Safety, and Ch. 183, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 275-14 PATERSON CODE § 275-15
275:540
§ 275-16. Violations and penalties.122
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of
any rule or regulation adopted by the Health Division pursuant to authority
granted by this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.), by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of community service
for not a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 279
ICE, SALE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 227.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 231.
Food handler's certificate — See Ch. 235.
Preparation and sale of food — See Ch. 239.
Food vending vehicles — See Ch. 243.
in conflict with the laws of the State of New Jersey or with the lawful
regulations of any state board or agency.
G. No rooming unit or rental space in a rooming house shall be used for
cooking facilities, provided that incidental cooking facilities, as defined
in § 275-2, shall be permitted where the following requirements are
met:
(1) The size of the room shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet for
one (1) person and fifty (50) square feet for each additional person.
(2) The room shall contain a refrigerator and a sink with hot and cold
running water. The sink should be in the room and not in a common
hallway.
(3) There shall be adequate ventilation over the cooking area.
(4) There shall be a water-repellent flooring surface.
(5) The single plate or burner is not in excess of eight (8) inches.
H. Cooking facilities serving more than one (1) dwelling or rooming unit or
combination thereof shall not be permitted except that nothing herein
shall be construed to prohibit operators of hotels and boardinghouses
serving food to lodgers, nursing homes or other similar establishments
of a similar nature, subject to licensing provisions by the State of New
Jersey.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 275-15 ICE, SALE OF § 275-16
279:541
§ 279-1. License required.
§ 279-2. Application for license.
Before any such license may be granted, an application shall be made to the
Division of Health by the entity seeking such license. The application shall
be signed personally by the applicant or, if a corporation, by its authorized
agent. The application shall state the current post office address of such
party, the name under which and the place where the ice business it to be
conducted, the character of such business, whether wholesale or retail, the
name of the party from whom the ice is secured, the places where such
ice is cut or manufactured and any other information which the Division of
Health may require in said application.
§ 279-3. Annual license fee.
The annual fee for such ice dealer's license is ten dollars ($10.).
§ 279-4. Expiration of license; renewal.
Each license required by the provisions of this article shall expire on
December 31 in each year unless sooner forfeited or revoked and shall be
renewed annually.
§ 279-5. Transferability of license.
No license shall be assigned or transferred to another party or location.
§ 279-6. Ice to be free from impurities.
All ice offered for sale in the city shall be free from harmful, impure or
polluted materials.
§ 279-7. Denial of license application; suspension or revocation of
license; notice; hearing.
A. No person or entity shall engage in the business of the wholesale or
retail sale of ice in the city without having first secured a license
therefor from the City Division of Health.
B. A separate license shall be required for each store or other place used
for the sale of ice.
A. An application for a license to sell ice may be denied by the Health
Officer for noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter, for
fraud or misrepresentation in making application for such license or for
other good cause shown in the discretion of the Health Officer.
B. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the Health Officer for violation of any provision of this
§ 275-16 PATERSON CODE § 279-7
279:542
§ 279-8. Violations and penalties.123
Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.), by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by
providing community service for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or
any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
chapter or violation of any ordinance of the city or of any state or
federal law applicable thereto or for other good cause shown in the
discretion of the Health Officer.
C. Any such denial of a license application or suspension or revocation of a
license must be preceded by notice to the licensee or applicant, as the
case may be, of such contemplated action. The licensee or applicant
shall be granted a hearing by the Health Officer. Notice of any such
contemplated action must be given to the applicant or licensee at least
five (5) days prior to its effective date. Such notice must be either
served personally on the party to be notified or by mailing such notice
to the business address appearing on said license or application. Such
notice shall contain a brief statement as to the grounds to be relied
upon for revoking or suspending or denying the application for such
license and shall advise the party so notified to his right to a hearing
before the Health Officer.
D. Such request for hearing must be in writing and made to the Health
Officer within five (5) days of service of notice upon such party. Notice
of time and place of such hearing will be served upon such party in the
same manner as the notice of contemplated action provided in
Subsection C above and at least three (3) days prior to the date set for
such hearing. At the hearing before the Health Officer, the aggrieved
party shall have an opportunity to answer and may thereafter be heard.
Upon due consideration and deliberation by the Health Officer, the
contemplated action against the aggrieved party may be dismissed, or if
the Health Officer concludes that the charges have been substantiated,
he may deny the license application or revoke or suspend the license
held by the licensee. Any such denial of a license application, revocation
or suspension of such a license may be rescinded by the Health Officer
upon the correction of the basis for such adverse action to the
satisfaction of the Health Officer.
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 279-7 ICE, SALE OF § 279-8
279:543
Chapter 283
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Division — See Ch. 39. Fire safety — See Ch. 215.
§ 279-8 PATERSON CODE § 279-8
283:544
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 5-9-1990 as Ord. No. 90-016]
§ 283-1. Conditions for payment of claims; anticipated costs of
demolition.
§ 283-2. Requests for certificate of search.
Any request for an official certificate of search for municipal liens shall
specify that the search concerns fire damaged property.
§ 283-3. Appeals.
If an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge other than
an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:3-21, the insurance company shall issue a draft payable to the court
of record to be held by the court in an interest bearing escrow account
in the state or federally chartered bank, savings bank or savings and loan
association in the state in an amount totaling seventy-five percent (75%)
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 et seq., no insurance company authorized
to issue fire insurance policies in the State of New Jersey shall pay to a
claimant any claim in excess of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.) for fire damages on any real property located within the City
of Paterson pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed
after the adoption of this Article and the filing of this Article with the
State Commissioner of Insurance, until such time as:
(1) All taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges
levied and assessed and due and payable appearing on the official
certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12
shall have been paid either by the owner of such real property or by
the insurance company; and
(2) An official certificate on a form prescribed and certified by the
Director of Community Improvements and the Tax Collector of the
municipality that demolition is not required or that the costs of
demolition is not required or anticipated demolition have been
paid; or
(3) The municipality submits to the insurance company a copy of a
resolution adopted pursuant to § 283-4 of this Article.
B. If a demolition has not yet occurred on date of receipt of a request for
an official certificate of search pursuant to this section, the insurer shall
provide on that certificate an estimate of the anticipated costs of
demolition. The insured on notice shall pay the anticipated cost of
demolition to the municipality which shall hold the funds in an interestbearing
escrow account in a state or federally charted bank, savings
banks or savings and loan association in this state.
§ 283-1 INSURANCE § 283-3
283:545
of the full amount of the lien or charge being contested, but not to exceed
the proceeds payable under its insurance policy, and the insurance company
shall issue a draft payable to the municipality for the remaining twenty-five
percent (25%) of the lien or charge being contested with the full amount
paid by the insurance company to the court and the municipality not to
exceed the proceeds payable under its insurance policy pending termination
of all proceedings, at which time such moneys and all interest accruing
thereon at a rate paid on interest bearing accounts in state or federally
chartered banks, savings bank or savings and loan association to the state
shall be disbursed in accordance with the final order or judgment of the
court.
§ 283-4. Installment payments.
The Municipal Council of the City of Paterson may by resolution enter
into an agreement with the owner of any fire-damaged property situated
in the City of Paterson to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or
other municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the
redemption of a tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to Article
7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey or for the
payment in full of any anticipated costs of demolition by installment, if the
Municipal Council is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be used
to restore or improve the fire-damaged property.
§ 283-3 PATERSON CODE § 283-4
283:546
Chapter 287
JUNK DEALERS, MOTOR VEHICLE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junkyards — See Ch. 291. Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 399.
§ 287-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to raise revenue and to regulate the business
referred to in this chapter.
§ 287-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTOR VEHICLE JUNK DEALER — A person who establishes and
maintains or intends to establish and maintain, within the City as a
business, a yard, space or place for the exclusive purpose of buying and
dismantling of used automobiles and of buying and selling used automobile
parts.
§ 287-3. License required; limitation on number of licenses.
[Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04-041]
§ 287-4. Application for license.
An application for a motor vehicle junk dealer license shall be made by
the applicant, in writing, addressed to the Council on forms approved by
the Council and furnished to the applicant at the office of the Licensing
Division. The application shall be filed with the Licensing Division and shall
be accompanied by the required license fee.
§ 287-5. License fee; term of license. [Amended 4-19-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-031]
A. No person shall conduct or engage in the business of motor vehicle junk
dealer without first obtaining a license thereof issued by the Licensing
Division after approval thereof by the Municipal Council, in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. No motor vehicle junk dealer license shall be granted after the effective
date of this section, unless and until the number of such licenses issued
and outstanding shall be less than four. When the number of such
licenses issued and outstanding shall be less than four, additional
licenses may be granted, but only in sufficient numbers so that the total
number of motor vehicle junk dealer licenses issued and outstanding
will equal but not exceed four.
§ 283-4 INSURANCE § 287-5
283:547
§ 287-6. Public hearing; notification.
§ 287-7. Method of service of notice; proof of service. [Amended
6-27-1989 by Ord. No. 89-039]
A. The fee for each annual license shall be $1,100. [Amended
11-25-2003 by Ord. No. 03-071; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-059]
B. The term of the license issued under this chapter shall be for one year
from the date of its issuance.
A. Upon the filing of the application accompanied by the prescribed
license fee, the Council shall fix a reasonable time for a public hearing
to be held before it on the application, and the Licensing Division shall
notify the applicant of the same.
B. The applicant for the license shall, at least five days prior to the time
appointed for the public hearing on the application, give notice of such
hearing, as provided in § 287-7, to all property owners within 200 feet
of the property lines of the proposed location of the business to be
conducted by the applicant. At the hearing, the applicant and all
interested persons shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard in
person or by agent or by attorney.
A. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to § 287-6 shall be
given by:
(1) Serving a copy of said notice on the property owner as shown on
the current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the property; or
(2) Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his
address as shown on the current tax list. Notice to a partnership
owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a
corporate owner may be made by service upon its president,
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to
accept service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a
condominium association, horizontal property regime, community
trust or homeowners' association, because of its ownership of
common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property
which is the subject of the license, may be made in the same
manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners,
co-owners or homeowners on account of such common elements or
areas.
B. The form of the notice shall include the name of the applicant, the
location which is the subject of the license and the date and time of the
hearing, if any, to be held before the City Council.
C. The applicant shall by affidavit present satisfactory proof to the
Council, at least two days prior to the hearing, that said notices have
been duly served.
§ 287-5 PATERSON CODE § 287-8
283:548
§ 287-8. Prerequisites for issuance of license.
§ 287-9. Approval and issuance of license; contents of licenses.
After the Council has approved the application for a motor vehicle junk
dealer license, the license shall be issued by the Licensing Division. The
license shall state the name of the licensee and the location of the premises
where the business shall be conducted.
§ 287-10. Enclosure of junkyard required.
Each location of the business licensed under this chapter as a junkyard shall
during the entire license term be enclosed by a suitable enclosure of not
less than eight feet in height which shall be constructed in such a manner
that the interior of such yard and the contents thereof shall not be visible
from the outside.
§ 287-11. Maintenance of premises.
The premises named in the license shall at all times be maintained in a safe
manner with due regard for the public health and safety of persons and
property in the vicinity in which the licensed premises are located.
§ 287-12. Restrictions on use of streets or sidewalks.
No licensee under this chapter shall keep or place or cause to be kept or
placed any material on the sidewalk or street or any part thereof or on or
above the fence or between the fence and the sidewalk or between any
building and the sidewalk.
A. No motor vehicle junk dealer license shall be issued unless the
premises to be used in said business conform to the provisions of the
zoning ordinances of the City.124
B. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no motor vehicle junk
dealer license shall be granted under this chapter to any person who
has been convicted of the crime of receiving stolen goods, nor shall a
license be issued to any corporation which includes as stockholder,
director or officer a person who has been convicted of such crime. If, at
the time of the application, more than five years have elapsed since the
date of such a conviction and it appears, to the satisfaction of the
Council, that the convicted person has conducted himself in a lawabiding
manner during that period and his association with the junk
business will not be contrary to the public interest, the Council may, in
its discretion, remove such person's disqualification from holding a
license and grant the license.
124. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 287-8 INSURANCE § 287-13
283:549
§ 287-13. Purchase record book.
Every licensee under this chapter shall provide and keep on the premises
named in the license a book in which shall be written at the time of each
purchase a description of the articles purchased, the name and residence
of the person from whom the purchase was made and the date of purchase.
The book shall, at all reasonable times, be open to inspection by the Chief
of Police or his representatives.
§ 287-14. Transfer of license; procedure; fee.
The license issued under this chapter shall not be transferable from person
to person except in accordance with the following procedure:
§ 287-15. Suspension or revocation of license.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 287-16, any license issued under
this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Council, after hearing,
upon due notice, where an individual licensee or a stockholder, director or
officer of a corporate licensee or a corporate licensee:
§ 287-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for a period
not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall
A. An applicant for a transfer to him of an existing license shall make
application, in writing, addressed to the Council and filed with the City
Clerk at least 10 days prior to the next meeting of the Council. The
application shall be accompanied by the transfer fee of $50, which fee is
imposed for revenue purposes. In the event that the transfer is not
granted by the Council, said transfer fee shall be returned to the
applicant.
B. The applicant for a transfer of license shall cause to be published once
in a local newspaper, at least seven days prior to the meeting of the
Council, a notice of his intention to apply for the transfer. Such
newspaper notice shall specify the name and address of the present
licensee, the location of the licensed premises and the date and time of
said meeting of the Council.
C. The applicant for the transfer of license shall prove to the satisfaction of
the Council that he is of good moral character.
A. Has, during the term of the license, been convicted of the crime of
receiving stolen goods; or
B. Violates any provision of this chapter.
§ 287-13 PATERSON CODE § 287-16
283:550
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 291
JUNKYARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Motor vehicle junk dealers — See Ch. 287. Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 399.
§ 291-1. Purpose; applicability.
§ 291-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM MATERIALS — Any aluminum cable, bar, rod, pipe or tubing
of the type used to construct utility, communication or broadcasting towers,
aluminum utility wire, aluminum radiators not attached to a motor vehicle,
aluminum irrigation pipe or tubing, or any aluminum artwork, ornament,
roofing or railing, whether composed of aluminum or alloys thereof, or any
combination of these. Aluminum materials does not include aluminum cans
that have served their original economic purpose.[Added 4-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-009]
COPPER MATERIALS — Any copper wire, bar, rod, pipe or tubing, including
copper wire or cable or coaxial cable of the type used by public utilities,
common carriers or communication services providers, whether wireless or
wire line, copper air conditioner evaporator coil or condenser, copper or
aluminum-copper radiator not attached to a motor vehicle, or any copper
artwork, ornament, roofing or railing, whether composed of copper or
alloys thereof, or any combination of these.[Added 4-14-2009 by Ord. No.
09-009]
INDICIA OF LEGITIMATE ACQUISITION — Any receipt or other proof
of prior purchase that is regular on its face, or any demolition permit,
plumbing permit, electrical permit, or other permit that would entitle the
legitimate replacement or removal of the item in question in a structure, or
any valid and current contractor's license, including but not limited to that
A. The purpose of this chapter is to raise revenue and to regulate the
junkyard business referred to in this chapter.
B. Nothing in this chapter is intended to apply to the regulation and
licensing of businesses exclusively engaged in buying and dismantling
of used automobiles and of buying and selling used automobile parts,
the regulation and licensing of which are set forth in Chapter 287, Junk
Dealers, Motor Vehicle.
§ 287-16 INSURANCE § 291-2
283:551
of a home improvement contractor licensed under N.J.S.A. 56:8-136 et seq.,
a plumber licensed under N.J.S.A. 45:14C-1 et seq., an electrician licensed
under N.J.S.A. 45:5A-1 et seq., or a contractor licensed under Chapter 153
of this Code.125[Added 4-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-009]
JUNKYARD — Any yard, covered or uncovered, space or place in the City
used for the purpose of sale, purchase, storage or exchange of rags, old
metals, old bottles, old glassware, old tinware, old paper, old lumber, old
plumbing fixtures, material from dismantled buildings, dismantled old
automobiles or parts thereof, motor vehicle junk or any other old material
commonly called "junk." "Junkyard," however, shall not be deemed to
include a yard, space or place used for the storage of old material to be used
for manufacturing purposes by the person storing the same.
MARKETABLE METAL OBJECTS — Any railroad track materials as defined
in this chapter, copper materials as defined in this chapter, aluminum
materials as defined in this chapter, and electrical, communications or
utility brass, stainless steel sinks, catalytic converters not attached to a
motor vehicle and metal beer kegs. Marketable metal objects does not
include ferrous materials not listed in this section.[Added 4-14-2009 by
Ord. No. 09-009]
METAL ELECTRICAL WIRE — Any household or industrial metal electrical
wiring, other than that used to transmit data or voice by telephone,
computer, or similar device.[Added 4-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-009]
METAL GAS PIPE — Any segment of piping of the type commonly used
for natural gas, whether made of copper, iron or any other metal.[Added
4-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-009]
METAL PLUMBING PIPE — Any segment of piping of the type commonly
used for water supply, sewage or drainage, whether made of copper, iron
or any other metal. Metal plumbing pipe shall not be deemed to include
pipes or ducts of the type commonly used in heating, ventilation and air
conditioning ("HVAC").[Added 4-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-009]
RAILROAD TRACK MATERIALS — Any rail, switch component, spike, angle
bar, tie plate or bolt of the type used in constructing railroads.[Added
4-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-009]
§ 291-3. License required.
No person shall have, conduct or engage in the business of keeping,
operating or maintaining a junkyard without first obtaining a license
therefor issued by the Licensing Division after approval thereof by the
Council, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 291-4. Application for license.
An application for a junkyard license shall be made by the applicant, in
writing, addressed to the Council on forms approved by the Council and
125. Editor's Note: See Ch. 153, Builders and Contractors.
§ 291-2 PATERSON CODE § 291-4
283:552
furnished to the applicant at the office of the Licensing Division. The
application shall be filed with the Licensing Division and shall be
accompanied by the required license fee.
§ 291-5. License fee; term of license. [Amended 4-19-1983 by Ord.
No. 83-032]
§ 291-6. Public hearing; notification.
§ 291-7. Service of notice; proof of service. [Amended 6-27-1989 by
Ord. No. 89-038]
A. The fee for each annual license shall be $1,100. [Amended 12-2-2003
by Ord. No. 03-075; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-066]
B. The term of the license issued under this chapter shall be for one year
from the date of its issuance.
A. Upon the filing of the application accompanied by the prescribed
license fee, the Council shall fix a reasonable time for a public hearing
to be held before it on the application, and the Licensing Division shall
notify the applicant of the same.
B. The applicant for the license shall, at least five days prior to the time
appointed for the public hearing on the application, give notice of such
hearing, as provided in § 291-7, to all property owners within 200 feet
of the property lines of the junkyard proposed to be licensed. At the
hearing, the applicant and all interested persons shall have reasonable
opportunity to be heard in person or by agent or by attorney. 126
A. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to § 291-6B shall
be given by:
(1) Serving a copy of said notice on the property owner as shown on
the current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the property; or
(2) Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at his
address as shown on the current tax list. Notice to a partnership
owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a
corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, vice
president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or
by law to accept service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a
condominium association, horizontal property regime, community
trust or homeowners' association, because of its ownership of
common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property
which is the subject of the license, may be made in the same
manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit owners,
co-owners or homeowners on account of such common elements or
126. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, regarding exception for requirement for public
notice, which immediately following this subsection, was repealed 4-22-2003 by Ord. No.
03-020.
§ 291-4 INSURANCE § 291-7
283:553
§ 291-8. Limitation on number of licenses; exceptions. [Amended
10-13-1987 by Ord. No. 87-032]
§ 291-9. Prerequisites for issuance of license.
areas. The form of the notice shall include the name of the
applicant, the location which is the subject of the license and the
date and time of the hearing, if any, to be held before the City
Council.
B. The applicant shall by affidavit present satisfactory proof to the
Council, at least two days prior to the hearing, that said notices have
been duly served.
A. No junkyard license shall be granted after the effective date of this
subsection unless and until the number of such licenses issued and
outstanding shall be less than 10. When the number of junkyard
licenses issued and outstanding shall be less than 10, additional
licenses may be granted, but only in sufficient numbers so that the total
number of junkyard licenses issued and outstanding will equal but not
exceed 10. [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 04-040]
B. The provisions set forth in Subsection A of this section shall not apply
to:
(1) The renewal of any junk shop license issued and outstanding as of
April 3, 1950; or
(2) The transfer from person to person of any junkyard license issued
and outstanding as of April 3, 1950, or the renewal of such
transferred junkyard license.
A. No premises shall be licensed for a junkyard unless said premises
conform to the provisions of the zoning ordinances of the City.127
B. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no junkyard license shall
be granted under this chapter to any person who has been convicted of
the crime of receiving stolen goods, nor shall a license be issued to any
corporation which includes as stockholder, director or officer a person
who has been convicted of such crime.
C. If, at the time of the application, more than five years have elapsed
since the date of such a conviction and it appears, to the satisfaction of
the Council, that the convicted person has conducted himself in a lawabiding
manner during that period and his association with the junk
business will not be contrary to the public interest, the Council may, in
its discretion, remove such person's disqualification from holding a
license and grant the license.
127. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 291-7 PATERSON CODE § 291-10
283:554
§ 291-10. Approval and issuance of license.
After the Council has approved the application for a junkyard license, the
license shall be issued by the Licensing Division.
§ 291-11. Commencement of operation; suspension or revocation
upon failure to comply; hearing.
Each person to whom a junkyard license is issued shall commence operation
of the licensed premises within 60 days of the issuance of the license. Upon
failure to comply with the provisions of this section, the license shall be
subject to revocation or suspension unless good and sufficient reasons can
be shown for such failure to comply. Before any action is taken by the
Council, a notice shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to
the date set for a hearing, and the licensee shall be given an opportunity to
be heard either in person or through an attorney.
§ 291-12. Junkyard enclosure required.
Each space or place licensed as a junkyard shall, during the entire license
term, be entirely enclosed by a suitable enclosure of not less than eight feet
in height which shall be constructed in such a manner that the interior of
such yard and the contents thereof shall not be visible from public streets
or highways facing said junkyard.
§ 291-13. Maintenance of premises.
The premises licensed for a junkyard shall at all times be maintained in a
safe manner with due regard for the public health and safety of persons and
property in the vicinity in which the licensed premises are located.
§ 291-14. Restrictions on use of streets or sidewalks.
No junkyard licensee shall keep or place or cause to be kept or placed any
material on the sidewalk or street or any part thereof or on or above the
aforementioned enclosure or between said enclosure and the sidewalk or
between any building and the sidewalk.
§ 291-15. Purchase record book. [Amended 4-14-2009 by Ord. No.
09-009]
Every junkyard licensee under this chapter shall provide and keep a book on
the licensed premises in which shall be written at the time of each purchase
a description of the articles purchased, the name and residence of the
person from whom the purchase was made and the date of purchase. Where
a purchase of any kind of goods exceeds 100 pounds or $50, whichever is
less, the book shall also contain a photocopy of proof of identification of the
person from whom the purchase was made, in the form of a photographic
identification card issued by any governmental entity or authority located
in or within the United States or its territories. The book shall, at all
§ 291-10 INSURANCE § 291-15
283:555
reasonable times, be open to inspection by the Chief of Police or his
representatives.
§ 291-15.1. Certain documentation required for purchase of metal
pipes and wires. [Added 4-14-2009 by Ord. No. 09-009]
In addition to the purchase record book requirements of § 291-15 of this
chapter, every junkyard licensee under this chapter, upon purchasing from a
seller or group of sellers more than one segment of metal plumbing pipe, as
defined in § 291-2 of this chapter, more than one segment of metal gas pipe,
as defined in § 291-2 of this chapter, or any metal electrical wire, as defined
in § 291-2 of this chapter, shall obtain from the seller indicia of legitimate
acquisition, as defined in § 291-2 of this chapter, and retain a photocopy of
the said evidence in or attached to the purchase record book.
§ 291-15.2. Metal holding requirement. [Added 4-14-2009 by Ord.
No. 09-009]
A junkyard licensee who purchases a marketable metal object as defined
in § 291-2 of this chapter, where the purchase of marketable metal objects
exceeds 100 pounds or $50, whichever is less, shall keep each separate
purchase in a separate and distinct pile, bundle or package, in the usual
place of business of the licensee, without removing, melting, cutting or
destroying any article thereof, for a period of three calendar days
immediately succeeding such purchase, on which package, bundle or pile
shall be placed and kept by such licensee a tag bearing the name and
residence of the seller, with the date, hour and place of purchase, and the
weight thereof.
§ 291-16. Transfer of license; procedure; fee.
The license issued under this chapter shall not be transferable from person
to person except in accordance with the following procedure:
A. An applicant for a transfer to him of an existing license shall make
application, in writing, addressed to the Council and filed with the City
Clerk at least 10 days prior to the next meeting of the Council. The
application shall be accompanied by the transfer fee of $50, which fee is
imposed for revenue purposes. In the event that the transfer is not
granted by the Council, said transfer fee shall be returned to the
applicant.
B. The applicant for a transfer of license shall cause to be published once
in a local newspaper, at least seven days prior to the meeting of the
Council, a notice of his intention to apply for the transfer. Such
newspaper notice shall specify the name and address of the present
licensee, the location of the licensed premises and the date and time of
said meeting of the Council.
C. The applicant for the transfer of license shall prove to the satisfaction of
the Council that he is of good moral character.
§ 291-15 PATERSON CODE § 291-17
283:556
§ 291-17. Suspension or revocation of license.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 291-18 hereof, any license issued
under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Council, after
hearing, upon due notice, where an individual licensee or a stockholder,
director or officer of a corporate licensee or a corporate licensee:
§ 291-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 297
LAND SUBDIVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Recycling — See Ch. 427, Art. IV. Zoning and land development — See Ch. 483.
A. Has, during the term of the license, been convicted of the crime of
receiving stolen goods; or
B. Violates any provision of this chapter.
§ 291-17 LAND SUBDIVISION § 291-18
297:557

ARTICLE I
General Provisions; Administration; Terminology
§ 297-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of Paterson."
§ 297-2. Purpose and intent of chapter.
The purpose and intent of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations
and standards to guide land subdivision in the city in order to promote the
public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the municipality.
It shall be administered to ensure the orderly growth and development, the
conservation, protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for
public facilities, circulation, utilities and services.
§ 297-3. Approving agencies.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered in accordance with
the Municipal Land Use Law (P.L. 1975, c. 291 [N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq.]).
B. Planning Board.
(1) The Planning Board, in considering a subdivision, may grant such
variance(s) from the terms of this chapter and the Zoning and Land
Development Ordinance128 which, in its discretion, seem
reasonable and within the general purposes and intent of the rules,
regulations and standards established herein, if the subdivider for
the subdivision can clearly demonstrate that, because of conditions
peculiar to his land, the literal enforcement of one (1) or more parts
of this chapter will exact undue hardship on him.
(2) The Planning Board shall have the power to review and approve or
deny site plans, conditional uses and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c)
variances simultaneously with its review of a subdivision plat
without further applications by the developer, provided that the
longest period for Board action shall apply and further provided
that public notice, when required, shall make mention of each type
of approval sought.
C. Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
have the power to grant subdivision approval to the same extent and
subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board whenever the
Board of Adjustment is reviewing an application for approval of a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4O:55D-70(d).
128. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 297-1 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-4
297:559
§ 297-4. Inconsistent ordinances; effect of zoning provisions.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances other than the Zoning Ordinance129
of the city which are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are
hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 297-5. Certificates as to approval of subdivision of land.
The administrative officer shall issue certificates as to approval of
subdivision of land as authorized by law when a land subdivision has been
approved in accordance with this chapter.
§ 297-6. Rules, regulations and standards as minimum
requirements.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of
the citizens of the city.
§ 297-7. Definitions.
A. The following words, terms or phrases when used in this chapter shall
have the meanings ascribed in this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The City of Paterson Zoning Officer or
such other individual designated by the City Council.
APPLICANT — A developer submitting an application for development.
BUFFER STRIP — Open spaces, landscaped area, fences, walls, berms
or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one
use or property from another so as to shield or block noise, lights or
nuisances.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street with only a single means of ingress and egress,
not longer than six hundred (600) feet, and having a turnaround at the
end.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
of sanitary and/or stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required
along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and
providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against
flooding or flood damage.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action taken by the Planning Board
after all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have
been fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed or
129. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 297-4 PATERSON CODE § 297-7
297:560
guaranties properly posted for their completion or approval conditioned
upon the posting of such guaranties.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which
is presented to the Planning Board for final approval in accordance
with the regulations outlined herein and which, if approved, shall be
filed with the Passaic County Planning Board and the Passaic County
Register of Deeds office.
LOT — A designated parcel tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise, as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted
by a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements required
pursuant to this chapter, including but not limited to surety bonds,
letters of credit under the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.5 and cash.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of one (1) or more written or graphic
proposals recommending the development of the city which shall have
been duly adopted as such by the Planning Board.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision which will result in not more
than three (3) lots fronting an existing accepted street, not involving
any new street or road or the extension of municipal facilities, not
adversely affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or
adjoining property and not in conflict with any provision or portion of
the Master Plan, Official Map, Zoning Ordinance130 or this chapter. Any
subdivision involving fully developed lands where lot lines are being
solely altered for the purpose of property transfer shall be considered
a "minor subdivision" regardless of the number of lots that will result
from the subdivision or their conformance to city ordinances.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or
corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to
be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the
same under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
a municipality, including but not limited to surety bonds, letter of credit
under the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5 and cash.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Planned unit development, planned unit
residential development, residential cluster, planned commercial
development or planned industrial development, as those terms are
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-6.
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the city, established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.
130. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 297-7 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-7
297:561
PLAT — A map or maps of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights, pursuant
to Article III of this chapter, prior to final approval, after specific
elements of a subdivision plan have been agreed upon by the Planning
Board and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the Planning Board for
consideration and tentative approval, meeting the requirements of this
chapter.
RESUBDIVISION —
SIGN EASEMENTS — At intersections, a triangular-shaped area
established in accordance with requirements of this chapter, in which
nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a
manner as to obstruct vision between a height of three (3) feet and ten
(10) feet above the center-line grade of either street.
SILTATION BASIN — A temporary facility, designed in accordance with
the standards of this chapter, to collect silt and eroded soil resulting
from grading the area of a subdivision for the purpose of limiting the
deposit of silt and eroded soil in streams, brooks and sewers.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting
the requirements of this chapter.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, alley,
drive or other way which is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway; or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant
to law; or which is approved by official action; or which is shown on a
plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the Passaic County Register
of Deeds; and includes the land between the street lines, whether
improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the
street lines. For the purpose of this chapter, "streets" shall be classified
as follows:
The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within
a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according
to law; or
(1)
The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new
streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or
recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances so as
to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
(2)
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast,
heavy or through traffic.
(1)
§ 297-7 PATERSON CODE § 297-7
297:562
SUBDIVIDER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to affect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2)
or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of sale or development, except that the
following divisions shall not be considered "subdivisions"; provided,
however, that no new streets are created: divisions of land for
agricultural purposes where the resulting parcels are five (5) acres
or larger in size; divisions of property by testamentary or intestate
provisions; divisions of property upon court order, including but not
limited to judgments of foreclosure; consolidation of existing lots by
deed or other instrument; and the conveyance or one (1) or more
adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land owned by the same person or
persons and all of which are found and certified by the administrative
officer to conform to the requirements of the municipal development
regulations and are shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or
parcels on the Tax Map of the municipality. "Subdivision" also includes
resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the
process of subdividing or to the lands or territory divided.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of at least three (3) but no
more than five (5) Planning Board members, appointed by the Chairman
with approval of the Board, for the purpose of classifying subdivisions
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and such other duties
as may be conferred on this Committee by the Planning Board or state
statutes.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor
streets, including the principal access and circulation streets
within a development.
(2)
MINOR STREETS — Those which are designed to be used primarily
for access to the abutting properties.
(3)
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Those which are adjacent to
arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
(4)
B. This section incorporates by reference definitions contained in the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and the City of
Paterson Zoning and Land Development Ordinance.131
131. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 297-7 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-7
297:563

ARTICLE II
Sketch Plat Procedure
§ 297-8. Submission of sketch plat; fee.
§ 297-9. Action with respect to minor subdivision.
A. Any applicant proposing to subdivide land within the city shall, prior to
subdividing land, as defined by this chapter, submit to the Planning
Board, at least two (2) weeks prior to the regular meeting of the Board
at which review is requested, nine (9) copies of a sketch plat of the
proposed subdivision for the purposes of classification and preliminary
discussions.
B. Along with the sketch plat, the applicant shall submit four (4) copies of
the application form as well as the checklist of items and a fee of fifty
dollars ($50.).
A. The Planning Board, or its Subdivision Committee if so delegated to
said Committee, shall determine if a sketch plat conforms to the
definition of a "minor subdivision" pursuant to § 297-7. The Planning
Board may require notice and public hearing of minor subdivision
applications.
B. Approval of a minor subdivision shall be granted or withheld based
upon the following conditions:
(1) The subdivision shall not conflict with any provision or portion of
this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance,132 Official Map or Master Plan.
(2) It shall not adversely affect the development of the remainder of
the parcel or adjoining property as determined by the Planning
Board.
(3) Consideration shall be given to such matters as lot shapes, sizes,
surface drainage and topography.
(4) It shall not adversely affect the development of the city as a whole
or the health, safety and general welfare of the people of the city as
determined by the Planning Board.
C. Minor subdivision approval shall be granted or denied by the Planning
Board within forty-five (45) days of submission of a completed
application or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act within the prescribed
period shall constitute minor subdivision approval as provided by law. A
certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning
Board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval required herein and shall be so accepted by the county
132. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 297-8 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-9
297:565
§ 297-10. Action with respect to major subdivision.
If the plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that effect shall
be made on the plat which will be returned to the subdivider for compliance
with the procedure in Article III of this chapter.
§ 297-11. County Planning Board review or approval.
§ 297-12. Copies of sketch plat to be furnished.
In addition to filing requirements of subdivision plats with the county
recording officers, when any approved sketch plat is returned to the
subdivider, seven (7) copies shall be made by the subdivider to furnish the
required number of copies to each of the following:
recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats. All approved
subdivision plats must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the
Planning Board. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final
approval by the Board except that terms and conditions, if any, ensuring
the provision of improvements pursuant to Article VI of this chapter
may be imposed.
D. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two (2) years after the date
on which minor subdivision approval is adopted, provided that the
approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as herein
provided.
A. All subdivisions of land within the city are subject to review by the
Passaic County Planning Board. Approval by the Passaic County
Planning Board is required if said subdivision falls within the
jurisdiction of the county as prescribed in N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.2.
B. Whenever review or approval of the subdivision application is required
by the Passaic County Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3,
the City Planning Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon
timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the County
Planning Board or approval by the County Planning Board by its failure
to report thereon within the required time period.
A. Community Improvements Division (Construction Official): one (1) copy.
B. Tax Assessor: one (1) copy.
C. Paterson Planning Board: two (2) copies.
D. Passaic County Planning Board: two (2) copies.
E. City Engineer: one (1) copy.
§ 297-9 PATERSON CODE § 297-13
297:566
§ 297-13. Required filing for minor subdivisions.
With respect to approval of a minor subdivision, either a deed or plat map
drawn in compliance with the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.)
shall be filed by the subdivider with the County Register of Deeds office,
the City Engineer and the City Tax Assessor within one hundred ninety
(190) days from the date of Planning Board approval or as provided by the
Municipal Land Use Law133 or the approval is voided.
133. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 297-13 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-13
297:567

ARTICLE III
Preliminary Plat Procedure
§ 297-14. Submission of preliminary plat of major subdivision or
preliminary approval; fee.
§ 297-15. Notice of public hearing; costs; publication.
A. At least six (6) black-on-white legible prints of the preliminary plat map
shall be submitted by the owner, properly signed as being the person or
subdivider seeking approval or by his agent acting for and with the
consent of the owner, to the Planning Board at least two (2) weeks prior
to the Planning Board meeting at which consideration is desired.
B. Along with the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall submit a fee of one
hundred ten dollars ($110.) for major subdivisions involving ten (10)
lots or fewer and the following fees for major subdivisions involving
more than ten (10) lots:
(1) Four hundred dollars ($400.), plus thirty dollars ($30.) per unit, for
eleven (11) to fifty (50) units.
(2) Four hundred dollars ($400.), plus thirty-two dollars and fifty cents
($32.50) per unit, for fifty-one (51) to one hundred (100) units.
(3) Four hundred dollars ($400.), plus thirty-five dollars and fifty cents
($35.50) per unit, for one hundred one (101) to two hundred (200)
units.
(4) Four hundred dollars ($400.), plus forty dollars ($40.) per unit,
from two hundred one (201) to three hundred (300) units.
(5) Four hundred dollars ($400.), plus forty-two dollars and fifty cents
($42.50) per unit, for three hundred one (301) to four hundred
(400) units.
(6) Four hundred dollars ($400.), plus forty-five dollars ($45.) per unit,
for four hundred one (401) units or more.
C. All preliminary plats accompanying drawings shall be drawn of a size to
conform with the specifications of the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.).
A. The applicant for subdivision shall serve notice by personal service on
the property owner as shown on the current tax duplicate or his agent
in charge of the property or by mailing a copy by certified mail to the
property owner at his address as shown on the current tax duplicate, at
least ten (10) days prior to the hearing by the Planning Board, to all
property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the extreme limits of
the subdivision as their names appear on the city tax records. Said
notice shall state the date, time and place of hearing, a brief description
of the subdivision and any variances sought, the street address of the
§ 297-14 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-15
297:569
property or designation by lot and block number and notification that
a copy of said subdivision has been filed with the Planning Board for
public inspection. Upon receipt of a written request from a subdivider,
the City Tax Assessor shall furnish within seven (7) days a list of all
names and addresses of owners required to be served. A fee of twentyfive
cents ($0.25) per name or ten dollars ($10.), whichever is greater,
shall be paid by the applicant for the preparation of this list of owners.
B. The Planning Board Secretary shall cause notice of the public hearing
to be published in the Herald and News or in another newspaper of
general circulation in the city at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing,
at the expense of the applicant.
C. In the event that the proposed subdivision involves property located
within two hundred (200) feet of an adjoining municipality, notice of
hearing shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk
of such municipality.
D. Notice of hearing shall be given by personal service or certified mail to
the County Planning Board if the application seeks development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or a proposed road shown
on the Official County Map or the County Master Plan or adjoining
other county land or situated within two hundred (200) feet of a
municipal boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
F. For applications for development of property which exceeds one
hundred fifty (150) acres or five hundred (500) dwelling units, notice of
a hearing shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
State Planning Commission. Said notice shall include a copy of any
maps or documents required to be on file with the City Clerk pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10b.
G. In the case of a public utility, cable television company or local utility
which possesses a right-of-way or easement within the city and which
has registered in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.1, notice of a
hearing shall be given by serving a copy on the persons whose names
appear on the registration form on behalf of the public utility, cable
television company or local utility or by mailing a copy thereof by
certified mail to the person whose name appears on the registration
form at the address shown on that form.
H. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of publication and service of
required notices herein with the Planning Board.
§ 297-15 PATERSON CODE § 297-16
297:570
§ 297-16. Copies of preliminary plat to be furnished.
At least five (5) copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the
Planning Board or designated agent prior to the hearing to the following
persons:
§ 297-17. Design standards to be considered by Planning Board.
A. Passaic County Planning Board: two (2) copies.
B. County Engineer: one (1) copy.
C. City Engineer: one (1) copy.
D. Community Improvements Division: one (1) copy.
E. Such other city, county or state officials as directed by the Planning
Board.
A. In reviewing the subdivision for preliminary approval, the Planning
Board shall apply design standards that encourage good development
patterns within the city.
B. The subdivision shall basically conform to the proposals, conditions and
outlook of the Master Plan. Among matters to be considered by the
Planning Board are:
(1) Appropriate extension and/or realignment of existing and/or
proposed streets.
(2) Adequate right-of-way widths for various classifications of streets
as indicated in the Master Plan and Official Map.
(3) Elimination of reserve strips controlling access to streets.
(4) Street grades, intersection sight distances, length and treatment of
dead-end streets and duplication of street names.
(5) Block lengths and widths as related to zoning, and pedestrian
walks.
(6) Lot sizes, shapes and frontages.
(7) Soil erosion and sediment control if any part of the proposed
subdivision involves land disturbances in excess of five thousand
(5,000) square feet (according to Standards for Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control in New Jersey, New Jersey Soil Conservation
Committee 1976, or any amendments thereto).
(8) Stormwater easements or drainage and utility rights-of-way.
(9) The overall effect of the subdivision on the community, the city and
the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city.
(10) Adequate water supply, shade trees, sewerage and other utilities.
§ 297-16 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-17
297:571
§ 297-18. Action by Planning Board and County Planning Board.
(11) Reserved open space, if needed.
(12) Regulations of land subject to flooding.
(13) Buffer strips, culs-de-sac and street turnarounds to be indicated, if
applicable.
(14) Consistency of the layout with the Zoning Ordinance.134
(15) Conformity with standards promulgated by the Commissioner of
Transportation pursuant to the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning
Act of 1983 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.) for any airport safety zones
delineated under that Act.
(16) Conformity with Article IV, Recycling, of Chapter 427, Solid Waste.
(17) Conformity with any access management code adopted by the
county with respect to any county roads within the city or adopted
by the city with respect to municipal streets.
(18) Conformity with the state highway access management code
adopted by the Commissioner of Transportation with respect to
state highways within the city.
(19) Protection of potable water supply reservoirs from pollution or
other degradation of water quality in accordance with siting,
performance or other standards or guidelines adopted by the
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy.
(20) Conformity with public safety regulations concerning stormwater
detention facilities pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-95.1 and as
reflected in stormwater management plans and ordinances
adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93 et seq.
A. The Planning Board shall act on a preliminary plat within forty-five (45)
days from date of submission of a completed application if the
subdivision involves ten (10) lots or fewer and within ninety-five (95)
days from date of submission if the subdivision involves more than ten
(10) lots. If variances are sought, the Planning Board shall act within
one hundred twenty (120) days.
B. When County Planning Board review is required, action by the Planning
Board shall be contingent on county action. In all cases, the
recommendations of the Passaic County Planning Board shall be given
careful consideration in the final decision by the City Planning Board.
Its actions shall be noted on the plat, and if disapproved, two (2) copies
of the reasons for disapproval shall be returned with the plat. If either
the Planning Board of the city or the Passaic County Planning Board
134. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 297-17 PATERSON CODE § 297-18
297:572
§ 297-19. Rights conferred by preliminary approval.
Preliminary approval shall confer upon the subdivider the following rights
for a three-year period from the date of such approval:
disapproves a plat, the reasons for disapproval shall be remedied prior
to further consideration.
C. If the Planning Board acts favorably on a preliminary plat, the
Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board shall affix their
signatures to the plat with a notation that it has received preliminary
approval and returned to the subdivider for compliance with final
approval requirements.
A. The general terms and conditions under which the preliminary approval
was granted will not be changed, except modifications by ordinance for
such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as related to
public health and safety.
B. The subdivider may submit, on or before the expiration date, the whole
or part or parts of said plat for final approval.
C. The subdivider may apply for and the Planning Board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of one
(1) year but not to exceed a total of two (2) years, provided that if
design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised
standards may govern.
§ 297-18 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-19
297:573

ARTICLE IV
Final Plat Procedure
§ 297-20. Submission of final plat.
§ 297-21. Action by Planning Board and County Planning Board.
A. The final plat shall be submitted to the Planning Board for final
approval within three (3) years from the date of the preliminary
approval.
B. The original tracing and six (6) black-and-white prints of the final plat
shall be submitted to the Planning Board at least two (2) weeks prior to
the date of the regular meeting at which review is requested. Unless the
preliminary plat is approved without changes, the final plat shall have
incorporated all changes or modifications required by the Planning
Board.
C. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement from the City
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation, identifying those portions already installed and
those to be installed, and the subdivider has complied with one (1) of
the following:
(1) Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
these regulations.
(2) Posted a performance guaranty with the City Engineer in sufficient
amount, not to exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the
cost of the improvements, to assure the completion of all required
improvements.
(3) Met all other conditions, including execution of a developer's
agreement where required by the Planning Board, pursuant to
preliminary approval.
D. The final plat must be drawn in conformance with the provisions of the
Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.) and contain all the
requirements for drainage easements, encroachment lines, sight
triangles at intersections and new or additional rights-of-way or
easements for roads, as established by the Planning Board for the
preliminary plat.
A. Upon receipt of the final plat, the Planning Board shall take action on
the plat within forty-five (45) days after the date of the complete
submission which shall include the checklist requirements pursuant to
the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance.135 Failure by the
Planning Board to act within the allotted time or a mutually agreed
upon extension shall be deemed an approval.
135. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 297-20 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-21
297:575
§ 297-22. Copies of final plat to be filed.
B. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the application for final approval
conform to the standards established by ordinance for final approval,
the conditions for preliminary approval and the standards prescribed by
the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.).
C. If the Planning Board approves the final plat, a notation to that effect
shall be made on each plat and shall be signed by the Chairman and the
Secretary of the Planning Board.
D. Any plat which requires Passaic County Planning Board approval,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, shall be forwarded to the County
Planning Board for its action. Final approval by the City Planning Board
shall be conditioned on County Planning Board approval or by its failure
to report thereon within the required time period.
A. Upon final approval, five (5) copies of the final plat shall be filed by the
Planning Board with the following:
(1) City Engineer: one (1) copy.
(2) Construction Official: one (1) copy.
(3) Tax Assessor: one (1) copy.
(4) County Planning Board: two (2) copies.
B. The cost of the copies will be charged to the subdivider and shall be
paid before the return of the original tracing to the subdivider.
C. After final approval by the City Planning Board, the signed plat shall be
filed by the subdivider with the County Register of Deeds. No plat shall
be accepted for filing by the County Register of Deeds office unless it
has been duly approved by the Planning Board and signed by its
Chairman and Secretary. Said signatures will not be affixed until the
subdivider has posted all required performance guaranties.
D. Final approval will expire if the plat is not filed within ninety-five (95)
days of the date signed, but the Planning Board may, for good cause
shown, extend this deadline for an additional period not to exceed one
hundred ninety (190) days from the date the plat is signed or as
permitted by the Municipal Land Use Law.136
136. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 297-21 PATERSON CODE § 297-22
297:576
ARTICLE V
Plat Details
§ 297-23. Sketch plat.
The sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information or other similarly
accurate base, at a scale suitable to present clear and legible information,
but not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, and shall show or include
the following:
§ 297-24. Preliminary plat.
The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a New Jersey licensed land
surveyor, architect, engineer, planner or certified landscape architect and
shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a suitable scale, but not less than one
(1) inch equals fifty (50) feet, and shall show or be accompanied by the
following information:
A. The entire tract of land and that portion which is to be subdivided,
including an indication of all property lines being eliminated and new
ones being proposed with corresponding dimensions.
B. All existing and proposed structures within and adjoining the proposed
subdivision, including the use and zoning designation of each parcel.
C. All existing and proposed streets and roads within or adjoining the
proposed subdivision, with the right-of-way widths of each clearly
indicated.
D. The location, size and direction of flow of all streams, brooks, drainage
ditches, all easements relative to the above and all existing and
proposed utility easements in the area of the subdivision.
E. Tax assessment information relative to map sheet, block and lot
numbers and the names of adjoining property owners.
F. Number and square footage of each lot to result from the proposed
subdivision.
G. Key map inset, date and scale of the plat and North arrow.
H. Names and address of owner(s), subdivider(s) and person(s) preparing
plat.
A. A key map showing the entire subdivision and its relationship to the
surrounding areas.
B. Tract name, tax block and lot number, city Tax Map sheet, date, revision
date if applicable, reference meridian and graphic scale.
C. The names and addresses of the owner(s) of record, the subdivider(s)
and the person(s) who prepared the map, plus his seal.
§ 297-23 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-24
297:577
§ 297-25. Final plat.
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on translucent tracing cloth or its
equivalent at a suitable scale, but not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50)
feet, and shall show or be accompanied by the following:
D. Acreage to the nearest tenth of an acre of the entire tract and the
portion subdivided.
E. The number of new lots created and square footage of each.
F. The location and dimensions of existing and proposed property lines,
buildings and structures, streets, watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, drains and any other natural features such as wooded areas
and rock formations. The information should also include the
boundaries of the designated encroachment lines of all watercourses
within or adjacent to the subdivision.
G. Existing and proposed contours shall be provided at two-foot intervals
for all slopes of a ten-percent grade or less and at five-foot intervals for
all slopes greater than ten percent (10%) grade.
H. Plans of proposed and existing utility facilities (sewers, storm drains,
water, gas, electricity) serving the subdivision, showing the size,
location and feasible connections to existing or any proposed utility
systems. When a public sewerage disposal system is not available, the
subdivider shall have percolation tests made and submit the results
with the preliminary plat. Any remedy proposed to overcome such a
situation shall first be approved by the appropriate local, county or
state health agency.
I. The high and low point and tentative cross sections and center-line
profiles for all proposed streets within the subdivision and for all other
streets at the point(s) where proposed new streets will connect with
existing ones.
J. The location, width and purpose of any easement or land reserved or
dedicated to public use in the area to be subdivided shall be designated,
and the proposed use of sites other than residential shall be noted.
K. A copy of all covenants or deed restrictions applying to the land being
subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary plat and denoted
thereon.
L. A certificate from the Revenue Collections Director, showing that all
taxes are paid to date, shall be submitted.
A. The date, name and location of the subdivision, the name of the owner,
graphic scale and reference meridian.
B. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines, with accurate dimensions,
§ 297-24 PATERSON CODE § 297-25
297:578
bearings and deflection angles and radii, acres and central angles of all
curves.
C. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
D. Each block and the lots therein shall be numbered in accordance with
the city tax numbering system.
E. Location and description of all monuments.
F. Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites.
G. Names of owners and block and lot numbers or descriptions of
adjoining unsubdivided lands.
H. Certification by the engineer or surveyor as to the accuracy of the
details of the plat.
I. Certification that the subdivider is the agent or owner of the land or
that the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
J. Cross section and profiles of streets, approved by the City Engineer.
K. Contours at five-foot intervals for land of greater than ten-percent
slope, and at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
L. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
M. A certificate from the Revenue Collections Director that all taxes are
paid to date.
§ 297-25 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-25
297:579

ARTICLE VI
Improvements
§ 297-26. Required improvements.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed
all improvements or shall have furnished performance guaranties for the
ultimate installation of all improvements, including:
§ 297-27. Inspection and approval of improvements; costs.
All of the above-listed improvements shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the City Engineer who shall be notified by the subdivider
at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and approved. The
A. Streets.
B. Street signs.
C. Curb and/or gutters.
D. Sidewalks.
E. Streetlighting.
F. Shade trees, to be located on the street line so as not to interfere with
utilities or sidewalks.
G. Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be used as spoil or removed from the
site. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six (6) inches of cover to all areas
of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding, sodding or
planting on slopes of less than twelve percent (12%) as shown on the
final grading plan and shall be stabilized by sodding on slopes of twelve
percent (12%) or over as shown on the final grading plan.
H. Monuments, to be of the size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11,
as amended, and shall be placed in accordance with said statute.
I. Water mains, culverts, storm sewers and sanitary sewers. All such
installations shall be properly connected with an approved system and
shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future
development.
J. Grading.
K. Pavement.
L. Drainage structures, erosion controls and sedimentation control
devices.
M. Public improvements of open space.
§ 297-26 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-27
297:581
city may charge the subdivider an inspection fee not to exceed the costs
incurred in performing the inspection.
§ 297-28. Completion of improvements prior to final approval.
No final plat shall be approved by the Planning Board until the completion
of all such required improvements has been certified to the City Council
by the City Engineer, unless the subdivider shall have filed with the city a
performance guaranty as hereinafter provided.
§ 297-29. Performance guaranties.
A. The subdivider shall file with the city a performance guaranty sufficient
in amount not to exceed one hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost
of all required improvements or uncompleted portions thereof as
estimated by the City Engineer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 for
improvements deemed necessary or appropriate, including streets,
grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, streetlighting, shade
trees, surveyors monuments, water mains, culverts, storm sewers,
sanitary sewers or other means of sewerage disposal, drainage
structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices and
public improvements of open space and assuring the installation of such
uncompleted improvements on or before an agreed date. The City
Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements
covered by the performance guaranty, which itemized cost estimate
shall be appended to each performance guaranty posted by the obligor.
Such performance guaranty may be in the form of a performance bond
which shall be issued by a bonding or surety company approved by the
Planning Board; a certified check, returnable to the subdivider after full
compliance; cash pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.3; an
irrevocable letter of credit pursuant to the requirements of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.5; or any other type of surety approved by the Corporation
Counsel as to form, sufficiency and execution. At least ten percent
(10%) of said guaranty shall be made in cash. Such performance
guaranty shall run for a period to be fixed by the Planning Board but in
no case for a term of more than three (3) years.
B. The time allowed for installation of improvements may be extended by
resolution of the City Council. As a condition or as part of any such
extension, the amount of any performance guaranty shall be increased
or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed one
hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost of the installation, as
determined by the Municipal Engineer according to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4 as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
C. Uncompleted and unsatisfactorily completed improvements.
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements
and utility improvements and the connection of the same to the
public system, the obligor on the performance guaranty may
request of the governing body, in writing, by certified mail
§ 297-27 PATERSON CODE § 297-29
297:582
addressed in care of the City Clerk, that the City Engineer prepare,
in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the
City Engineer pursuant to Subsection A, a list of all uncompleted
and unsatisfactorily completed improvements. If such a request
is made, the obligor shall send a copy of the request to the City
Engineer. The request shall indicate which improvements have
been completed and which improvements remain uncompleted in
the judgment of the obligor. Thereafter, the City Engineer shall
inspect all improvements covered by the request and shall file a
detailed list and report, in writing, with the governing body and
shall also send a copy thereof to the obligor not later forty-five (45)
days after receipt of the obligor's request.
(2) The list prepared by the City Engineer shall state in detail with
respect to each improvement determined to be incomplete or
unsatisfactory the nature and extent of the incompleteness or the
nature and extent of and remedy for the unsatisfactory state of
each completed improvement determined to be unsatisfactory. The
report prepared by the City Engineer shall identify each
improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory together
with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be made in
the performance guaranty relating to the completed and
satisfactory improvement in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared pursuant to Subsection A.
D. Approval of the complete and satisfactory improvements and approval
of a reduction in the performance guaranty.
(1) The Municipal Council, by resolution, shall either approve the
improvements determined to be complete and satisfactory by the
City Engineer or reject any of these improvements and shall
approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the
performance guaranty relating to the improvements accepted, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City
Engineer pursuant to Subsection A. This resolution shall be
adopted not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the list
and report prepared by the City Engineer. Upon adoption of the
resolution by the City Council, the obligor shall be released from all
liability pursuant to its performance guaranty with respect to those
approved improvements except for that portion adequately
sufficient to secure completion or correction of the improvements
not yet approved, provided that thirty percent (30%) of the amount
of the performance guaranty posted may be retained to ensure
completion and acceptability of all improvements.
(2) If the City Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report as
requested by the obligor pursuant to Subsection C within forty-five
(45) days from receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to a
court in a summary manner for an order compelling the City
Engineer to provide the list and report within a stated time. If the
city fails to approve or reject the improvements determined by the
§ 297-29 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-29
297:583
Municipal Engineer to be complete and satisfactory or reduce the
performance guaranty for the complete and satisfactory
improvements within forty-five (45) days from the receipt of the
City Engineer's list and report, the obligor may apply to the court
in a summary manner for an order compelling, within a stated
time, approval of the complete and satisfactory improvements and
approval of a reduction in the performance guaranty for the
approvable complete and satisfactory improvements in accordance
with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer
pursuant to Subsection A.
(3) In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the city
or approving agency as part of the performance guaranty, any
partial reduction granted in the performance guaranty pursuant to
this subsection shall be applied to the cash deposit in the same
proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full amount of
the performance guaranty.
E. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving
agency may require the obligor to complete or correct such
improvements and, upon completion or correction, the same procedure
of notification, as set forth in this section, shall be followed.
F. The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the City Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements, provided that the city may require of the developer a
deposit for the inspection fees in an amount not to exceed, except for
extraordinary circumstances, the greater of five hundred dollars
($500.) or five percent (5%) of the cost of improvements, which cost
shall be determined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. For those
developments for which the reasonably anticipated fees are less than
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.), fees may, at the option of the
developer, be paid in two (2) installments. The initial amount deposited
by a developer shall be fifty percent (50%) of the reasonably anticipated
fees. When the balance on deposit drops to ten percent (10%) of the
reasonably anticipated fees because the amount deposited by the
developer has been reduced by the amount paid to the Municipal
Engineer for inspection, the developer shall deposit the remaining fifty
percent (50%) of the anticipated inspection fees. For those
developments for which the reasonably anticipated fees are ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.) or greater, fees may, at the option of the
developer, be paid in four (4) installments. The initial amount deposited
shall be twenty-five percent (25%) of the reasonably anticipated fees.
When the balance on deposit drops to ten percent (10%) of said fees
because the amount deposited by the developer has been reduced by
the amount paid to the City Engineer for inspection, the developer shall
make additional deposits of twenty-five percent (25%) of the reasonably
anticipated fees. The City Engineer shall not perform any inspection if
sufficient funds to pay for the inspections are not on deposit.
§ 297-29 PATERSON CODE § 297-30
297:584
§ 297-30. Liability for breach of performance guaranty;
performance by city.
If the required improvements have not been installed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if any,
shall be liable thereon to the city for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not installed or corrected and, either prior to or after receipt
of the proceeds thereof, the city may complete such improvements. Such
completion or correction shall be subject to the public bidding requirements
of the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
§ 297-31. Maintenance guaranty.
For all improvements not owned by a governmental agency or public utility
and not covered by a maintenance guaranty to another governmental
agency, a maintenance guaranty shall be posted with the city by the
subdivider for a period not to exceed two (2) years after final acceptance of
the improvements, in an amount not to exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the
cost of the improvements, which cost shall be determined by the Municipal
Engineer according to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4.
§ 297-32. Standard requirements.
A. All streets shall be paved the full width between the curblines as
determined by the Planning Board. The minimum width of pavement
will be thirty (30) feet. In residential sections, the pavement type shall
be six (6) inches dense graded aggregate, four (4) inches bituminous
stabilized base, mix I-2, and two (2) inches bituminous concrete, mix
I-5. In commercial and industrial sections, the pavement type shall be
eight (8) inches dense graded aggregate, six (6) inches bituminous
stabilized base, mix I-2, and three (3) inches bituminous concrete, mix
I-5, unless, in the opinion of the City Engineer, local conditions require
a more durable pavement.
B. Straight concrete curb or combined concrete curbs and gutters will be
required in all street improvements. They shall be constructed in
accordance with the standard plans and specifications of the city and
the applicable provisions of this chapter.
C. Concrete sidewalks will be required on all street improvements and
shall be constructed in accordance with applicable city specifications.
D. Provisions shall be made for stormwater drainage, sanitary sewage and
utilities. All such installations shall be connected with an approved
system and shall be adequate for all present and probable future
development and shall be made according to the standard requirements
and specifications of the city.
E. Appropriate street name signs shall be installed at all street
intersections.
§ 297-30 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-32
297:585
F. Appropriate streetlights shall be installed where designated by the
Planning Board.
G. Landscaping and buffer requirements as designated by the Planning
Board shall be required.
§ 297-32 PATERSON CODE § 297-32
297:586
ARTICLE VII
Design Standards
§ 297-33. Compliance required.
The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and principles of
land subdivision in the design of each section as set forth in this Article.
§ 297-34. General standards.
The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that will encourage
acceptable and standard development patterns within the city. The streets,
drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and playgrounds shall be
considered in the approval of subdivision plats. Said plat elements shall
be such as to lend themselves to the harmonious development of the city
and enhance the public welfare in accordance with the following design
standards.
§ 297-35. Streets.
A. The arrangement of streets shall be such as to provide for the
appropriate extension of existing streets.
B. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
C. Widths.
(1) The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line
and shall be not less than the following:
(a) Arterial/principal streets: sixty (60) feet.
(b) Collector/minor streets: fifty (50) feet.
(c) Local streets: forty (40) feet.
(2) The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multifamily,
commercial and industrial developments shall be determined on an
individual basis and shall, in all cases, be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and
loading needs and maximum access for fire-fighting equipment.
(3) No street shall have a width greater than sixty (60) feet within the
right-of-way lines unless said street constitutes an extension of an
existing street of greater width.
D. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been placed under city jurisdiction under conditions
approved by the Planning Board.
E. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to the street width requirements of this chapter shall dedicate
§ 297-33 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-35
297:587
§ 297-36. Blocks.
additional width along either one (1) or both sides of said road. If
subdivision is along one (1) side only, one-half (1/2) of the required
extra width shall be dedicated except when the Planning Board
determines that existing conditions make it unfeasible.
F. Grades of arterial, major thoroughfares and collector streets shall not
exceed four percent (4%). Grades on other streets shall not exceed ten
percent (10%). No streets shall have a minimum grade of less than onehalf
of one percent (1/2 of 1%). Within fifty (50) feet of an intersection of
any street with a collector street, major thoroughfare, arterial street or
controlled access highway, the maximum grade shall be limited to two
percent (2%).
G. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case be less than sixty degrees (60°). The block corners at
intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a
radius of not less than twenty (20) feet for collector and arterial streets
and fifteen (15) feet for minor and marginal streets.
H. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five
(125) feet shall be prohibited.
I. A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced
between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
J. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one (1)
point by more than ten degrees (10°) and not more than forty-five
degrees (45°), they shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not
less than one hundred (100) feet for minor streets and three hundred
(300) feet for arterial and collector streets.
K. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
L. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall be not longer than six hundred
(600) feet and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of not
less than fifty (50) feet and tangent, whenever possible, to the right side
of the street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar
turnaround shall be provided and provisions shall be made for future
extensions of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the
adjoining properties.
M. No streets shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of the lot required in the area by the Zoning
Ordinance137 of the city and provide for convenient access, circulation,
control and safety of street traffic.
§ 297-35 PATERSON CODE § 297-36
297:588
§ 297-37. Lots.
§ 297-38. Public use and service areas.
B. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
C. In blocks over one thousand (1,000) feet long, pedestrian walkways may
be required in locations deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Such
walkway shall be ten (10) feet wide and be straight from street to
street.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance of the city.138
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved street with a right-of-way of at
least fifty (50) feet in width.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances, the Planning Board may, after investigation,
withhold approval of such lots.
A. Easements for utility installation may be required where no utility lines
presently exist. Such easements shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide
and located in consultation with the utility company and the city
departments concerned.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
C. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
137. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
138. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 297-36 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-38
297:589

ARTICLE VIII
Violations; Lien
§ 297-39. Violations and penalties.
If, before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells
or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly
conditioned on final subdivision approval as owner or agent, any land which
forms a part of a subdivision on which, by ordinance, the Planning Board
is required to act, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed one
thousand dollars ($1,000.), and each lot disposition so made may be deemed
a separate violation.
§ 297-40. Civil remedies.
In addition to the foregoing, the city may institute and maintain a civil
action:
§ 297-41. Lien.
In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to
a lien upon the portion of the land, from which the subdivision was made
that remains in the possession of the subdivider or his assigns or successors
to secure the return of any deposits made or purchase price paid, and also
a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any.
Any such action must be instituted within two (2) years of the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land, or
within six (6) years if unrecorded.
A. For injunctive relief.
B. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued.
§ 297-39 LAND SUBDIVISION § 297-41
297:591
Chapter 301
LAUNDRIES, COIN-OPERATED
§ 301-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-OPERATED LAUNDRY — An establishment, facility or place of
business in the City conducted and used for the purpose of washing,
cleaning, drying, dyeing and laundering clothes and other washable
materials in coin-operated machines. "Coin-operated laundry" shall include
facilities in dwellings and apartment houses restricted to use by persons
residing in said dwelling or apartment house.
LOITER or LOITERING — Includes the commission of acts by one or more
persons in and upon the premises where a coin-operated laundry is located
with intent to provoke a breach of the peace or whereby a breach of the
peace may be occasioned; or refusal to move from said premises after being
requested to do so by the operator of said premises or the person then in
charge of said premises or by a police officer of the City; or congregating
at said premises with other persons so as to molest or interfere in any way
with the free passage of any person lawfully on said premises.
§ 301-2. License required; compliance required.
§ 301-3. Application for license; contents.
A. No person shall engage in, conduct or operate a coin-operated laundry
business within the City without first having obtained a license therefor
from the City issued by the Licensing Division after approval thereof by
the Council.
B. A separate license shall be required for each coin-operated laundry
location.
C. No license shall be issued under this chapter unless the premises in
which the coin-operated laundry is to be operated complies in all
respects with the requirements of the applicable City codes and
ordinances and laws of this state.
A. The application for a license shall be filed with the Licensing Division
upon forms approved by the Council. A separate application shall be
filed for each location.
B. Each application shall state the following:
(1) The name and address of the person who will engage in, conduct or
operate the coin-operated laundry business.
§ 297-41 PATERSON CODE § 301-3
297:592
§ 301-4. Term of license; expiration of license.
Each license shall be issued for a term of one year or a portion thereof
commencing on January 1 or thereafter and shall expire on the 31st day of
December following the date of issuance.
§ 301-5. License fee. [Amended 4-19-1983 by Ord. No. 83-030;
11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-068; 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-076;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-067]
The fee for a license issued under this chapter for the calendar year or any
portion thereof shall be $25 for each coin-operated machine installed in the
coin-operated laundry, provided that the minimum license fee for any coinoperated
laundry shall be $50. Any application for a license renewal which
is not completed within 30 days of the renewal date shall be subject to an
additional late administrative charge equal to 10% of the cost of the license
renewal.
§ 301-6. Sanitary and safety requirements.
§ 301-7. Unreasonable noise and vibration prohibited.
In the operation of a coin-operated laundry, no machinery shall be used
or operated as to cause unnecessary or unreasonable noise or vibration
to the annoyance of residents in said premises or in the surrounding
neighborhood.
(2) The exact location and size of the premises wherein the coinoperated
laundry is to be located.
(3) The location in said premises where the coin-operated laundry is to
be operated.
(4) The maximum amount of water to be used daily in connection with
the operation of the coin-operated laundry.
A. Each coin-operated laundry shall be kept clean and dry, be adequately
ventilated and provided with sufficient natural or artificial light. The
walls of the premises shall be covered with nonabsorbent cement or
other impervious material.
B. All plumbing work and facilities used in the coin-operated laundry shall
conform to the provisions of the uniform construction codes and shall
be maintained in good condition. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
C. The coin-operated laundry shall, at all times, comply with the
requirements of the applicable City codes and ordinances and laws of
this state.
§ 301-3 LAND SUBDIVISION § 301-8
297:593
§ 301-8. Premises to be visible from street; exception.
No coin-operated laundry shall operate or be permitted to operate unless
the entire premises shall be fully visible from the street. This section
shall not apply to the premises of coin-operated laundries in dwelling or
apartment houses where the use is restricted to persons residing therein.
§ 301-9. Loitering prohibited.
No person shall loiter in and upon the premises where a coin-operated
laundry is located.
§ 301-10. Permitted hours of operation.
No coin-operated laundry shall be open or be permitted to operate between
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. except that any machine which has been started
before 11:00 p.m. may be permitted to complete its cycle of operation.
§ 301-11. Use of separate machine for diapers and certain soiled
articles.
No diapers or other articles containing body excrement or discharge shall
be permitted to remain in and upon the premises of a coin-operated laundry.
They shall, as speedily as possible, be placed in coin-operated machines
specially designated for such purpose. All such machines shall be
appropriately and conspicuously marked and shall not be used for any other
purpose.
§ 301-12. Revocation or suspension of license; hearing.
In addition to the penalties prescribed in § 301-13, any license issued under
this chapter may be revoked by the Council, after notice and hearing, if
it appears after such hearing that the licensee has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or that the licensed premises have been
maintained in such manner that continuance thereof is detrimental to the
public health, safety and the general welfare of the community. Pending a
revocation hearing, the license may be suspended for no longer than two
weeks.
§ 301-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
Chapter 305
§ 301-8 PATERSON CODE § 301-13
305:594
LIBRARY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Library Board of Trustees — See Ch. 59.
§ 305-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LIBRARY — Any library or collection supported in whole or in part by
public funds of the city and any free public library created pursuant to the
provision of N.J.S.A. 40:54-1 et seq.
§ 305-2. Failure to return book or article.
No person shall retain or fail to return any book or article borrowed from
any library in the city contrary to the rules and regulations of such library.
§ 305-3. Notification of failure to return borrowed items.
If any person retains or fails to return any book or article, he shall be first
notified in person or in writing of his failure to return said book or article as
per rules and regulations of the library before any complaint shall be made
for violation of this chapter.
§ 305-4. Damage to book or article.
No person shall damage or destroy or permit to be damaged or destroyed
any book or other article or any part thereof which is owned by or is in the
custody of the library.
§ 305-5. Fraudulent borrowing.
No person shall register or furnish a false name or address or use any
card or indicia other than the one issued to said person for the purpose of
borrowing any book or other article from the library.
§ 305-6. Violations and penalties.139
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period
of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 301-13 LIBRARY § 305-6
305:595
Chapter 309
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 309-1. Applications for licenses and permits in the absence of
specific requirements.
Applications for licenses or permits shall be made as required by the
applicable provisions of this Code of the City of Paterson. If no such
requirements are set forth, applications shall be made in writing, addressed
to and filed with the Council, board or officer authorized by statute, state
regulation or this Code of the City of Paterson to grant or issue the license
or permit, on forms supplied by such authorized issuing authority or officer.
§ 309-2. Fees to accompany application.
Every application for a license or a permit shall be accompanied by the
license fee or permit fee in the amount prescribed by the applicable
provisions of this Code of the City of Paterson or other ordinances of the
city or statutes unless otherwise provided therein.
§ 309-3. Refund of fee on withdrawal or denial of application.
Whenever an application for a license or a permit is denied or withdrawn
by the applicant, there shall be refunded to the applicant the amount
of the license or permit fee which accompanied the application, less ten
percent (10%) thereof but not less than one dollar ($1.) or more than ten
dollars ($10.), unless otherwise provided by statute, this Code of the City of
Paterson or other ordinances of the city.
§ 309-4. Expiration of licenses.
Unless otherwise provided by statute or this Code of the City of Paterson or
other ordinances of the city, all licenses shall be effective until the 31st day
of December of the year when issued and shall expire on that date unless
sooner suspended or revoked.
Chapter 313
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 105.
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
Solid waste — See Ch. 427.
§ 305-6 PATERSON CODE § 309-4
309:596
ARTICLE I
Prohibited Acts
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 18, Art. 9, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson; amended in its
entirety 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
§ 313-1. Placing litter on property prohibited.
No person shall throw, fling, cast, hurl or otherwise propel or deposit any
printed advertisement, litter, garbage, bottles or rubbish upon any property,
including, but not limited to, upon the lawns, walks and sidewalks of private
residential dwellings, or business, mercantile or commercial establishments
or public buildings or structures in the city. In addition, no person shall
throw, fling, cast, hurl or otherwise propel or deposit litter on any open or
vacant property whether owned by such person or not.
§ 313-1.1. Permitting litter on property prohibited. [Added
4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 03-019]
No occupant or owner of any property shall permit any printed
advertisement, litter, garbage, bottles or rubbish to remain upon any
property, including, but not limited to, upon the lawns, walks and sidewalks
of private residential dwellings or business, mercantile or commercial
establishments in the City.
§ 313-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey statute, any
person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 313-2.1. Violations and penalties of § 313-1.1. [Added 4-22-2003
by Ord. No. 03-019]
Any person who violates § 313-1.1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 313-2.2. Authority to enforce. [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No.
03-019]
A summons may be issued for a violation of § 313-1.1 by a police officer,
a designated inspector of the Department of Public Works or any lawfully
designated officer.
§ 313-1 LITTERING § 313-2.2
313:597

ARTICLE II
Littering Prohibited; Handbill Distribution
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 13, Art. 7, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 313-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designed for navigation or for flight in the air and includes helicopters and
lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — A litter storage and collection
receptacle weighing not more than 70 pounds when filled, constructed of
galvanized metal or rigid plastic, leakproof, not more than 26 inches in
height and having a properly secured metal or plastic lid. A certified plastic
litter storage bag that is tied securely at the top may also be included under
this definition.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of
literature which:
A. Advertises any merchandise, product, commodity or thing for sale.
Directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment or other activity for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales.
B.
Directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance,
exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged
for the purpose of private gain or profit. The terms of this definition
shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is
taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such
meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind when
it is held, is given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of
information which does not violate the ordinary rules of decency, good
morals, public peace, safety and good order. Nothing contained in this
definition shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking
place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any
kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by a
law of the state or ordinance of the city.140
C.
While containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is
predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or
circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
D.
140. Editor's Note: See Ch. 203, Entertainment and Shows.
§ 313-3 LITTERING § 313-3
313:599
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HANDBILL — Includes both commercial handbills and noncommercial
handbills, as such terms are defined in this section.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse and rubbish as such are defined herein, and all
other waste material thrown or deposited as herein prohibited.[Amended
5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure of one or more
stories in which four or more units of dwelling space are occupied, or are
intended to be occupied, by four or more individuals or families who live
independently of each other.[Added 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the
United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any
newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by
general law. In addition thereto, "newspaper" means and includes any
periodical or magazine regularly published with not fewer than four issues
per year and sold to the public.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, circular, dodger, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of
a "commercial handbill" or "newspaper."
OCCUPANT — Any adult person, proprietorship, corporation, partnership,
association and/or the agents or employees of any one of them having
actual or constructive possession of property or any part thereof.[Added
5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
OWNER — Any person who, alone, jointly or severally with others, holds
legal or equitable title to any property as herein defined, with or without
the accompanying actual possession thereof; or any vehicle. This definition
includes any person who shall have charge, care or control of any property
or vehicle as owner or agent of the owner or as fiduciary, including but not
limited to executor, administrator, trustee, receiver, rent receiver, guardian
or as mortgagee in possession regardless of how such possession was
obtained.[Added 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to
recreation.
PROPERTY — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, sidewalk, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule
or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
Directs attention to or which encourages support of any political party,
candidate for municipal, county, state or federal office or any
referendum that will appear on the election ballot.
E.
§ 313-3 PATERSON CODE § 313-3
313:600
other structure. This term shall also mean any open or enclosed lot or space,
irrespective of whether it has any dwelling, house, building or structure on
said lot or space.[Amended 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
PUBLIC PLACE — Includes all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public ways and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and
similar materials and bricks or building materials resulting from the
demolition of any structure.
SUPERINTENDENT or JANITOR or RENTAL AGENT — Any person who has
charge, care or control of the property or any part thereof or one who has
been designated to provide maintenance, cleaning and/or repair services
for the property by virtue of agreements or authorization, either oral and/
or written, with the owner. This includes but is not limited to all agents,
servants or employees of any person who has charge, care or control of the
property or any part thereof.[Added 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
TENANT — Any adult person, proprietorship, corporation, partnership or
association and/or the agents or employees of any one of them having
actual or constructive possession of property or any part thereof.[Added
5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
VEHICLE or MOTOR VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any
person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.[Amended 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
§ 313-4. Responsibility for keeping property clean. [Amended
5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
A. Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the property
free of litter.
B. In addition to the owner, responsibility for violation of this section shall
be as follows:
(1) In a one-family house occupied by a tenant, the tenant shall keep
the property free of litter.
(2) In dwellings occupied or intended to be occupied by one to three
individuals or families who live independent of each other, and
which is not occupied by the owner, all tenants shall be obliged to
keep the property free of litter.
§ 313-3 LITTERING § 313-4
313:601
(3) In multi-family dwellings where there is a janitor, superintendent or
rental agent, it shall be his duty to keep the property free of litter.
C. Every person who owns, manages or occupies property for business
purposes shall keep the property free of litter. In addition, every person
who owns or operates a business that sells or offers food stuffs that are
to be consumed out of the place of business, shall provide for the
placement of either an open-mesh or a closed-top litter receptacle that
is lined with a plastic, waterproof garbage bag for every 25 feet of the
premises' street line. These receptacles shall be constructed so as to
prevent litter from being scattered and must be emptied into an
authorized private receptacle every evening before closing.
D. It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owner, tenant(s)
and superintendent or janitor, and the agent or employee of any of
them, to keep the property free from litter.
E. Maintenance of property. The property is to be maintained free from
litter in accordance with the provisions of this article and shall be swept
as often as is necessary to maintain it free of litter in accordance with
the provisions of this article. The property shall be inspected regularly,
including but not limited to during the hours designated for street
cleaning and/or snow removal. Such property inspections shall be
conducted simultaneously with street cleaning and/or snow removal
and shall be conducted by the Director of the Department of Public
Works, or the Director's designee, in order to insure compliance with
the provisions herein. At the time of such inspections, all parts of the
property shall be free of all litter.
F. Curbside notification of property inspection days and times. The
Director of the Department of Public Works, or the Director's designee,
shall cause curbside signs to be erected to notify owners, tenants or
occupants and/or their agents or employees and the general public of
the days and hours of said street cleaning and property inspections,
which days and hours are fully set forth in the Street Cleaning
Ordinance and are incorporated herein by reference.
G. Failure of property to be free of litter during property inspections. Upon
failure of the property to be free of all litter during designated property
inspection days and times, which shall coincide with street cleaning
days and times, the Department of Public Works shall serve upon the
owner, tenant, occupant, superintendent or janitor, and/or the agent or
employee of any one of them, a written notice of violation from the
Department of Public Works. Said notice of violation shall be served by
personal service upon the owner, tenant, occupant, superintendent or
janitor and/or the agent or employee of any one of them, whomever is
located at the property. In the event that the notice of violation cannot
be served by personal service upon the owner, tenant, occupant,
superintendent or janitor, and/or the agent or employee of any one of
them, then a notice of violation shall be posted upon the main entrance
of the premises on the property. In the event that the property is an
§ 313-4 PATERSON CODE § 313-4
313:602
empty or unimproved lot, then in that event, the notice of violation shall
be mailed by certified mail addressed to the last known address of the
owner of the property as shown in the records of the office of the Tax
Collector. The notice of violation shall specify the violation or violations
committed, what must be done to correct same and shall specify a
five-day period for residential users and a two-business-day period for
commercial users which includes weekends and holidays, allotted to
abate the violation. [Amended 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 99-066]
H. Failure to abate violation. In the event that the violation is not abated,
removed, cured or otherwise fully remedied within the five-day period
for residential users and two-business-day period for commercial users
prescribed in the initial notice of violation, a summons for such
violations shall then be issued against the owner, tenant, occupant,
superintendent or janitor, or the agent or employee of any one of them.
The summons, which shall be answerable in Municipal Court, shall be
issued only after the Department of Public Works has completed a
second inspection of the property and has determined that the violation
has not been abated. [Amended 12-21-1999 by Ord. No. 99-066]
I. Litter dangerous to public health, safety and welfare. In the event that
the litter located on the property is determined to be dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare, the Department of Public Works is
authorized and empowered to dispose of or destroy such litter.
(1) Charge included in tax bill. When litter has been destroyed or
removed from any property by or under the direction of the
Director of Public Works, he shall certify the cost thereof to the Tax
Assessor, who shall examine the certificate and, if found correct,
shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against said
property. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien
upon such property and shall be added to and become and form
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such property,
the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be
collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes.
(2) Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due
the city is not paid by the owner within 30 days after the disposal of
such litter as specified in Subsection I of this section, then, and in
that case, the Director of Public Works shall cause to be recorded in
the City Clerk's office a sworn statement showing the cost and
expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the
location of the property on which said work was done. The
recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the
property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount
due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for
collection until payment has been made. Said costs and expenses
shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of
taxes and shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of 7% in the event
that they are not paid in full on or before the tax bill upon which the
§ 313-4 LITTERING § 313-4
313:603
§ 313-5. Placement of litter in receptacles.
Litter shall be placed in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles in such a manner as to prevent it from being scattered, carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place.
§ 313-6. Littering in public places prohibited.141
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place except in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles for collection or in official city dumps.
§ 313-7. Sweeping litter into streets and gutters prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public
or private sidewalk or driveway.
§ 313-8. Littering in parks or playgrounds prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park or playground except in
public receptacles and in such a manner as to prevent such litter from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park, playground
or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all litter shall be carried from the park or playground by
the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 313-9. Littering in fountains and bodies of water prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in the city.
charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded
in accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie
evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that
the work has been properly and satisfactorily completed and shall
be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the
statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property
designated or described in the statement and that the same is due
and collectible as provided by law.
J. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the storage of litter in
authorized private receptacles for collection.
141. Editor's Note: Former § 313-6, Commercial handbill litter control, was renumbered as
§ 313-16 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027. Sections 313-7 through 313-16 were then
redesignated as §§ 313-6 through 313-15, respectively.
§ 313-4 PATERSON CODE § 313-10
313:604
§ 313-10. Prevention of litter from trucks and vehicles.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle onto any public
place unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any litter
from being blown or deposited from the vehicle upon any street, alley or
other public place.
§ 313-11. Throwing litter from vehicles prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter from a vehicle upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place.
§ 313-12. Dropping litter from aircraft prohibited.
No person, while in an aircraft, shall throw out, drop or deposit upon or
within the city any litter, handbill or any other object.
§ 313-13. Littering of private property prohibited. [Amended
5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any property, whether owned
by him or not, except that the owner, superintendent or janitor or person
in control of any property may maintain authorized private receptacles for
collection in such a manner that litter will not be carried or deposited by
the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any
private property.
§ 313-14. Littering of vacant lots prohibited.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property whether owned by such person or not.
§ 313-15. Clearing of litter from open private property by city.
A. Notice to remove. The Director of the Department of Public Works or
any inspector working under his supervision is authorized and
empowered to notify the owner or tenant of any open or vacant private
property or the agent of such owner or tenant to properly dispose of
litter located on such property which is dangerous to public health,
safety or welfare or to remove or dispose of any abandoned, junked or
dismantled motor vehicles. Notice shall be by registered or certified
mail addressed to said owner or tenant or his agent at the last known
address.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or tenant or agent so notified to properly dispose of said litter or
abandoned, junked or dismantled motor vehicles within 10 days after
receipt of written notice specified in Subsection A of this section or
within 10 days after the date of such notice in the event that it is
returned to the city by the Post Office Department because of inability
to make delivery thereof, provided that the notice was properly
§ 313-10 LITTERING § 313-15
313:605
§ 313-16. Commercial handbill litter control. [Amended 5-9-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-027]
addressed to the last known address of the owner or tenant or agent,
the Director of Public Works is authorized and empowered to pay for
disposing of such litter or to order its disposal or destruction by the city.
C. Charge included in tax bill. When litter has been destroyed or removed
from any lands under this article by or under the direction of the
Director of Public Works, he shall certify the cost thereof to the Council,
which shall examine the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the
cost as shown thereon to be charged against said lands. The amount so
charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be
added to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and
levied upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as
taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in
the same manner as taxes.
D. Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the city
is not paid by the owner within 30 days after the disposal of such litter
as specified in Subsections A and B of this section, then and in that case
the Director shall cause to be recorded in the City Clerk's office a sworn
statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date
the work was done and the location of the property on which said work
was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a
lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the
amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for
collection until payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall
be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and
shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of 7% in the event that they are
not paid in full on or before the tax bill upon which the charge appears
becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with
the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal
formalities have been complied with and that the work has been
properly and satisfactorily completed and shall be full notice to every
person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest,
constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in
the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by
law.
A. Indiscriminate distribution prohibited. No person, either directly or
indirectly, shall distribute, place or cause to be placed or scatter or
throw any commercial handbill in or upon any public thoroughfare,
public park or other public ground.
B. Depositing in vehicles or private property prohibited. No person shall
place or put in or upon any part of a vehicle standing or parked in or
upon any public thoroughfare, public park or other public ground or
place or put in or upon any porch, steps or yard of any residence,
private property or other premises any commercial handbill.
§ 313-15 PATERSON CODE § 313-16
313:606
§ 313-17. Posting notices prohibited.
§ 313-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-037; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 4-22-2003 by Ord. No.
03-019; 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-044]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, except as provided
below, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty of imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof,
except that violations of §§ 313-16 and 313-17 are subject to punishment
by payment of fines in the amount of $50. Fines for violation of §§ 313-16
and 313-17 are payable at the Violation Bureau without a court appearance.
Costs of court of $30 will be imposed, consistent with New Jersey Court
Rule 7:11-4, for all such payments.
C. Employer's liability. No person or proprietor of any business or
manager or agent of any proprietorship, corporation, partnership or
association or establishment shall employ or retain another to perform
any act which shall constitute a violation of this section.
D. When delivery permitted. Nothing herein contained shall be construed
to prohibit the physical delivery of a commercial handbill to anyone
personally who is willing to receive the same, provided that such
delivery is made between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any
weekday, exclusive of Sundays and holidays.
E. Prima facie evidence. The finding of any commercial handbill in or upon
any public thoroughfare, public park or other public ground, or in or
upon any parked vehicle, or in or upon any porch, steps or yards shall
be prima facie evidence that such commercial handbill was placed in or
upon the same in violation of this section by the person for whose behalf
such commercial handbill is being distributed.
A. No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company,
candidate for political office, political party or organization of any kind
shall post or affix any notice, commercial handbill or other paper or
device calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost,
public utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building
except as may be authorized or required by law.
B. The posting of any commercial handbill or notice to any lamppost,
public utility pole or shade tree or any public structure or building shall
be prima facie evidence that said commercial handbill or notice was
posted upon same in violation of this section by the person or entity for
whose benefit such commercial notice or handbill is being posted.
[Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 03-019]
§ 313-16 LITTERING § 313-18.1
313:607
§ 313-18.1. Authority to enforce. [Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No.
03-019]
A summons may be issued for a violation of § 313-17 by a police officer,
a designated inspector of the Department of Public Works or any lawfully
designated officer.
§ 313-18.1 PATERSON CODE § 313-18.1
313:608
ARTICLE III
Litter in Motor Vehicles and Motor-Drawn Vehicles
[Adopted 4-11-1989 as Ord. No. 89-017]
§ 313-19. Depositing litter in abandoned motor vehicles or motordrawn
vehicles on public streets.
No person shall deposit litter, rubbish or refuse in a motor vehicle or motor
drawn vehicle left unattended, parked, disabled or abandoned on a public
street, highway or bridge within the City of Paterson. A vehicle which has
remained on or along any highway or other public property for a period
of more than 48 hours or for any period without current license plates or
when disabled or immobile shall be deemed abandoned. For purposes of
this section, a motor vehicle or motor-drawn vehicle shall be deemed to
include but not be limited to cars, trucks, buses, vans, road tractors and
pole trailers without motive power but designed to be propelled by another
vehicle. The inability of a motor vehicle to be moved under its own power
by reason of design or condition shall not eliminate said motor vehicle from
coverage under this section.
§ 313-20. Depositing litter in abandoned motor vehicles or motordrawn
vehicles on private property.
No person shall deposit litter, rubbish or refuse in a motor vehicle or motordrawn
vehicle left unattended, parked, disabled or abandoned on private
property within the City of Paterson. A vehicle which has remained on
private property for a period of more than 48 hours or for any period
without current license plates or when disabled or immobile shall be
deemed abandoned. For purposes of this section, a motor vehicle or motordrawn
vehicle shall be deemed to include but not be limited to cars, trucks,
buses, vans, road tractors and pole trailers without motive power but
designed to be propelled by another vehicle. The inability of a motor vehicle
to be moved under its own power by reason of design or condition shall
not eliminate said motor vehicle from coverage under this section. For
purposes of this section, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the
owner of the private property on which said motor vehicle or motor-drawn
vehicle is found is in control and possession of said vehicle, regardless of
the registration of said motor vehicle or motor-drawn vehicle.
§ 313-21. Action by city upon failure to comply; notice; lien.
[Amended 5-9-1995 by Ord. No. 95-027]
A. Notice to remove. The Director of the Department of Public Works or
any inspector working under his supervision is authorized and
empowered to notify the owner, tenant, occupant or superintendent or
janitor or rental agent of any property, and/or the agent or employee of
any one of them, to properly dispose of litter, refuse or rubbish left in a
motor vehicle or motor-drawn vehicle on such property. Notice shall be
served by personal service upon the owner, tenant, occupant or
superintendent or janitor or rental agent, and/or the agent or employee
§ 313-19 LITTERING § 313-21
313:609
of any one of them, whomever is located at the property. In the event
that notice cannot be served by personal service upon the owner,
tenant, occupant, superintendent or janitor or rental agent, and/or the
agent or employee of any one of them, then a notice shall be posted
upon the main entrance of the premises on the property. In the event
that the property is an empty or unimproved lot, then, in that event,
notice shall be mailed by certified mail addressed to the last known
address of the owner of the property as shown in the records of the
office of the Tax Collector. The notice shall specify the violation or
violations committed, what must be done to correct the same and shall
specify a five-day period allotted to abate the violation.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or tenant or agent so notified to properly dispose of the said
litter, refuse or rubbish in a motor vehicle or motor-drawn vehicle
within five days of written notice, the Director of Public Works is
authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of such motor
vehicle, or motor-drawn vehicle and the litter, refuse, rubbish contained
therein, by the city.
C. Charge included in tax bill. When said motor vehicle or motor-drawn
vehicle and contents have been removed from any property by or under
the direction of the Director of Public Works and properly disposed of,
he shall certify the cost thereof to the Tax Collector, who shall examine
the certificate and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown
thereon to be charged against said property. The amount so charged
shall forthwith become a lien upon such property and shall be added to
and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such property, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes,
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the
same manner as taxes.
D. Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the city
is not paid by the property owner within 30 days after disposal of such
motor vehicle or motor-drawn vehicle as specified in Subsections A and
B of this section, then, and in that case, the Director of Public Works
shall cause to be recorded in the Tax Collector's office a sworn
statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date
the work was done and the location of the property on which said work
was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a
lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the
amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for
collection until payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall
be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and
shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of 7% in the event that they are
not paid in full on or before the tax bill upon which the charge appears
becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with
the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal
formalities have been complied with and that the work has been
properly and satisfactorily completed and shall be full notice to every
§ 313-21 PATERSON CODE § 313-21
313:610
§ 313-22. Violations and penalties.142
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest,
constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in
the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by
law.
142. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 313-21 LITTERING § 313-22
313:611
Chapter 315
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 195. Graffiti — See Ch. 255.
§ 313-22 PATERSON CODE § 313-22
315:612
ARTICLE I
Criminal Gang Loitering
[Adopted 5-10-2006 by Ord. No. 06-040]
§ 315-1. Procedures for police officers.
Whenever a police officer observes an individual whose actions or conduct
gives the officer reasonable cause to believe that person is a member of a
criminal street gang engaged in gang loitering with one or more persons
in any public place designated under § 315-2 of this article, the police
officer shall, subject to all applicable procedures promulgated by the Police
Director.
§ 315-2. Designation of areas; protection of rights.
A. Inform all such persons that they are engaged in gang loitering within
an area in which loitering by groups containing criminal street gang
members is prohibited;
B. Order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from the
designated area at which the order was issued;
C. Inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they fail to
obey the order promptly or engage in further loitering; within the next
three hours, within the designated place at which the order was issued.
A. The Police Director shall, by written directive, designate areas of the
City in which the Police Director has determined that enforcement of
this article is necessary because criminal gang loitering has enabled
criminal street gangs to establish control over identifiable areas in
order to intimidate others from entering those areas or to conceal
illegal activities in detriment to the public good and safety. Prior to
making a determination under this subsection, the Police Director shall
consult, as he/she deems appropriate, with persons who are
knowledgeable about the effects of gang activity in areas in which this
article may be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be
limited to, members of the City of Paterson Police Department with
special training and/or experience related to criminal street gangs,
elected and appointed officials of the areas, community-based
organizations, and members of the CPAC community groups. The Police
Director shall develop and implement procedures for the periodic
review and update of designations made under this subsection.
B. The Police Director shall, by written directive, promulgate policy and
procedures to prevent the enforcement of this section against persons
who are engaged in collective advocacy activities that are protected by
the Constitution of the United States or the State of New Jersey.
§ 315-1 LOITERING § 315-3
315:613
§ 315-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY — The commission, attempted commission
or solicitation of the following offenses, provided that the offenses are
committed by two or more persons, or by an individual at the direction of,
or in association with, any criminal street gang with the specific intent to
promote, further, or assist in any criminal conduct commonly engaged in
by criminal street gang members. The following is a listing of such activity
under the New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice: 2C:11-2 Homicide; 2C:13-1
Kidnapping; 2C:13-2 Criminal restraint; 2C:12-1b Aggravated assault
(firearm); 2C:28-5 Tampering with witnesses; 2C:15-1 Robbery (home
invasion); 2C:33-28 Gang recruitment, threats, intimidation; 2C:18-2
Burglary; 2C:35-1 Controlled dangerous substances; 2C:35-3 Leader of
narcotics trafficking network; 2C:35-4 Maintaining or operating a
controlled dangerous substance house or facility; 2C:35-4.1 Fortified
premises; 2C:35-6 Employing a juvenile in drug distribution; 2C:35-7 CDS
within 1,000 feet of school; 2C:35-10 Possession of CDS; 2C:17-1 Arson;
2C:39-3 Possessions of firearms and all subsections; 2C:39-6 Possession of
explosives; 2C:39-4 Possession of weapons (firearms) for unlawful purpose;
2C:39-13 Unlawful use of bulletproof vest. All subsections of the statutes
listed apply as well as those that were mentioned specifically.
CRIMINAL STREET GANG — Any ongoing organization, association, in fact
or group, of three or more persons, having as one of its activities the
commission of one or more criminal acts enumerated herein, and whose
members individually, or collectively, engage in or have engaged in a
pattern of criminal gang activity.
GANG LOITERING — Remaining in any one place under circumstances that
would warrant a reasonable person to believe that the purpose or effect
of that behavior is to enable a criminal street gang to establish control
over identifiable areas, to intimidate others from entering such areas, or
to conceal illegal activities of which criminal street gangs engage in daily
causing an extreme danger to the public at large.
PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY — Two or more acts of criminal
gang activities of which at least two such acts were committed within five
years of each other.
PUBLIC PLACE — The public way and any other location open to the public,
whether publicly or privately owned.
§ 315-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a maximum penalty for such violation of one or more of the
following:
(1) A fine not exceeding $1,250.
§ 315-3 PATERSON CODE § 315-4
315:614
(2) Imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding 90 days;
and
(3) A period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
B. Any person convicted of a subsequent violation of this article within a
one-year period shall be fined an additional amount as a repeat
offender. The additional fine shall not exceed $1,250 and shall be in
addition to, and calculated separately from, the fine imposed for the
violation of the article.
C. Any person in default of the payment of any fine imposed may be
imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or be
required to perform community service for a period not exceeding 90
days.
§ 315-4 LOITERING § 315-4
315:615
Chapter 319
LOTS, VACANT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dangerous and unfit buildings — See Ch. 157.
Demolition of buildings — See Ch. 161.
Graffiti — See Ch. 255.
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
§ 319-1. Findings.
The Council has determined that:
§ 319-2. Inspection of vacant lots.
The Director of the Division of Community Improvements or such
subordinate officials as may be designated to act in his behalf be and are
hereby empowered to enter and to inspect each and every vacant lot in this
city.
§ 319-3. Certificate of danger; complaint; notice of hearing.
A. There exist in this city numerous vacant lots which present a threat to
the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city due to the fact
that they serve as dumping grounds for garbage, debris, glass and
other harmful substances.
B. Said lots are a source of danger to juveniles in the area, a constant
breeding ground for rodents and filled with objects that endanger the
safety of children who might wander onto them.
C. There is urgent need for immediate action by the appropriate
authorized agencies for the elimination and reduction of such danger
with respect to said vacant lots whenever the same shall be brought to
their attention.
A. When any lot has been vacant for a period of thirty (30) or more days or
becomes vacant as a result of demolition and the Director or his
designee certifies that the same constitutes a danger and a threat to the
health, welfare or safety of persons in the area, a complaint shall be
served upon the owner or parties in interest.
B. The complaint shall contain:
(1) A description of the premises.
(2) A notice that a hearing will be held before the Director of
Community Improvements or his designated agent at a time fixed
not less than ten (10) days after serving the complaint. The notice
§ 315-4 PATERSON CODE § 319-3
319:616
§ 319-4. Determination after hearing.
After notice and hearing, the Director of Community Improvements or his
designee shall determine if a vacant lot under consideration constitutes a
danger and a threat to the health, welfare or safety of persons in the area.
§ 319-5. Order to secure lot; removal of hazards; construction of
fence.
If such positive determination is made, the Director of Community
Improvements or his designee shall, within fifteen (15) days after the
hearing, state, in writing, his findings and support for his determination,
and he shall within said fifteen (15) days issue and serve on all parties in
interest an order effective ten (10) days after receipt, to protect and secure
said lot against intrusion, garbage dumping, unlawful entry or unlawful use
or use inimical to the public health, safety and/or welfare requiring the
following:
§ 319-6. Fence specifications; maintenance.
shall state that the parties in interest may file an answer no less
than three (3) days prior to the scheduled hearing and may appear
in person.
A. The owner or owners shall have removed therefrom all filth, rubbish,
refuse, junk, slop, wood, paper or other materials which are or may
constitute a hazard to health or cause accidents on said lot.
B. The owner or owners shall protect the lot by constructing a fence
around said property according to the specifications set forth in
§ 319-6.
A. Specifications for the fence required by § 319-5B are as follows:
(1) The minimum height shall be six (6) feet.
(2) The fencing material must be of galvanized metal.
(3) There shall be a minimum of two-inch outside diameter galvanized
pipe for all line posts.
(4) There shall be a minimum of two-and-one-half-inch outside
diameter for all terminal posts, gates, ends and corner posts.
(5) All terminal posts must be set in concrete footings at a minimum of
thirty (30) inches into the ground.
(6) All line posts must be driven a minimum of thirty (30) inches into
the ground.
(7) Fencing material must be of minimum No. 9 gauge galvanized wire
with a two-inch mesh.
§ 319-3 LOTS, VACANT § 319-6
319:617
§ 319-7. Service of complaints, notices and orders.
All complaints, notices and orders issued by the Director of Community
Improvements shall be served either personally or by registered mail.
§ 319-8. Failure to protect lot; action by city.
Upon failure of the owner or owners to protect said lot within the period
specified in § 319-5, immediate notice shall be given by the Director of
Community Improvements to the Director of the Department of Public
Works; and upon receipt of such notice, the Director of the Department of
Public Works shall forthwith protect said property as hereinabove set forth.
§ 319-9. Certification of city's costs; lien.
The costs thereof shall be certified by the Director of the Department of
Public Works to the Council. If, upon examination of the certificate, the
Council shall find the same to be correct, such certified cost shall forthwith
become a charge against said lands and constitute a lien upon said lands,
which shall be added to and become and form a part of the taxes next to
be assessed and levied upon said lands. The amount of such charge or lien
shall bear interest at the same rate and shall be collected and enforced by
the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 319-10. Violations and penalties.143
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period
of community service not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(8) Coil spring minimum No. 7 gauge wire shall be used to provide
proper tension.
(9) In no case should barbed wire, wood or similar materials
dangerous to children be used.
B. It shall be the continuing responsibility of the owner or owners to so
maintain the fence and protect the property as hereinabove set forth so
long as the same shall remain vacant.
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 319-6 PATERSON CODE § 319-10
319:618
Chapter 322
MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 309.
§ 322-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUSINESS, TRADE or OCCUPATION — Refers to any person, firm,
corporation, partnership or other entity that sells any goods, provides any
services, solicits business, offers goods or services for sale or hire, acquires
or uses any vehicle, machine or device or any premises in the City for
business, trade or occupational purposes.
MERCANTILE ESTABLISHMENT — Refers to any person, firm, corporation,
partnership or other entity that maintains an office or place or business to
conduct, engage in or carry on any business, trade or occupation within the
City of Paterson.
§ 322-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other
entity to engage in any business, trade or occupation within the City without
first having obtained a license as hereinafter provided in this chapter. Any
mercantile establishment consisting of more than one owner, partner, agent,
servant or employee shall be required to obtain only a single license for
such business, trade or occupation.
§ 322-3. Requirements for issuance of license.
Every applicant shall be at least 18 years of age and a citizen of the United
States. The applicant shall be the actual owner of the business, trade or
occupation for which the license is sought.
§ 322-4. Application for license; contents; fee required; notice of
intention for initial application.
A. The application shall be addressed to the City Council and filed with the
Division of Consumer Affairs Department of Health and Human
Services on forms furnished by said Division of Consumer Affairs
Department of Health and Human Services and approved by the
Council. The application shall be signed by the applicant and shall
contain the following information: [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord.
No. 10-078]
§ 319-10 LOTS, VACANT § 322-4
319:619
§ 322-5. License fee; term of license.
§ 322-6. Issuance of license. [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord. No.
10-078]
The license shall be issued by the Division of Consumer Affairs Department
of Health and Human Services after approval of the application by the City
Council.
§ 322-7. Exceptions.
(1) The name of the applicant; if applicable, the general partners shall
also be designated. If a corporation, the president and secretary
shall also be designated. If a limited liability company, the
managing members shall also be designated.
(2) The residence of the applicant (not a P.O. box number).
(3) The Standard Industrial Classification Code for the business
conducted.
(4) The location where the licensed business, trade or occupation is to
be conducted and its telephone number.
(5) The specific nature of the business, trade or occupation.
(6) Whether or not the applicant has ever had a license to conduct the
business, trade or occupation herein denied or revoked. If so, the
applicant shall set forth the details of such denial or revocation,
including all relevant dates, locations and authorities involved in
said denial or revocation.
(7) If a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent
thereof.
B. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $50. If the application
is withdrawn prior to consideration by the City Council, the fee will be
refunded in full. [Amended 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-074]
A. All mercantile establishments in the City of Paterson shall, immediately
upon passage of this chapter, apply for a license to conduct their
business, trade or occupation for the calendar year 2004. A fee shall not
be required for any or license issued for the calendar year 2004.
B. The license fee for each mercantile establishment shall be $125 per
year or any part thereof, commencing January 1, 2011. [Amended
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-074]
C. The term of the license shall be for the calendar year. Each license shall
expire on December 31 of the year in which it was issued.
A. This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm, corporation,
partnership or other entity that currently holds or comes to hold a valid
§ 322-4 PATERSON CODE § 322-7
319:620
§ 322-8. Contents and regulations of the license.
Each license issued under this chapter shall state either upon its face or by
reference to this chapter.
§ 322-9. Display of license.
The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the premises where
the mercantile activity is conducted. The license number shall be printed on
all contracts, bills or correspondence of the licensee.
§ 322-10. Transfer of license.
Upon application made therefor, in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter, a license may be transferred from a licensee to another
licensee or from one premises to another premises upon approval of the City
Council. The fee for a transfer shall be $100 and is in addition to the license
fee.
license issued by the State of New Jersey that exempts the particular
business, trade or occupation from municipal licensing.
B. No license shall be required for the mere delivery into the City of
Paterson of any goods or property purchased or acquired in good faith
at a regular place of business located outside of the City of Paterson
where no intent to avoid the requirements of this chapter can be shown.
C. No provision of this chapter shall be applied so as to impose any
unlawful burden on interstate commerce or any activity of the federal
or state government.
D. No license shall be required under this chapter or any person, firm,
corporation, partnership or other entity that is required to be licensed
under any other chapter.
A. The name and address of the licensee and any and all other names
under which mercantile activities are conducted by the licensee;
B. Regulations of each license shall include the licensee to permit access
to and any and all inspections of the mercantile activity and premises
where said activity is conducted by City of Paterson employees
authorized to conduct such inspections such as, but not limited to,
Department of Health, Zoning, Public Works and Community
Improvement. The license number shall be printed on all contracts, bills
or correspondence of the licensee;
C. The licensee shall ascertain and at all times comply with the laws and
regulations applicable to the mercantile activity; and
D. Such other regulations as the City Council may require for any
particular mercantile activity.
§ 322-7 LOTS, VACANT § 322-11
319:621
§ 322-11. Death of licensee.
In the event of the death of the licensee, the license held must be
transferred to a qualified applicant within 60 days. Said license will expire
on the 61st day following the death of the licensee if not transferred. There
is no fee for transfer of license on account of death of the licensee.
§ 322-12. Delinquent property tax.
It shall be a condition for the issuance of any license or renewal thereof
that the applicant or licensee, if the owner thereof, pay any delinquent
property taxes or assessments on the property where the mercantile activity
is sought or conducted. A license may be revoked or suspended when a
licensee is delinquent for four consecutive quarters. Upon payment of such
delinquent taxes or assessments, said license shall be restored.
§ 322-13. Revocation of license; suspension pending hearing.
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked by
the City Council for cause after notice and hearing or pending such hearing
for:
§ 322-14. Notice.
Notice of a hearing to suspend or revoke a license issued under this chapter
shall be given in writing personally to the licensee or by regular mail to the
address contained in the license referred to in § 322-8A. The notice shall set
forth the grounds for the hearing. The hearing date shall be set no sooner
than 10 days from the date of the notice.
§ 322-15. Sanctions.
A. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the initial
application or renewal.
B. Conviction of the licensee of a crime or felony.
C. Conducting the mercantile activity himself/herself or by any agent,
servant or employee in an unlawful manner that violates this chapter,
federal law, state law, any ordinance of the City of Paterson or in any
other manner that may constitute a breach of the peace, menace to the
public health, public safety and public nuisance.
D. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
A. Following a hearing, the City Council may suspend, revoke, impose
additional conditions or modify existing conditions of the license or
impose a monetary penalty.
B. Any sanction referred to in this section shall be in addition to and not a
replacement for any other violation of this chapter, federal law, state
law or other ordinance of the City of Paterson.
§ 322-11 PATERSON CODE § 322-16
319:622
§ 322-16. Renewal fees.
The fee for license renewal shall be $100 due and payable 30 days prior to
the expiration of the current license.
§ 322-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $100 nor more than $1,250, by
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days or by a period of community
service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 325
MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 227.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 231.
Food handler's certificate — See Ch. 235.
Preparation and sale of food — See Ch. 239.
Food vending vehicles — See Ch. 243.
Sale of ice — See Ch. 279.
Ice cream peddlers — See Ch. 367, Art. II.
§ 325-1. Licenses required; schedule of fees.
No person shall sell or offer for sale or distribute or have in his possession
with intent to sell or distribute in the city any milk, milk products (except
butter and cheese) or fluid milk products unless such person has first
obtained an annual license therefor from and paid the required license fee
to the Health Division, as follows:
§ 325-2. Application for license.
Any person who desires a license under the provisions of this chapter shall
make a written application to the Health Division for such license on such
form as may be supplied by the Division.
A. For each store, place of business or other premises at or from which the
above-described products are sold for off-premises consumption: $25.
[Amended 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-089]
B. For each truck, wagon or other vehicle used in the distribution or sale
of the above-described products: $25. [Amended 12-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-089]
C. For each milk vending machine: $5.
§ 322-16 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 325-3
325:623
§ 325-3. Term of license.
Each license issued under this chapter shall be valid for the calendar year,
unless sooner suspended or revoked as provided in this chapter.
§ 325-4. License not transferable.
No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable from one person
to another.
§ 325-5. Display of license.
The licensee shall at all times display the license issued to him in the
following manner:
§ 325-6. Regulations for milk vending machines.
The following regulations shall apply with respect to all milk vending
machines in the city:
A. When the sale or distribution of the products described in § 325-1 is
made or to be made from a store, place of business or other premises,
the license shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous part therein.
Such license shall be in the form of a card supplied by the Health
Division.
B. When the sale or distribution of the products described in § 325-1 is
made or to be made from a truck, wagon or other vehicle, each such
vehicle shall have therein a license which shall be furnished by the
Health Division.
C. When the sale is made or to be made from a milk vending machine, the
license, in the form of a cardboard furnished by the Health Division,
shall be placed and kept inside each such machine.
A. The location and type of each milk vending machine shall be approved
by the Health Division.
B. Hot running water shall be available on the premises in which each milk
vending machine is located. Each milk vending machine shall be
equipped with a crank or key for opening said machine, and such crank
or key shall be left on the premises and available to an inspector of the
Health Division for the purpose of inspection of such machine at all
reasonable hours.
C. All tanks in each machine shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times.
D. The milk contained in each machine shall be maintained at a
temperature not exceeding forty-five degrees Fahrenheit (45° F.) at all
times.
E. The coin box in each machine shall be kept locked at all times.
§ 325-3 PATERSON CODE § 325-7
325:624
§ 325-7. Suspension of license; hearing; termination of suspension.
§ 325-8. Revocation of license; hearing; termination of revocation.
§ 325-9. Violations and penalties.144
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.)
or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 331
MOTION-PICTURE THEATERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183. Fire safety — See Ch. 215.
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended, pending a
hearing, whenever the Health Division or the Health Officer of the city
has reason to believe that the licensee is operating in violation of any
applicable state law or of any regulations or ordinances or of any
provisions of this chapter or rules and regulations adopted thereunder
and finds, in addition, that the suspension of the license is necessary for
the protection of the public health. In such case, the Health Division
shall, upon request of the person whose license has been suspended,
proceed forthwith to a hearing to ascertain the facts, after due notice to
such licensee.
B. The Health Division or the Health Officer may terminate any suspension
under Subsection A of this section upon proof satisfactory that the
violation for which the license was suspended has been corrected.
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Health
Division or the Health Officer after notice for hearing to the licensee
upon proof of the violation of any applicable state law or of any
regulations or ordinances or of any provisions of this chapter or rules
and regulations adopted thereunder.
B. The Health Division may cancel the revocation and reinstate any license
revoked under Subsection A of this section upon proof satisfactory that
the violation for which the license was revoked has been corrected.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 325-7 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 325-9
325:625

ARTICLE I
Operation of Motion-Picture Projectors or Apparatus
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 12 of the 1979
Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 331-1. License required.
No person shall operate a motion-picture projector or apparatus in a
motion-picture or other theater within the City without first obtaining a
license from the Council for such operation.
§ 331-2. Inspection of premises; compliance with other
requirements. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
Prior to the issuance of a license, the Division of Community Improvements
shall inspect the premises for compliance with all zoning, building and fire
codes and subcodes.145
§ 331-3. Issuance of license; renewal; minimum age of licensee.
§ 331-4. Expiration of license; fees; failure to renew. [Amended
3-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-010]
§ 331-5. Revocation of license.
The Council, after hearing, may revoke any license issued under this article
for violations of the state fire protection subcode, state electrical subcode or
any other negligent conduct in the operation of a projector which is inimical
to the public safety.
§ 331-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
A. All licenses and renewals of licenses shall be issued by the Council.
B. No license shall be issued to any person under the age of 18 years.
A. All licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of the year in
which issued.
B. The initial license fee and the renewal fee shall be $250 per year for
each movie screen.
C. If any person to whom a license has been issued fails to renew his
license for one calendar year, he shall undergo another examination
and, if successful, shall pay the initial fee of $250 per movie screen.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by
145. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development, Ch. 183, Construction Codes,
Uniform, and Ch. 215, Fire Safety.
§ 331-1 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 331-6
325:627
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
B. Any person who shall permit any person not duly licensed under this
article to operate a motion-picture projector or apparatus in a motionpicture
or other theater shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days or by a period of community service for not more than 90 days, or
any combination thereof.
C. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 331-6 PATERSON CODE § 331-6
325:628
Chapter 332
MUNICIPAL IDENTIFICATION CARD
§ 332-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Paterson, or any department, board, commission or
agency thereof.
MUNICIPAL IDENTIFICATION CARD or PATERSON MUNICIPAL
IDENTIFICATION CARD — An identification card issued by the City of
Paterson that shall display, at a minimum, the cardholder's name,
photograph, address, and an expiration date.
PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR — The Department of Health and Human
Services, which has been designated as being responsible for implementing
and administering the municipal identification card program.
RESIDENT — A person, 14 years of age or older, who can demonstrate that
he or she has been present in the City of Paterson for at least 15 continuous
days and who presents proof of residency as specified in § 332-3A(2) below.
§ 332-2. Implementation, issuance and purpose of card.
A. The Program Administrator, namely, the Department of Health and
Human Services, shall administer the municipal identification card
program. The Department of Health and Human Services is authorized
to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter,
subject to the approval as to form and legality by the Law Department,
in order to implement and administer the issuance of the municipal
identification card program.
B. The Program Administrator shall make applications for the municipal
identification card available for pickup at designated locations and
other designated access sites and online.
C. Upon request, the Program Administrator shall issue a municipal
identification card to any resident who meets the application
requirements set forth below in § 332-3. The card shall bear the Seal of
the City, and the Program Administrator shall cause the card to be
produced in a form intended to thwart replication or counterfeiting.
Cards shall be valid for a maximum of two years from the date of
issuance as long as residence in the City is maintained during that time.
Cards shall become invalid upon the expiration date.
D. It is the City's intent that the municipal identification cards will provide
residents with a means of proving their residence in the City of
Paterson, for the purposes of accessing City programs, services and
activities, as well as helping to substantiate their identity to law
enforcement personnel.
§ 331-6 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 332-3
325:629
§ 332-3. Application.
A. To obtain a municipal identification card, a resident shall complete an
application, under penalty of perjury, requiring proof of identification
and proof of residence within the City, and pay the required fee for the
issuance of the card. As part of the application process, the Program
Administrator shall take a digital photograph of the applicant for use on
their individual municipal identification card. Upon receipt of the proof
of identity, the proof of residence, and required fee, as outlined in this
section, the Program Administrator or his/her designee shall cause the
municipal identification card to be issued to the applicant.
(1) Proof of identity.
(a) To establish identity, each applicant shall be required to
produce one or more of the following documents, current or
expired not more than five years prior to the date of the
municipal identification card application:
[1] A United States or foreign passport;
[2] A United States state driver's license;
[3] A United States state identification card;
[4] A United States permanent residence card (also known as
a "green card").
[5] A consular identification card (CID);
[6] A photo identification card with name, address, date of
birth, and expiration date issued by another country to its
citizens or nationals as an alternative to a passport for reentry
into the issuing country;
[7] A certified copy of a United States or foreign birth
certificate;
[8] A social security card;
[9] A national identification card with photo, name, address,
date of birth, and expiration date;
[10] A foreign driver's license;
[11] A United States or foreign military identification card;
[12] A current visa issued by a government agency;
[13] A United States individual taxpayer identification number
(ITIN) authorization letter;
[14] An electronic benefit transfer (EBT) card;
[15] A school identification card; or
§ 332-3 PATERSON CODE § 332-3
325:630
[16] Any other documentation that the administering agency
deems acceptable.
(b) The Program Administrator may determine by resolution the
weight to be given to each type of document, and may require
that an applicant produce more than one document to establish
identity.
(2) Proof of residency.
(a) In order to establish residency, an applicant shall be required
to produce one or more of the following items, each of which
must show the applicant's name and residential address
located within the City and must be dated no more than 60
days prior to the date such document is presented, except as
otherwise indicated in this subsection:
[1] A utility bill;
[2] A current residential property lease;
[3] A local property tax statement dated within one year of the
date it is submitted;
[4] A local real property mortgage payment receipt;
[5] A bank account statement;
[6] Proof that the applicant has a minor child currently
enrolled in a school located within the City;
[7] An employment pay stub;
[8] A jury summons or court order issued by a federal or state
court;
[9] A federal or state income tax or refund statement dated
within one year of the date it is submitted;
[10] An insurance bill (homeowner, renter, health, life, or
automobile insurance);
[11]Written verification issued by a homeless shelter that
receives City funding confirming at least 15 days'
residence;
[12]Written verification issued by a hospital, health clinic or
social services agency located within Paterson confirming
at least 15 days' residency; or
[13] Any other documentation that the Program Administrator
deems acceptable.
(b) The Program Administrator may determine by resolution the
weight to be given to each type of document, and may require
§ 332-3 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 332-3
325:631
that an application produce more than one document to
establish residency.
(c) The Program Administrator shall create an alternative method
by which individuals who are homeless can establish residency
notwithstanding the lack of a fixed address.
(3) Fee.
(a) The fee for the issuance of the municipal identification card
shall be as follows:
[1] Ten dollars for new applicants over the age of 18 years;
[2] Five dollars for senior applicants (persons over the age of
62 years);
[3] Five dollars for child applicants (persons under the age of
18 years);
[4] Five dollars for a card change or update; and
[5] Ten dollars for a lost, stolen, or damaged card.
(b) The Department of Health and Human Services may adopt
rules permitting residents who cannot afford to pay such a fee
to receive a full or partial waiver. In order for an applicant to
be granted a waiver, the applicant must demonstrate and have
proof of one of the following circumstances:
[1] The applicant is currently homeless;
[2] The applicant has recently experienced reported domestic
violence;
[3] The applicant has proof of substantial debt caused by
medical expenses within the last 12 months;
[4] The applicant is currently unemployed;
[5] The applicant has filed for bankruptcy within the last six
months;
[6] The applicant currently receives one of the following:
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or SSI, or
TANF, or food stamps. The applicant shall provide proof in
the form of a letter, notice or other official document
containing the name of the agency granting the benefit,
the name of the recipient of the benefit, and the name of
the benefit received; or
[7] The applicant's current household income is at or below
150% of the federal poverty level.
§ 332-3 PATERSON CODE § 332-4
325:632
§ 332-4. Confidentiality of application information.
§ 332-5. Access to services.
A. The City shall not retain originals or copies of records provided by an
applicant to prove identity or residency for a municipal identification
card.
B. The City shall not disclose information about municipal identification
card applicants to any public or private entity or individual, including
federal, state, or City immigration or law enforcement entities, except
for instances pertaining to public health and safety or if required by a
court of competent jurisdiction, or authorized in writing by the
individual to whom such information pertains, or when such individual
is a minor or is otherwise not legally competent, by such individual's
parent or legal guardian, when so ordered by a court of competent
jurisdiction, to a requesting City department for the limited purpose of
administering the program or determining or facilitating the applicant's
eligibility for additional benefits or services or care and provided such
disclosure is made in accordance with all applicable federal and state
privacy laws and regulations.
C. This protection shall extend to the municipal identification card
application forms, information contained on those forms or obtained
through the card application process, to the lists of individuals who hold
or have applied for a municipal identification card, and to the fact of any
individual's participation in the municipal identification card program.
A. All municipal agencies, offices, departments, and all municipal
employees, including law enforcement officers, shall accept the
Paterson municipal identification card as proof of identity and residency
in the City, unless such City agency, office, department or employee has
reasonable ground for determining that the card is counterfeit, altered,
or improperly issued to the cardholder, or that the individual presenting
the card is not the individual to whom it was issued.
B. The City shall seek to expand the benefits associated with the municipal
identification card, including encouraging eligible persons to apply for
the card and promoting the acceptance of the municipal identification
card by banks and other public and private institutions.
C. Paterson agencies and officers shall not require the possession of a
Paterson identification card where identification is not already required
to obtain City services; provided, however that agencies may require
the possession of a municipal identification card to obtain benefits or
privileges offered exclusively to those who possess a municipal
identification card as an incentive to apply for said card.
D. No City agencies or officers shall discriminate against or draw any
inference about an individual's national origin, race, language
proficiency, immigration status, religion, sexual orientation, disability,
§ 332-4 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 332-5
325:633
§ 332-6. Language assistance services.
The City shall, consistent with federal, state and local laws, provide
language assistance to applicants for the municipal identification cards to
facilitate access thereto. The Department of Health and Human Services
shall identify and implement measures, including but not limited to staff
training, community outreach, and language assistance tools, to address the
needs of limited English proficient individuals in the administration of the
municipal identification card program.
§ 332-7. City undertaking limited to promotion of general welfare;
disclaimer.
§ 332-8. Expiration.
All municipal identification cards issued during Mayor Jose "Joey" Torres'
current term shall expire at the conclusion of said term (i.e., June 30,
2018), unless the municipal identification cards are specifically authorized
by resolution to continue in effect, either by Mayor Torres or his successor,
housing status, financial status, marital status, status as a victim of
domestic violence, or criminal history, based upon the fact that the
individual holds or presents a municipal identification card issued
under this chapter.
E. The requirements of this section do not apply under circumstances
where 1) a federal or state statute, administrative regulation or
directive, or court decision requires the City to obtain different
identification or proof of residence, 2) a federal or state statute or
administrative regulation or directive preempts local regulation of
identification or residency requirements, or 3) the City would be unable
to comply with a condition imposed by a funding source, which would
cause the City to lose funds from that source.
A. In undertaking the adoption and enforcement of this chapter, the City is
assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not
assuming, nor is it imposing on its officers and employees, an obligation
for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person who
claims that such breach proximately caused injury.
B. The City is providing the Paterson municipal identification card for
identification and access to services provided by the City of Paterson.
The City does not act as guarantor or warrantor either of the
information provided by the applicant for the Paterson municipal
identification card or against acts, criminal or otherwise, committed by
the individual(s) who possess or use the Paterson municipal
identification card. The City does not waive any of its protections
afforded under federal, state or local laws, including but not limited to
the immunities under the New Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et
seq., by its involvement in the processing or issuing of the Paterson
municipal identification cards.
§ 332-5 PATERSON CODE § 332-8
325:634
through the conclusion the subsequent Mayoral term, and so on and so
forth.
Chapter 337
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 121.
Block parties — See Ch. 137.
Coin-operated laundries — See Ch. 301.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 355.
§ 337-1. Noise policy.
It is the policy of the City of Paterson to prevent excessive sound, which may
jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of its citizens or degrade the quality
of life.
§ 337-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to the control of sound originating from sources
within the City of Paterson.
§ 337-3. Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this chapter have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
COMMERCIAL FACILITY — Any premises, property or facility involving
traffic in goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit, including but not
limited to:
A. Banking and other financial institutions;
B. Dining establishments;
C. Establishments for providing retail services;
D. Establishments for providing wholesale services;
E. Establishments for recreation and entertainment;
F. Office buildings;
G. Transportation;
H. Warehouses; and
§ 332-8 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 337-3
325:635
COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITY — Any nonresidential facility used to
provide service to the public, including but not limited to:
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration, or similar action of buildings or structures.
CONTINUOUS AIRBORNE SOUND — Sound that is measured by the slow
response setting of a sound-level meter in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, and which lasts one second or longer. Impulsive sounds that
are rapidly repetitive and have a duration of one second or longer shall be
measured as continuous airborne sound.
dBA — The abbreviation designating the unit of sound level as measured by
a sound-level meter using the A-weighting.
DECIBEL (dB) — The practical unit of measurement for sound pressure
level; the number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to 20 times the
logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure of the measured
sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20 micropascals);
abbreviated "dB."
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary at the site of an
emergency to restore or deliver essential services, including, but not limited
to, repairing water, gas, electricity, telephone, sewer facilities, or public
transportation facilities, removing fallen trees on public rights-of-way,
dredging navigational waterways, or abating life-threatening conditions or
a state of emergency declared by a governing agency.
Establishments providing living accommodations which exceed six
dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments, co-ops, hotels,
motels, and dormitories, when they are the source of the sound that
is being investigated and the source of sound is a heating, airconditioning,
pool filter unit or system, or outdoor amplified sound
system.
I.
A. Club meeting halls, offices and facilities;
B. Organization offices and facilities;
C. Facilities for the support and practice of religion;
D. Private and parochial schools;
E. Hospitals;
Offices and buildings of agencies or instrumentalities of government;
and
F.
G. Maintenance centers (such as Department of Public Works facilities).
§ 337-3 PATERSON CODE § 337-3
325:636
FREQUENCY — The number of sound pressure oscillations per second
expressed in hertz; abbreviated "Hz."
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — Any facility, whether public or private, and its
related premises, property, or equipment involving:
MINOR VIOLATION — A violation that is not the result of the purposeful,
reckless or criminally negligent conduct of the alleged violator; and/or the
activity or condition constituting the violation has not been the subject of
an enforcement action by any authorized local, county or state enforcement
agency against the violator within the immediately preceding 12 months for
the same or substantially similar violation.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound on engines or equipment where such device is part of the
normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING-UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
The fabrication, manufacture, or production of durable or nondurable
goods; or
A.
Industrial-like activities, including, but not limited to:
(1) Waste collection;
(2) Waste incineration;
(3) Waste recycling;
(4) Water and sewage treatment; and
(5) Electricity generation.
B.
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building, which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property, located above, below or otherwise adjacent to.
B.
§ 337-3 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 337-3
325:637
NOISE CONTROL INVESTIGATOR (NCI) — An employee of a municipality,
county or regional health commission that has a Department-approved
model noise control ordinance, and the employee has not received noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29.
However, they are knowledgeable about their model noise ordinance and
enforcement procedures. A Noise Control Investigator may only enforce
sections of the ordinance that do not require the use of a sound-level meter.
The employee must be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and
must be authorized to issue a summons.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — An employee of a local, county or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities or an employee of a municipality with a Departmentapproved
model noise control ordinance. All NCOs must receive noise
enforcement training as specified by the Department in N.J.A.C. 7:29 and
must be currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must be
acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized to
issue a summons.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, political
subdivision, governmental agency, department or bureau of the state,
municipality, industry, or association, including condominium or co-op
associations, limited liability corporations, and partnerships and limited
liability partnerships.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by an NCO or an
NCI using his or her unaided hearing faculties of normal acuity. As an
example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or vehicular
sound amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic
bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound.
The NCO or NCI need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist
performing the song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place that is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structure thereon which is owned,
leased or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either a) the vertical boundary that separates
one parcel of property (i.e., lot and block) from another residential or
commercial property; b) the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling
unit that is part of a multidwelling unit building; or c) on a multi-use
property as defined herein, the vertical or horizontal boundaries between
the two portions of the property on which different categories of activity
are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is
residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the real property line
§ 337-3 PATERSON CODE § 337-3
325:638
would be the interface between the residential area and the commercial
area, or if there is an outdoor sound source such as an HVAC unit on
the same parcel of property, the boundary line is the exterior wall of the
receiving unit). Note: This definition shall not apply to a commercial source
and a commercial receptor which are both located on the same parcel of
property (e.g., a strip mall).
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Property used for human habitation, unless
the habitation is a condition of employment, including but not limited to:
SOUND PRODUCTION DEVICE — Any device whose primary function is the
production of sound, including, but not limited to, any musical instrument,
loudspeaker, radio, television, digital or analog music player, public address
system or sound-amplifying equipment.
SOUND REDUCTION DEVICE — Any device, such as a muffler, baffle,
shroud, jacket, enclosure, isolator, or dampener provided by the
manufacturer with the equipment, or that is otherwise required, that
mitigates the sound emissions of the equipment.
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument for the measurement of sound
levels as specified in N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.6(a)1, which provisions are
incorporated herein by reference.
STATIONARY EMERGENCY SIGNALING DEVICE — Any device, excluding
those attached to motor vehicles, used to alert local persons engaged
in local emergency operations. These include, but are not limited to,
firefighters, first aid squad members and law enforcement officers, whether
paid or volunteer.
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending on the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 337-4. Powers, duties and qualifications of Director of Division of
Health; applicable property categories.
A. Private property used for human habitation;
Commercial living accommodations and commercial property used for
human habitation;
B.
C. Recreational and entertainment property used for human habitation;
D. Community service property used for human habitation.
A. The Director of the Division of Health shall:
(1) Review the actions of all municipal departments and advise such
departments of the effect, if any, of such actions on noise control.
§ 337-3 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 337-4
325:639
(2) Coordinate the noise control activities of all municipal departments
and cooperate with all other public bodies and agencies to the
extent practicable.
(3) Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments, for compliance with this chapter.
(4) Administer noise program grants and other funds and gifts from
public and private sources, including the state and federal
governments.
(5) Conduct or cause to be conducted research, monitoring and other
studies related to sound.
(6) Conduct programs of public education regarding the cause, effects
and general methods of abatement and control of noise and the
actions prohibited by this chapter and the procedures for reporting
violations.
B. Applicable property categories.
(1) This chapter applies to sound from the following property
categories:
(a) Industrial facilities;
(b) Commercial facilities;
(c) Public service facilities;
(d) Community service facilities;
(e) Residential properties;
(f) Multi-use properties;
(g) Public and private rights-of-way;
(h) Public spaces; and
(i) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
(2) This chapter applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
(a) Commercial facilities;
(b) Public service facilities;
(c) Community service facilities (i.e., nonprofits and/or religious
facilities);
(d) Residential properties;
(e) Multi-use properties;
§ 337-4 PATERSON CODE § 337-4
325:640
§ 337-5. Exemptions.
§ 337-6. Enforcement officers.
§ 337-7. Measurement protocols.
§ 337-8. Maximum permissible sound levels.
(f) Multi-dwelling-unit buildings.
(3) Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be
regulated in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, except that the
testing of the electromechanical functioning of a stationary
emergency signaling device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. Except as provided in § 337-11 below, the provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.5.
A. Noise Control Officers shall have the authority within their designated
jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any section of this
chapter and pursue enforcement activities.
B. Noise Control Investigators shall have the authority within their
designated jurisdiction to investigate suspected violations of any
section of this chapter that do not require the use of a sound level meter
(i.e., plainly audible, times of day and/or distance determinations) and
pursue enforcement activities.
C. Noise Control Officers and Investigators may cooperate with NCOs and
NCIs of an adjacent municipality in enforcing one another's municipal
noise ordinances.
D. Both NCIs and NCOs shall include the Department of Health and
Human Services and the Paterson Police Department.
A. Sound measurements made by a Noise Control Officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
Subsection B and with the definition of "real property line" as contained
herein.
B. When conducting indoor sound level measurements across a real
property line, the measurements shall be taken at least three feet from
any wall, floor or ceiling, and all exterior doors and windows may, at the
discretion of the investigator, be closed. The neighborhood residual
sound level shall be measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2.
When measuring total sound level, the configuration of the windows
and doors shall be the same, and all sound sources within the dwelling
unit must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo).
C. Measurements shall not be taken in areas which receive only casual
use, such as hallways, closets and bathrooms.
§ 337-4 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 337-8
325:641
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in § 337-4B(1) above in
such a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the
sound level limits set forth in Tables I, II or III when measured at or
within the real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in
Tables I, II or III, except as specified in § 337-7B.
B. Impulsive sound. Between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., impulsive sound
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m., impulsive sound which occurs less than four times in any hour
shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels. Impulsive sound which repeats
four or more times in any hour shall be measured as continuous sound
and shall meet the requirements as shown in Tables I and II.
Table I
Maximum Permissible A-Weighed Sound Levels When Measured Outdoors
Receiving Property
Category
Residential
Property or
Residential Portion
of a Multi-Use
Property
Residential
Property or
Residential Portion
of a Multi-Use
Property
Commercial Public
Service Facility,
Nonresidential
Portion of a Multi-
Use Property, or
Community Service
Facility
Time
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. 24 hours
Maximum A-Weighted
Sound Level
Standard, dB
65 50 65
Table II
Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels When Measured Indoors
Receiving Property
Category
Residential Property, or Residential
Portion of a Multi-Use Property
Commercial Facility
or Nonresidential
Portion of a Multi-
Use Property
Time
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. 24 hours
Maximum A-Weighted
Sound Level
Standard, dB
55 40 55
Note: Table II shall only apply when the source and the receptor are separated by a real
property line and they also share a common or abutting wall, floor or ceiling, or are on the
same parcel of property.
§ 337-8 PATERSON CODE § 337-8
325:642
§ 337-9. Sound production devices.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any sound
production device in such a manner that the sound crosses a property line
Table III
Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels in Decibels
Receiving
Property
Category
Residential Property
or Residential Portion
of a Multi-Use
Property
(outdoors)
Residential Property, or
Residential Portion of a
Multi-Use Property
(indoors)
Commercial
Facility,
Public
Service
Facility,
Nonresidential
Portion
of a Multiuse
Property,
or
Community
Service
Facility
(outdoors)
Commercial
Facility or
Nonresidential
Portion
of a Multi-
Use
Property
(indoors)
Octave
Band
Center
Frequency
Level, Hz
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level, dB
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level, dB
Octave
Band
Sound
Pressure
Level, dB
Octave
Band
Sound
Pressure
Level, dB
Time
7:00 a.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m.
7:00 a.m.
to 10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m.
to 7:00
a.m. 24 hours 24 hours
31.5 96 86 86 76 96 86
63 82 71 72 61 82 72
125 74 61 64 51 74 64
250 67 53 57 43 67 57
500 63 48 53 38 63 53
1,000 60 45 50 35 60 50
2,000 57 42 47 32 57 47
4,000 55 40 45 30 55 45
8,000 53 38 43 28 53 43
Note: When octave measurements are made, the sound from the source must be constant in
level and character. If octave band sound pressure level variations exceed plus or minus 2 dB
in the bands containing the principal source frequencies, discontinue the measurement.
§ 337-8 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 337-9
325:643
and raises the total sound levels above the neighborhood residual sound
level by more than the permissible sound level limits set forth in Table
IV when measured within the residence of a complainant according to
the measurement protocol in § 337-7B of this chapter. These sound level
measurements shall be conducted with the sound level meter set for "C"
weighting, "fast" response.
Table IV
Maximum Permissible Increase in Total Sound Levels Within a
Residential Property
Weeknights 10:00 p.m. to 8:00
a.m.
Weekend nights 11:00 p.m. to
9:00 a.m. All Other Times
3 dB (C) 6 dB(C)
§ 337-10. Restricted uses and activities.
The following standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set
forth below:
A. Excluding emergency work, power tools, home maintenance tools,
landscaping and/or yard maintenance equipment used by a residential
property owner or tenant shall not be operated between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., unless such activities can meet the applicable
limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times, the limits set forth
in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction
device.
B. Excluding emergency work, power tools, landscaping and/or yard
maintenance equipment used by nonresidential operators (e.g.,
commercial operators, public employees) shall not be operated on
residential, commercial, industrial or public (e.g., golf course, parks,
athletic fields) property between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the limits
set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times, the limits set forth in
Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in these
activities shall be operated with a muffler and/or sound reduction
device.
C. All construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on
weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I, II or III. At all other times, the limits set forth
in Tables I, II or III do not apply. All motorized equipment used in
§ 337-9 PATERSON CODE § 337-10
325:644
§ 337-11. Motor vehicles.
Violations of each subsection of this section shall be considered purposeful
and therefore non-minor.
construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a muffler
and/or sound reduction device.
D. Motorized snow removal equipment shall be operated with a muffler
and/or a sound reduction device when being used for snow removal. At
all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
E. All interior and exterior burglar alarms of a building or motor vehicle
must be activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates
its operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for intermittent sound after it has been activated. At all other
times, the limits set forth in Tables I, II or III do not apply.
F. Self-contained, portable, nonvehicular music or sound production
devices shall not be operated on a public space or public right-of-way in
such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet in any
direction from the operator between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., sound, operated on
a public space or public right-of-way, from such equipment shall not be
plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in any direction from the
operator.
G. Animal noise.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant to allow any
domesticated or caged animal to create a sound across a real
property line which unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the
peace, comfort, and repose of any resident, or to refuse or
intentionally fail to cease the unreasonable noise when ordered to
do so by a Noise Control Officer or Noise Control Investigator.
Prima facie evidence of a violation of this section shall include but
not be limited to:
(a) Vocalizing (howling, yelping, barking, squawking, etc.) for five
minutes without interruption, defined as an average of four or
more vocalizations per minute in that period; or
(b) Vocalizing for 20 minutes intermittently, defined as an average
of two vocalizations or more per minute in that period.
(2) It is an affirmative defense under this subsection that the dog or
other animal was intentionally provoked to bark or make any other
noise.
A. No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed
or rendered inoperative or less effective than originally equipped, other
than for the purposes of maintenance, repair, or replacement, any
§ 337-10 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 337-11
325:645
§ 337-12. Enforcement.
device or element of design incorporated in any motor vehicle for the
purpose of noise control. No person shall operate a motor vehicle or
motorcycle which has been so modified. A vehicle not meeting these
requirements shall be deemed in violation of this provision if it is
operated stationary or in motion in any public space or public right-ofway.
B. No motorcycle shall be operated stationary or in motion unless it has a
muffler that complies with and is labeled in accordance with the federal
noise regulations under 40 CFR Part 205.
C. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that it is plainly
audible at distance of 25 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
D. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or reproduction
equipment shall not be operated in such a manner that is plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
A. Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for a notice of
violation (NOV) or a notice of penalty assessment (NOPA) document to
be issued to the violator by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
a civil penalty for each offense of not more than the maximum penalty
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is $2,000 as of December 2014. If
the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs
shall constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. Upon identification of a violation of this chapter, the Noise Control
Officer or Noise Control Investigator shall issue an enforcement
document to the violator. The enforcement document shall identify the
condition or activity that constitutes the violation and the specific
provision of this chapter that has been violated. It shall also indicate
whether the violator has a period of time to correct the violation before
a penalty is sought.
D. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a minor violation (as defined in § 337-3 of this
chapter), an NOV shall be issued to the violator.
(1) The document shall indicate that the purpose of the NOV is
intended to serve as a notice to warn the responsible party/violator
of the violation conditions in order to provide them with an
opportunity to voluntarily investigate the matter and voluntarily
take corrective action to address the identified violation.
§ 337-11 PATERSON CODE § 337-12
325:646
(2) The NOV shall identify the time period (up to 90 days), pursuant to
the Grace Period Law, N.J.S.A. 13:1D-125 et seq., where the
responsible party's/violator's voluntary action can prevent a formal
enforcement action with penalties issued by the Health
Department of the City of Paterson. It shall be noted that the NOV
does not constitute a formal enforcement action, a final agency
action or a final legal determination that a violation has occurred.
Therefore, the NOV may not be appealed or contested.
E. If the violation is deemed by the Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator to be a non-minor violation, the violator shall be notified
that if the violation is not immediately corrected, an NOPA with a civil
penalty of not more than the maximum penalty allowed pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, which is $2,000 as of December 2014, will be issued. If
a non-minor violation is immediately corrected, an NOV without a civil
penalty shall still be issued to document the violation. If the violation
occurs again (within 12 months of the initial violation), an NOPA shall
be issued, regardless of whether the violation is immediately corrected
or not.
F. The violator may request from the Noise Control Officer or Noise
Control Investigator, an extension of the compliance deadline in the
enforcement action. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control
Investigator shall have the option to approve any reasonable request for
an extension (not to exceed 180 days) if the violator can demonstrate
that a good-faith effort has been made to achieve compliance. If an
extension is not granted and the violation continues to exist after the
grace period ends, an NOPA shall be issued.
G. The recipient of an NOPA shall be entitled to a hearing in a municipal
court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
H. The Noise Control Officer or Noise Control Investigator may seek
injunctive relief if the responsible party does not remediate the
violation within the period of time specified in the NOPA issued.
I. Any claim for a civil penalty may be compromised and settled based on
the following factors:
(1) Mitigating or any other extenuating circumstances;
(2) The timely implementation by the violator of measures which lead
to compliance;
(3) The conduct of the violator; and
(4) The compliance history of the violator.
§ 337-12 MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS § 337-12
325:647
Chapter 341
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Air pollution — See Ch. 105.
Animals — See Ch. 121.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 149.
Dangerous and unfit buildings — See Ch. 157.
Graffiti — See Ch. 255.
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
Littering — See Ch. 313.
Noise — See Ch. 337.
Rodent control — See Ch. 385.
Solid waste — See Ch. 427.
Spitting — See Ch. 431.
§ 341-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ENFORCING OFFICIAL — The Health Officer or other official authorized by
the Council to enforce this chapter.
§ 341-2. Nuisances prohibited.
No person shall commit, maintain or allow any nuisance as declared and
described in § 341-3 within the limits of the city.
§ 341-3. Nuisances enumerated.
The following matters, things, conditions or acts and each of them are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of the city:
A. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become detrimental
or a menace to the health of the inhabitants of the city.
B. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become an
annoyance or interfere with the comfort or general well-being of the
inhabitants of the city.
C. Pollution or existence of a condition or conditions which cause or
threaten pollution of any waters in the city in such manner as to cause
or threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of the city either in their
health, comfort or property.
D. The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any
entrance to the open air or from any fire into the open air of such
quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists or gases as to
§ 337-12 PATERSON CODE § 341-3
341:648
§ 341-4. Prohibited occupancy of certain buildings.147
No person shall rent, lease or otherwise permit the occupancy of any
building as a residence, nor shall any person reside in any building as its
owner, which building violates any building or fire codes or subcodes.148
§ 341-5. Inspection of premises; interference forbidden.
§ 341-6. Notice to abate nuisance on private premises.
cause injury, detriment or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city or
endanger their comfort, repose, health or safety.
E. The growth, existence or presence of ragweed on any plot of land, lot,
highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place.
F. The growth, existence or presence of poison ivy within twenty (20) feet
of any property line.
G. The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist.
H. The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure or animal or vegetable matter which may attract flies and to
which flies may have access or in which fly larvae or pupae breed or
exist.
I. Depositing, accumulating or maintaining any matter or thing which
serves as food for insects or rodents and to which they may have access
or which serves or constitutes a breeding place or harborage for insects
or rodents in or on any land, premises, building or other place.
J. The creation of any noise in violation of Chapter 337, Noise, of the Code
of the City of Paterson.146
A. All places and premises in the city shall be subject to inspection by the
Health Division or the enforcing official if the Health Division or the
official has reason to believe that any section of this chapter is being
violated.
B. No person shall hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or prevent the Health
Division or the enforcing official from having full access to any place or
premises upon which a violation of this chapter is believed to exist.
A. Whenever a nuisance as declared by § 341-3 of this chapter is found on
any plot of land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place,
notice in writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate
146. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
Original Sec. 13-73, Prohibiting certain noises or sounds, which immediately followed this
section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
147. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
148. Editor's Note: See Ch. 183, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 215, Fire Safety.
§ 341-3 NUISANCES § 341-6
341:649
§ 341-7. Abatement of nuisance by city on private premises.
If the owner, tenant or occupant, upon being notified as provided in § 341-6
of this chapter, shall not comply with such notice within the time specified
therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Health Division shall
proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or abated in a
summary manner by such means as said Division shall deem proper.
§ 341-8. Notice to abate nuisance on public premises; abatement by
city.
Whenever a nuisance as declared by § 341-3 of this chapter is found on any
public property or on any highway or any other public premises or place,
notice in writing shall be given to the person in charge thereof to remove or
abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein. If such person
fails to comply with such notice within the time specified therein, the Health
Division may remove or abate such nuisance in the manner as hereinafter
provided in the case of a like condition existing on a private premises or
place.
§ 341-9. Recovery of costs by city.
The Health Division may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred
by it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance as declared by § 341-3
of this chapter from any person who shall have caused or allowed such
nuisance to exist or from any owner, tenant or occupant of premises who,
after notice and notification as herein provided, shall fail to remove and
abate the same within the time specified in such notice.
§ 341-10. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Health Division or its
enforcing official.
§ 341-11. Violations and penalties.149
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or with notice issued pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
the same within such time as shall be specified therein, but not less
than five (5) days from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of the
notice shall be left with one (1) or more of the tenants or occupants of
the premises or place.
B. If the owner resides out of the state or cannot be so notified speedily,
such notice shall be left at that place or premises with the tenant or
occupant thereof or posted on the premises, and such action shall be
considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or occupant thereof.
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 341-6 PATERSON CODE § 341-11
341:650
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period
of community service for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or any
combination thereof.
Chapter 345
OBSCENE MATERIALS
§ 345-1. Display of obscene materials by retailers.
No retailer may display or permit to be displayed at his business premises
any obscene material, as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, at a height of less than
five (5) feet from the ground or without a binder or other covering placed or
printed on the front of the material displayed.
§ 345-2. Presumptive evidence.
Public display of the obscene material shall constitute presumptive evidence
that the retailer knowingly made or permitted the display.
§ 345-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of violating this chapter shall be adjudged a petty
disorderly person and may be fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
imprisoned for up to ninety (90) days or sentenced to serve a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof.
Chapter 349
OUTDOOR CAFES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 113.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 231.
Food handler's certificate — See Ch. 235.
Food vending vehicles — See Ch. 243.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 309.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
§ 349-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed in this section:
OUTDOOR CAFE — Any eating establishment where food and other
refreshments are served upon the public right-of-way, namely the sidewalks
immediately in front of any restaurant, cafe, cafeteria or place of business
where food and/or other refreshments are served for on-site consumption.
§ 341-11 OBSCENE MATERIALS § 349-1
345:651
SIDEWALK — That area of the public right-of-way reserved for pedestrian
traffic from the curb to the front line of the building housing a proposed or
existing outdoor cafe.
§ 349-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization of any kind (hereinafter collectively referred to
as "person") to create, establish, operate, maintain or otherwise be engaged
in the business of conducting an outdoor cafe upon the sidewalks of the City
of Paterson unless such person shall hold a currently valid license issued
pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
§ 349-3. Conditions for license.
No license shall be issued hereunder unless the licensee meets the following
conditions:
§ 349-4. Application for license; fees; expiration of licenses.
A. The licensee must have existing approved indoor seating for a minimum
of 20 persons (five tables of four persons or equivalent), and the total
combined indoor and outdoor seating shall not exceed the maximum
number of indoor seating allowed by state and local regulation.
B. The licensee shall demonstrate that a minimum of five feet of
unobstructed paved surface will be available for pedestrian traffic
around or through such outdoor cafe and that such outdoor cafe is
contiguous to an eating establishment as hereinabove defined.
C. Outdoor seating may not displace parking spaces required by building
and zoning regulations.
D. No food or drinks served at such outdoor cafe shall be prepared other
than in the interior of the eating establishment.
E. The licensee shall demonstrate adequate controls to prevent vermin
entrance into the interior of the food establishment, such as air curtains
and pass-through windows.
F. Tables and chairs must be removed from the public sidewalks when the
establishment is not open for business.
A. Application for the license required hereunder shall be made to the
Health Officer and shall be signed by the applicant. The application
shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, residence address and telephone number of each
individual, owner, partner or, if a domestic corporation or limited
liability company (LLC), the names, residence addresses and
telephone numbers of the members, directors and officers owning a
ten-percent or greater interest in the corporation or LLC and the
§ 349-1 PATERSON CODE § 349-4
349:652
chief operating executive of the corporation or LLC and, if a
nondomestic corporation, the name, residence address and
telephone number of the managing officer for service of process
within the State of New Jersey and a copy of the qualification of
said nondomestic corporation to conduct business in the State of
New Jersey.
(2) A copy of the trade, corporate, business or fictitious name upon
which the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this chapter.
(3) The address and description of each place where the applicant
intends to establish or operate an outdoor cafe.
(4) The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other
than the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to
the application.
(5) Three sets of proposed layout plans containing scaled drawings
clearly illustrating the number, type of material, color and location
of all tables, chairs, umbrellas, or other furnishings or fixtures
intended to be located in the outdoor cafe. The perimeter of the
outdoor cafe may, if appropriate, be defined and set off by a
portable-type enclosure, which may include live plantings. The
enclosure shall define the perimeter of the area to be used as an
outdoor cafe and shall separate it from the pedestrians traversing
the adjacent sidewalk. The enclosure shall not contain doors or
windows nor air-conditioning or heating equipment and shall be
open at all times to the air from a height of not more than three
feet. Awnings or outdoor umbrellas extending over the enclosure
are permitted. The scaled drawings shall also illustrate the
following:
(a) The location of any doors leading from the eating
establishment to the outdoor cafe. No such doors may be
obstructed in any manner.
(b) The number of feet and location of unobstructed space
permitting free passage of pedestrian traffic around or through
each outdoor cafe.
(c) The location of the place where any food or drink is intended to
be prepared.
(d) An illustration of the enclosure or protective barrier separating
the eating and serving area of each outdoor cafe from
pedestrian traffic.
(e) The location of all fire hydrants, parking meters, utility poles,
benches, handicap ramps, street furniture, trees, and any
other fixtures permanently located on the sidewalk in front of
the eating establishment or within 10 feet thereof on either or
any side.
§ 349-4 OUTDOOR CAFES § 349-4
349:653
§ 349-5. Review of application.
The Health Officer in conjunction with the Department of Community
Development will review the application for completeness and compliance
with the terms of this chapter. If the application is complete, the Health
Officer will act upon the same within 10 business days of the submittal of
the application or within 10 business days after the application becomes
complete. If the application is not complete, the Health Officer will so notify
the applicant within 10 business days of the submission and specifically
detail the areas in which the application lacks compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 349-6. Issuance of license.
If the application complies with the chapter, the Health Officer shall issue a
license strictly subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 349-7. Nontransferability of license.
The license is personal to the applicant, and any change or transfer of
ownership of the outdoor cafe shall terminate the license and shall require
a new application and a new license in conformance with all of the
requirements of this chapter.
§ 349-8. Consent for inspections.
Acceptance of the license by the applicant shall operate as a consent to the
Health, Fire, Police and Building Officials of the City to inspect the outdoor
cafe for continued compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 349-9. Liability; insurance.
(f) The type and location of any proposed outdoor lighting and
fixtures.
B. The application fee and annual license fee shall be $100.
C. Licenses shall expire annually on March 1.
A. No license required by this chapter shall be granted to any person to
operate an outdoor cafe until such person shall have filed with the
Health Officer a statement agreeing to indemnify and hold harmless the
City of Paterson, its agents, servants, representatives or employees
from any or all claims, damages, judgment costs or expenses, including
attorneys fees, which they or any of them may incur or be required to
pay because of any personal injury, including death, or property
damage suffered by any person or persons as a result of or related in
any way to the operation and maintenance of the outdoor cafe for which
the license is issued.
B. Insurance requirements.
§ 349-4 PATERSON CODE § 349-9
349:654
§ 349-10. Revocation or suspension of license.
(1) Liability insurance requirement. No license required by this
chapter shall be granted to any person to operate an outdoor cafe
until such person shall have first filed with the Health Officer a
comprehensive general liability policy issued to such person by a
public liability insurance company authorized to do business in the
State of New Jersey affording the coverages set forth below in the
amounts specified. Such insurance policy shall name the City of
Paterson, 155 Market Street, Paterson, New Jersey 07505, its
agents, officers, servants, representatives, and employees as
additional insured with respect to the operation and maintenance
of the outdoor cafe in the following amounts:
(a) Bodily injury, each person: $300,000.
(b) Each accident: $1,000,000.
(2) The insurance coverage required by this section shall at all times
be maintained for the full amount. The policy of insurance required
by this section to be filed with the Health Officer shall contain a
clause obligating the company issuing the same to give not less
than 30 days' written notice to the City Clerk before cancellation or
amendments of any of the terms thereof. Notice of cancellation
shall not relieve the company issuing such policy of liability for any
injury or claim arising before the cancellation becomes effective.
The cancellation of any such policy shall have the immediate effect
of suspending the license of such person to operate the outdoor
cafe covered thereby until a new policy complying with the
provisions of this section is filed with the Health Officer and a letter
confirming in writing the new effective date of the license is issued
by the Health Officer.
(3) Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a
provision for continuing liability thereunder to the full amount
thereof notwithstanding any recovery thereon, that the liability of
the insured shall not be affected by the insolvency or the
bankruptcy of the insured, and that until the policy is canceled, the
insurance company will not be relieved from liability on account of
nonpayment of premium or of any act omission by the named
insured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for
the payment of any and all judgments up to the limits of such policy.
A. Any license issued hereunder is issued solely as a revocable license,
which shall be subject to revocation or suspension by the Business
Administrator for failure of any licensee to comply with this chapter or
for violation of any other applicable federal, state, county or municipal
law, regulation or ordinance. Any license issued hereunder is issued
upon the express understanding that the licensee obtains no property
right thereunder, nor any interest in the continuation of said license.
§ 349-9 OUTDOOR CAFES § 349-10
349:655
§ 349-11. Cleanliness of area.
Each licensee is responsible for keeping the area of the outdoor cafe and the
adjacent walks and streets free and clear of any debris or litter generated
by the cafe. Areas must be cleaned at the time that business is closed and
at the beginning of each business day, but not later than 9:00 a.m.
§ 349-12. Vending machines.
No vending machines of any kind are permitted on the exterior of any
building operating an outdoor cafe.
§ 349-13. Signs.
No signs shall be permitted in the area of the outdoor cafe except signs
on the awnings or umbrellas complying with the Zoning and/or Sign
Ordinances of the City of Paterson.
§ 349-14. Additional reasons for suspension or revocation of
license; appeal.
In addition to the powers of suspension or revocation as set forth above,
the City reserves the right to modify, suspend or revoke any license on
10 days' written notice if the City determines that pedestrian traffic is, in
fact, impeded or made unsafe because of the operation of the outdoor cafe
or because of any other safety issue which the City determines adversely
affects the City because of such operation. The license may also be
suspended or revoked on 10 days' written notice in the event the City
determines that it is necessary to utilize the area or any part thereof for
the maintenance or installation of underground utilities. In the event of an
emergency, which emergency is certified by the Business Administrator, the
license may be suspended or revoked without notice. Any appeal of the
revocation of a license shall be heard by the Business Administrator.
§ 349-15. Alcoholic beverages.
If the applicant is the holder of an alcoholic beverage control license
pursuant to laws of the State of New Jersey, it shall be the applicant's
responsibility to cause the Alcohol Beverage Control license to be amended
to include the premises utilized for outdoor cafe purposes in order to serve
alcoholic beverages therein.
§ 349-16. Permit of operation; term of license.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an outdoor cafe after the
suspension or termination of the applicable license.
A. Outdoor cafes shall be permitted to operate from April 1 to October 31
in any calendar year.
B. The license, when issued, shall be valid for one season.
§ 349-10 PATERSON CODE § 349-17
349:656
§ 349-17. Affixing of furniture or equipment.
No tables, chairs or other equipment used in the outdoor cafe shall be
attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign, or other
fixtures, curb or sidewalk, within or near the licensed area.
§ 349-18. Removal of property from sidewalk.
The licensee agrees at the end of the license period, or in the event that
the license is temporarily or permanently suspended or revoked, that the
licensee will at his own cost and expense vacate the sidewalk space and
promptly remove any property placed thereon. Failure to do so on five days'
written notice shall grant to the City the right to remove any property on
the sidewalk, and the licensee agrees to reimburse the City for the cost of
removing and storing the same.
§ 349-19. Use of sound devices.
The licensee shall not direct to or from the area occupied by the outdoor
cafe any bell, chime, siren, whistle, loudspeaker, public address system,
radio, sound amplifier or similar device.
§ 349-20. Hours of operation.
No outdoor cafe shall open for business prior to 7:00 a.m. nor remain open
for business after 11:00 p.m.
§ 349-21. Table service required.
Table service is required.
Chapter 351
PAINT, LEAD-BASED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
§ 351-1. Definitions.
A. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Any building or structure, whether it is
attached or detached from the dwelling, located on the same property
as the dwelling, including but not limited to garages, storage sheds and
similar structures.
§ 349-17 OUTDOOR CAFES § 351-1
349:657
§ 351-2. Exemptions.
The following types of premises are exempt from this chapter:
CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION — A certificate from the Health Officer
or his designee stating that a dwelling and/or premises is exempt from
inspection pursuant to this chapter.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — A certificate from the Health Officer
or his designee stating that a dwelling and/or premises has been
inspected pursuant to this chapter. The certificate shall also indicate
the results of the inspection.
DIVISION — The Division of Health of the City.
DWELLING — Any building or structure or portion thereof which is
occupied in whole or in part as the home, residence or sleeping
quarters of one or more persons and includes any dwelling unit,
rooming house or rooming unit and any facility occupied or used by
children, other than those buildings specifically exempted from this
chapter as set forth in § 351-2 below.
INSPECTOR — An employee of the Division of Health or a City
employee of any other department who has received the proper training
to conduct lead inspections and risk assessments.
PREMISES — A dwelling and any accessory structure.
B. All other definitions set forth in N.J.S.A. 24:14A-4 and N.J.A.C. 8:51-1.1
et seq. and any amendments thereto are incorporated by reference.
C. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health of the
residents of Paterson by establishing requirements to disclose the
presence of any potentially dangerous lead paint found at the time of
inspection to any proposed occupants of the premises. Disclosure will
allow those occupants to make informed judgments in order to protect
vulnerable occupants against the hazards of lead paint. Lead paint is
especially dangerous to children as it can impact the growth and
development of a child's brain and central nervous system.
A. Owner-occupied single-family dwellings and/or premises.
B. Any premises newly constructed after 1978. This means that no part of
the structure was in existence in 1978 or earlier.
C. Any premises for which a valid lead-free certificate is in force and has
been issued pursuant to the statutes and regulations administered and
applied by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, provided
the owner of such premises can demonstrate proof of the existence of
an original lead-free certificate and eligibility for registration of the
premises on the Lead Safe Housing Registry.
D. A request for a certificate of exemption pursuant to this chapter shall be
made in writing to the Division, on forms prescribed by the Division,
§ 351-1 PATERSON CODE § 351-2
349:658
§ 351-3. Certificates of inspection.
§ 351-4. Inspections.
together with proof satisfactory to the Division and a fee for the
certificate in the amount of $50. A duplicate or replacement certificate
of exemption may be obtained for a fee of $25.
A. A certificate of inspection shall be obtained from the Division of Health
by the owner of every dwelling and accessory structure subject to the
provisions of this chapter immediately prior to allowing occupancy or
possession of the dwelling and accessory structure by a tenant.
B. In no case shall an inspection be considered as immediately prior to a
new tenancy if it is conducted more than 365 days prior to the new
tenancy. A revised certificate of inspection may be issued for a new
tenant without a new inspection within 365 days of the last inspection,
upon request by the owner and payment of a fee of $25.
C. The inspection provisions of this chapter shall be fully applicable prior
to allowing occupancy or possession of the dwelling and accessory
structure by a tenant.
D. The owner of the premises being inspected shall be responsible for
granting all necessary access to the premises for the inspector. In many
cases, this will require the removal of furniture, equipment or stored
items, as the inspector requires. In the event that the owner of the
premises does not provide necessary access to the premises, the
inspector is required to presume that lead paint is present in the
inaccessible area, and will issue a written report to that effect. Any
necessary reinspection will require an additional payment of full
inspection fees.
E. In the event that any premises are inspected twice within a five-year
period, and it is determined that there is no lead paint in the
components tested, and if reasonable access has been provided, then
the Division of Health shall issue a certificate of inspection which is
valid for a period of five years. During this five-year period, the
premises so inspected shall not require an additional certificate of
inspection before a re-rental certificate may be issued by the City of
Paterson. Upon expiration of this five-year period, a new inspection will
be required under the terms of this chapter.
A. The required certificate of inspection shall be issued only after the
premises shall have been physically inspected by a Division of Health
inspector to ascertain whether lead paint exists at the premises.
B. Upon inspection for re-rental of an apartment or portion of a
multifamily home, the inspector shall also inspect not only the unit
being rented but also the common areas of the building and any
accessory structures. The inspector shall also have the right, at his
§ 351-2 OUTDOOR CAFES § 351-4
349:659
§ 351-5. Inspection fees.
discretion, to inspect any other rental or dwelling unit within the same
building, the cost of the inspections to be assessed to the owner
pursuant to § 351-5. In the event that lead-based paint is present, the
inspector shall also have the right, at his discretion, to inspect all other
dwelling units on the premises and all accessory structures, the cost of
the inspections to be assessed to the owner pursuant to § 351-5.
C. Requests for inspections pursuant to this chapter shall be made, in
writing, to the Division of Health, on forms prescribed by the City of
Paterson, Division of Health.
(1) Any such application shall include the name(s) and address(es) of
the proposed tenants for re-rentals.
(2) The names and addresses so provided shall be certified to be
accurate.
(3) Failure to provide the names and addresses or any other
information on the application form as required shall result in no
inspection taking place and no certificate of inspection being
issued.
(4) Providing false or inaccurate information shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and subject the violator to the penalties
prescribed herein.
D. The owner or prospective contract purchaser of any building not
subject to this chapter, including but not limited to owner-occupied
single-family homes, may request that an inspection be performed
pursuant to this section and receive a copy of the results of the
inspection. However, request of the voluntary inspection does not
obligate the owner of the buildings to obtain a certificate of inspection.
A. A request for lead paint inspection to the Division shall be accompanied
by a fee of $175 for a single-family, two-family or three-family dwelling
for the first unit inspected, plus an additional fee of $75 for each
additional unit inspected. For the reduced fee to be applied, all
inspections must be scheduled for the same day and time. By way of
example, the inspection of two units in a two-family home on one
scheduled day shall require a fee of $250. The inspection of three units
in a three-family dwelling on the same day shall require a fee of $325.
B. Multifamily premises. The initial inspection fee for multifamily
dwellings containing more than three dwelling units shall be $175 for
the initial unit inspected, plus $75 per additional dwelling unit for all
units inspected on the same scheduled inspection day. By way of
example, the inspection fee for four units in a four-family dwelling shall
be $400.
§ 351-4 PATERSON CODE § 351-5
349:660
§ 351-6. Inspection results; notification.
If an inspection uncovers lead-based paint at the premises, the Division
shall notify the property owner, contract purchaser in the case of a
voluntary inspection and, in cases of re-rentals, the proposed occupants, in
writing, of the presence of lead-based paint. For purposes of this section,
written notification by regular and certified mail, to the individuals listed on
the application at the addresses listed, shall be sufficient notification by the
Division.
§ 351-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person found in violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 351-8. Registry of exempt premises.
The Division shall create and maintain a registry of exempt premises in the
City of Paterson and shall, upon request and payment of a fee of $50, issue
a certificate of exemption.
§ 351-9. Complaint regarding lead-based paint.
In the event that the Division of Health receives a complaint alleging the
presence of lead-based paint at a premises, which the Health Officer or his
designee determines requires an inspection or investigation consistent with
existing law, the inspector may inspect not only the dwelling unit which is
the subject of the complaint but, in the case of multifamily dwellings, the
inspector may inspect all common areas and all other dwelling units within
the same building, the cost to be assessed to the owner pursuant to § 351-5.
§ 351-10. Effect on other provisions.
Nothing herein is intended to supersede any other ordinances or
regulations of the City of Paterson. Further, nothing herein is intended to
supersede federal or state statutes, rules or regulations, including but not
limited to N.J.S.A. 24:14A-1 et seq., N.J.A.C. 8:51-1.1 et seq., or any other
applicable laws or regulations.
C. The certificate of inspection valid for a period of five years that may be
issued pursuant to § 351-3E shall require the payment of a fee of $250.
Any duplicate original of this certificate that may be requested shall
require a fee of $25.
§ 351-5 OUTDOOR CAFES § 351-10
349:661
Chapter 355
PARADES AND PROCESSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bazaars — See Ch. 129.
Block parties — See Ch. 137.
Entertainment and shows — See Ch. 203.
§ 355-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARADE — Any parade, march, rally, pageant, demonstration, procession of
any kind or any similar display in or upon any street, park or other public
place in the city.
§ 355-2. Purpose.
The provisions contained in this chapter are set forth:
§ 355-3. Permit required. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
No person, association or corporation shall hold, conduct or take part in
any parade, procession or the like through, in or upon any public street,
highway or place in the city without first having obtained written permission
from the Director of Public Works or his designee as hereinafter provided.
§ 355-4. Application for parade permit; time for filing; contents of
application.
A. In order to more effectively regulate traffic and assembling of crowds in
and upon public streets, highways and places of the city which are
intended primarily for the convenience and accommodation of the
public and each member thereof in the pursuit of his lawful affairs
without hindrance.
B. In the interest of peace and good order of the city.
C. For the protection of the business people of the city.
D. To limit the city's unreimbursed expenses. [Added 5-26-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-036A]
A. An application seeking issuance of a permit for any parade, procession
or the like shall be filed with the Director of Public Works or his
designee on forms provided by the city. [Amended 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 351-10 PATERSON CODE § 355-4
349:662
§ 355-5. Approval of Chief or Acting Chief of Police required.
[Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
B. The application shall be filed at least 10 days before the date on which it
is proposed to conduct the parade or procession. [Amended
5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-036A]
C. The application shall state the object, time, route and termination point
of the proposed parade or procession.
D. The application shall also include the following, which shall be obtained
before the said application is filed: [Added 5-26-2015 by Ord. No.
15-036A]
(1) Proof of adequate insurance coverage in the form of a certificate of
insurance for a "special event policy," which shall include its
endorsement page or equivalent, and which shall name the City of
Paterson as an additional insured. The amount of such insurance
shall equal $1,000,000 in coverage. Any actual parade activities
that the insurer excludes from the special event policy, such as, for
example, automobile coverage, will require separate certificates at
a level of $1,000,000 in coverage.
(2) Proof of adequate security and emergency medical personnel in the
form of employment contracts or equivalent proof satisfactory to
the Chief of Police or his delegate. The applicant is solely
responsible for the cost of providing said personnel.
(3) A written good faith estimate from the Department of Public Works,
calculating the added Public Works expenses, including but not
limited to cleanup costs: the applicant's filed application shall be
accompanied by a deposit of 110% of the said costs, which shall be
refunded after the parade to the extent that actual costs may be
less than 110% of the estimate.
(4) Proof that all other City ordinances and required permits or
licenses have been complied with.
(5) Failure to provide any one or more of the above items set forth at
§ 355-4C and D herein at least 10 days in advance of the planned
event shall be sufficient grounds for the Department of Public
Works to deny issuance of a license.
A. No permit shall be issued by the Director of Public Works or his
designee unless the application has first received the written approval
of the Chief or Acting Chief of Police for the conduct of said parade or
procession.
B. The Chief or Acting Chief of Police shall submit to the Director of Public
Works or his designee his approval or disapproval of the application for
a permit at least five days prior to the date on which it is proposed to
§ 355-4 OUTDOOR CAFES § 355-5
349:663
§ 355-6. Application for partial subsidy, based solely on financial
need. [Added 5-26-2015 by Ord. No. 15-036A150]
An applicant may apply to the Office of Multicultural Affairs within the
Department of Economic Development for a subsidy of the costs of
insurance, security, emergency medical personnel, and public works
expenses described above in § 355-4D equaling 80% of such costs for events
occurring in calendar year 2015, 70% in calendar year 2016, and 60% in
subsequent years. If no specific form is available to apply for the subsidy,
then the applicant may apply by letter. The following procedures shall
govern, if such a subsidy is sought:
conduct the parade or procession. [Amended 5-26-2015 by Ord. No.
15-036A]
A. Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, if such a subsidy
is sought then the parade application referenced above in § 355-4 must
be filed simultaneously with the Office of Multicultural Affairs within
the Department of Economic Development and the Director of Public
Works no less than 30 days before the date of the event.
B. If such a subsidy is sought:
(1) The insurance certificate(s), security contract, and emergency
medical personnel contract referenced above in § 355-4 may on a
preliminary basis be replaced by formal written documentation as
to how much the insurance, security, and emergency medical will
cost, provided that if such a subsidy is approved then no permit
shall be issued until the Director of Public Works receives the said
certificate and contracts.
(2) The good faith estimate of Public Works expenses referenced in
§ 355-4 must be obtained to accompany the parade permit
application, but the deposit against Public Works expenses need
not be provided until seven days before event.
(3) The full application and the response thereto shall without undue
delay be prominently posted on the City of Paterson home page,
www.patersonnj.gov, and personal information shall be redacted
only to the extent otherwise required by law.
C. No subsidy shall be granted unless:
(1) The applicant has adequately documented its financial need, and
(2) There exists a line item in the approved special events budget (or
equivalent), which may also include funds such as dedicated trust
funds and/or grant funds, such that the City shall not be obligated
to provide a dollar amount in excess of the budgeted line item.
150. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former §§ 355-6
through 355-10 as §§ 355-7 through 355-11, respectively.
§ 355-5 PATERSON CODE § 355-6
349:664
§ 355-7. Grounds for denial of permit. [Amended 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068]
Whenever the Director of Public Works or his designee or the Chief or
Acting Chief of Police finds that the granting of a permit for any parade or
procession will result in public disorder or riot or will unduly interfere with
traffic or public convenience, the permit for the conduct of said parade or
procession shall not be approved nor issued.
§ 355-8. Appeal from denial of permit or denial of application for
subsidy. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 5-26-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-036A]
In the event that the Director of Public Works or his designee or the Chief
or Acting Chief of Police shall refuse to approve and issue the permit for
a parade or procession, or in the event that the Department of Economic
Development shall deny an application for a subsidy as described above in
§ 355-6, the applicant may apply to the Department that issued the denial
for a hearing and said Department shall then determine whether or not the
denial of the permit or the denial of the subsidy should be reversed.
§ 355-9. Conditions of permit; disbanding parade.
D. Such subsidies shall be granted to applicants based solely upon
documented financial need.
E. Failure to timely provide any one or more of the above items set forth at
§ 355-6A though C shall be sufficient grounds to deny the grant of a
subsidy.
A. The issuance of a permit under this chapter for a parade or procession
shall be subject to the conditions hereinafter set forth in this section,
which conditions shall be deemed a part of every such permit:
(1) There shall be no unreasonable inconvenience to the public or any
member thereof in the lawful use of any public street, highway or
place of business in the city.
(2) No public disorder, disturbance or riot whatsoever shall be created,
caused or encouraged by one (1) or more persons.
(3) There shall be no interference in the exercise of the powers and
duties of the police to regulate traffic generally and to maintain
peace and good order within the city.
B. The Director of Public Works or his designee or Chief of Police or Acting
Chief of Police may order any parade or procession to be disbanded or
otherwise terminated for breach of any of the conditions set forth in
Subsection A of this section. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
§ 355-6 OUTDOOR CAFES § 355-10
349:665
§ 355-10. Exemptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply or be construed to apply to:
§ 355-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein, any person who
violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.), by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 359
PARKING LOTS, OPEN-AIR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Handicapped parking policy — See Ch. 259.
§ 359-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPEN-AIR PARKING LOT or PARKING LOT — Any open-air place, lot or
parcel of land used, in whole or in part, for storage or parking of motor
vehicles, where a storage or parking fee is charged therefor and which is
open to the general public. It shall include such places with shelters that
are not completely enclosed.
§ 359-2. License required.
No person shall conduct, operate or maintain an open-air parking lot within
the City without first obtaining a license therefor issued by the Licensing
A. Funeral processions.
B. Students going to and from classes or participating in educational or
athletic activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate
direction and supervision of the proper school authorities.
C. Processions sponsored by a governmental department or agency acting
within the scope of its functions.
D. Wedding processions.
E. Processions sponsored by houses of religious worship.
§ 355-10 PATERSON CODE § 359-2
349:666
Division, after approval thereof by the Council, as hereinafter provided in
this chapter.
§ 359-3. Application for license; contents; fee to accompany
application.
§ 359-4. License fee; term of license.
A. Application for an open-air parking lot license shall be addressed to the
Council by the person intending to operate the open-air parking lot,
upon forms approved by the Council. The application shall be filed in
the office of the Licensing Division.
B. The application shall set forth the following:
(1) The name under which and place where the parking lot is to be
operated.
(2) Whether the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation;
if an individual, the name and business and residence address of
the applicant; if a partnership, the name and business and bona
fide residence addresses of each partner; if a corporation, the
name, date and state under which such corporation was organized
and the name and business address of the officers and
stockholders.
(3) The maximum number of motor vehicles which may, at any one
time, be stored or parked upon the premises.
(4) The hours during which motor vehicles may be stored or parked.
(5) A complete schedule of rates to be charged for storing or parking
motor vehicles.
(6) Such other information as the Licensing Division may require for
the purpose of the approval by the Council as herein provided.
C. Each application shall be signed and verified under oath by the
applicant, if an individual or partnership, or by a duly authorized agent
or properly constituted officers, if a corporation.
D. The license fee, prescribed in this chapter, shall accompany the
application.
A. The annual license fee for the operation of an open-air parking lot under
this chapter shall be $5 for each car capacity; provided, however, that in
no event shall the license fee be less than $50 per annum. [Amended
5-3-1983 by Ord. No. 83-034A; 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-087;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-068]
B. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be for a term of one year,
commencing January 1 and expiring on December 31 of the year in
§ 359-2 OUTDOOR CAFES § 359-4
349:667
§ 359-5. Investigation of application; report and recommendation.
The application shall be referred to the Public Works Director for the
purpose of investigation as to the truth of the matters contained in the
application and compliance with the requirements of this chapter and City
ordinances and resolutions governing traffic. The Public Works Director
shall return the application to the Council with his report and
recommendation for approval or disapproval.
§ 359-6. Issuance of license.
The Licensing Division shall issue the license provided for in this chapter
after approval of the application therefor by the Council.
§ 359-7. Record of applications and licenses.
A record of all applications filed and licenses issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be kept by the Licensing Division and by the
Public Works Director.
§ 359-8. Transfer of license; application; fee.
A license issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred to a new
operator if approved by the Council. The request for transfer shall be made
by written application filed with the Licensing Division and accompanied
by a transfer fee of $10. Such application and transfer of the license shall
be subject to all the terms, conditions and requirements of this chapter
applicable to a new application and the granting of a new license except
that no additional license fee shall be required.
§ 359-9. Signs to be posted; content.
Each licensee under this chapter shall maintain at each entrance to the
licensed open-air parking lot a permanently affixed sign, suitable to apprise
persons using such lot of the following:
which issued. If the license is issued after January 1, it shall nonetheless
expire on December 31 of the year in which issued.
A. The name of the licensee.
B. The hours of day and night during which such place is open for storing
motor vehicles.
C. The rates charged [and if more than one rate is charged, the figures for
each rate shall be of the same size and dimensions] shall be no less than
six inches in height. If separate rates are charged for day parking and
for night parking, the change of rate and hours shall be stated.
D. The closing hours of such parking lot, in letters and figures not less
than six inches in height.
§ 359-4 PATERSON CODE § 359-9
349:668
§ 359-10. Lighting at night.
If the licensed open-air parking lot is to be open for business at night,
adequate lighting shall be maintained to light the whole of such parking lot
properly until the time fixed for closing.
§ 359-11. Claim checks.
At the time of accepting a motor vehicle for parking or storage in the openair
parking lot, the licensee, his agent, servant or employee shall furnish
to such person parking or storing his motor vehicle a distinctive check or
ticket which shall be numbered to correspond to a coupon placed upon such
motor vehicle. The check or ticket shall contain the address of the parking
lot and the name of the licensee.
§ 359-12. Rates; change of rates.
§ 359-13. Notification of police of loss, theft or conversion.
Within 24 hours of any claim made to the licensee or his employees of any
loss, theft or conversion occurring upon the licensed premises, the licensee
shall notify the Police Division of such claim, furnishing all necessary
details.
§ 359-14. Maintenance of lot and surrounding sidewalks.
§ 359-15. Illegal use or movement of vehicles.
E. The maximum car capacity, in letters and figures not less than four
inches in height.
A. No licensee or his agent, servant or employee shall make any charge for
the parking or storage of any motor vehicle in excess of that charge or
rate set forth in his application for a license, as provided in § 359-3 and
posted in accordance with § 359-9.
B. A licensee may alter his charges or rates after he has filed a written
notice of such change with the Licensing Division and the Public Works
Director, not less than 30 days before the effective date of the change,
and has posted signs showing the changed rates or charges in the same
manner as provided in § 359-9.
A. Each licensee shall keep the sidewalks surrounding the licensed
parking lot and the surface of the parking lot free from dirt, ice, sleet
and snow and shall keep the sidewalks and the surface of the parking
lot in safe condition for the travel of pedestrians using said sidewalks
and for the public using said parking lot.
B. Parking lots shall be kept free from dust by frequent sprinkling or the
use of calcium chloride or other means so that the same shall not
become a nuisance to adjacent property owners or others.
§ 359-9 OUTDOOR CAFES § 359-15
349:669
§ 359-16. Employment of reliable and competent attendants.
Every licensee shall faithfully perform his duties as bailee. He shall employ
honest, reliable and competent attendants and employees on the licensed
parking lot. Failure to employ honest, reliable and competent help shall be
cause for revocation of the license issued under this chapter.
§ 359-17. Suspension or revocation of license.
In addition to the penalty provided in § 359-18, the Council may suspend or
revoke any parking lot license upon notice and hearing, if the Council finds
that:
§ 359-18. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for a term
not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
A. No person shall move or transfer or permit the movement or transfer of
any motor vehicle from any licensed parking lot to any other parking lot
without the consent of the owner of or bailor of such vehicle.
B. Each licensee under this chapter and each of his agents, servants or
employees who actually moves, drives or manipulates the motor
vehicles parked, stored or offered for parking or storing in the parking
lot shall be the holder of a current driver's license issued by the State of
New Jersey.
A. The licensee knowingly made any false or materially incorrect
statement in the application.
B. The licensee knowingly violated or knowingly permitted or suffered the
violation of any provision of this chapter.
C. The licensee knowingly violated or knowingly permitted or suffered the
violation of any provision of any penal law or ordinance regarding theft,
larceny or conversion of a motor vehicle or the operation of a motor
vehicle without the owner's consent.
§ 359-15 PATERSON CODE § 359-18
349:670
Chapter 363
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 113.
Animals — See Ch. 121.
Block parties — See Ch. 137.
Entertainment and shows — See Ch. 203.
Municipal facilities — See Ch. 209.
Noise — See Ch. 337.
Parades and Processions — See Ch. 355.
§ 363-1. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall, in any public park in the city:
§ 363-2. Regulated conduct.
Except by authority of the Department of Public Works, Division of Parks,
and subject to its rules and regulations, no person shall, in any public park
in the city:
A. Climb upon, cut, break, injure, deface or remove any wall, fence,
equipment, shelter, seat, structure, statue or other erection, turf, tree,
shrub or other plant or flower.
B. Throw stones or other missiles.
C. Tell fortunes.
D. Utter loud, threatening, abusive or indecent language.
E. Commit any indecent or obscene act.
F. Annoy another person.
G. Act in a disorderly manner.
H. Fish in any waters.
I. Disturb or annoy any birds or animals.
J. Send or throw or place any animal or thing in or on the waters.
A. Discharge or carry any firearm, firecracker, torpedo or fireworks.
B. Make a fire.
C. Preach or make any harangue or oration or public address.
D. Play a musical instrument.
§ 359-18 PARKS AND RECREATION § 363-2
363:671
§ 363-3. Regulation of animals.
§ 363-4. Entrances and exits.
No person shall enter or leave any public park except through an entrance
or exit established by the Division of Parks.
§ 363-5. Authorized road bumpers in Eastside Park.
E. Play, engage or take part in any organized game or competitive sport
unless such activity has been authorized by the Department of Public
Works, Division of Parks.
F. Bathe in any water.
G. Move in a military or civic parade, drill or procession.
H. Offer or expose articles for sale.
I. Post or display any sign, placard, target, transparency, advertisement
or any device of business.
J. Solicit business or alms.
K. Go upon turf areas when and where "Keep Off" signs or like signs are
posted. No activity shall be permitted on turf areas which is deemed by
the Superintendent of Parks to be injurious to the turf.
A. No quadrupeds shall be permitted to enter upon or remain in any of the
public parks of the city except:
(1) Those placed in the park by the Division of Parks.151
B. No person shall permit, suffer or allow any animal, domestic or
otherwise, the weight of which exceeds two hundred (200) pounds, to
enter, walk, run, graze, exercise or otherwise venture forth on any
publicly owned park lands of the city. The provisions of this Subsection
B shall not apply to animals being on any publicly owned park lands in
conjunction with a bona fide municipal activity or a special event for
which the proper permits have been otherwise obtained.
A. The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to
install and construct slow-down bumpers on the public roads in
Eastside Park.
B. The Director of Public Works shall further determine the actual location
and the number of slow-down bumpers to be installed and the type
thereof.
151. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(2), concerning dogs when controlled by a leash not
more than six feet in length, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed
9-8-1998 by Ord. No. 98-064. This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor but overridden by
vote of the Council on 9-22-1998.
§ 363-2 PATERSON CODE § 363-6
363:672
§ 363-6. Park hours; exceptions.
A. No person shall be or remain or loiter in any public park between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. with the exception of the following:
[Amended 5-24-1988 by Ord. No. 88-015; 11-22-1988 by Ord. No.
88-041; 9-14-2004 by Ord. No. 04-073]
(1) Those persons playing baseball on a designated ball field in a
Paterson park as part of a regulated baseball league shall be
prohibited from playing baseball between the hours of 10:50 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. All lights provided at designated baseball fields
within Paterson parks shall be turned off at 11:00 p.m.
(2) Westside Park shall be opened to members of the public between
the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays
and the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sundays. At all other
hours, subject to the exception set forth in Subsection A(1) above
for a closing hour of 10:50 p.m. and lights off time of 11:00 p.m. for
persons playing baseball on a designated ball field in Westside Park
as part of a regulated baseball league, Westside Park shall be
closed to the public.
(3) The parks are open to the public at 5:00 a.m. for activities that are
not noise-generating, such as reading, walking and jogging.
B. No person shall play basketball in Wrigley Park on Sunday between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. [Amended 9-14-2004 by Ord. No.
04-073]
C. The provisions of Subsection A of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Members of the police force.
(2) Park officials.
(3) Other city officials or employees while on duty or performing their
respective duties in any park.
D. Any and all public roads in city parks may be closed to the public at any
time for reasons of an emergency, after proper posting, by authorization
of the Director of Public Works or his designee.
E. The Parks Division may waive the provisions of Subsection A and fix the
closing hour for a specific occasion or a special event when it has been
authorized and approved by the Director of Public Works or his
designee. Any person remaining after the termination of the event shall
be properly warned and, if failing to comply, shall be considered in
violation of this chapter.
F. Exception is made for transient vehicular traffic on the transient roads
of Eastside and Westside Parks, at all hours so long as vehicles keep
moving. Stopping and parking of vehicles after closing hours shall be
strictly prohibited.
§ 363-6 PARKS AND RECREATION § 363-7
363:673
§ 363-7. Power to restrict use of certain park areas.
Whenever it shall be deemed necessary for the protection of life or property,
park officials and keepers of parks may require that all persons refrain
from occupying or move from any designated prohibited areas in any public
parks.
§ 363-8. Definitions. [Amended 5-15-1984 by Ord. No. 84-051;
4-25-1995 by Ord. No. 95-025]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SPECIAL EVENT — Includes but is not limited to athletic events, picnics
and other gatherings not governed by Chapter 355, Parades and
Processions.
§ 363-9. Permit required for special events and use of particular
areas. [Added 5-15-1984 by Ord. No. 84-051]
§ 363-10. Application for special event permit. [Added 5-15-1984 by
Ord. No. 84-051; amended 4-25-1995 by Ord. No. 95-025]
An applicant seeking a special events permit shall file an application with
the Division of Recreation no later than fourteen (14) days before the
scheduled event. The application shall include but not be limited to the
following:
A. In order to ensure the availability of all park and recreational facilities
to the greatest number of persons, no organized group, and no
unorganized group consisting of more than fifty (50) persons, shall use
any area or facilities within any park or recreational area without first
obtaining a permit as provided herein. Other persons desiring to
reserve a park area or facility for a stated time may, at their option,
apply for a permit for this purpose.
B. Permits for special events or use of particular areas or facilities of a
park or recreational area shall be granted by the Coordinator of
Recreation after submission and review of an application in accordance
with the procedures contained herein. [Amended 4-25-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-025]
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of person, persons or organization sponsoring
the event; if a corporation or other organization is sponsoring the event,
then the name and address of the president and secretary of the
organization and the relationship of the applicant to said organization.
C. The date and time for which the permit is desired.
§ 363-7 PATERSON CODE § 363-10
363:674
§ 363-11. Standards for issuance of special event permit. [Added
5-15-1984 by Ord. No. 84-051; amended 4-25-1995 by Ord. No.
95-025]
Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Division of Recreation shall
include but not be limited to the following findings:
D. The recreation area, park or portion thereof for which such permit is
desired.
E. The activity to be undertaken or the reason for the application.
F. The number of persons anticipated to participate.
G. If said event is a spectator sport or event, the number of spectators
anticipated.
H. Whether liquor will be served or consumed on the premises.
I. Whether an admission will be charged and, if so, how much.
J. Whether the event is open to the general public and, if so, what group
or groups are anticipated to attend.
K. Any other information which the Division of Recreation shall find
reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to whether a
permit should be issued hereunder.
A. That the proposed activity or use of the park or other recreational area
will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of the facility in question.
B. That the proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the promotion and maintenance of public health, welfare,
safety and recreation.
C. That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated will
not include violence, crime or other disorderly conduct.
D. That the proposed activity or use will not entail extraordinary effort or
unduly burdensome expense by the city.
E. That any fees assessed participants or contributions collected will be
used solely for the purpose of offsetting or equaling the organization's
reasonable expenses which will be incurred. The Coordinator of
Recreation may require the applicant to provide receipts or other
documentation to enable him to verify that this section of this chapter
was complied with.
F. That the facilities desired have not already been reserved for another
use at the date and time requested in the application.
§ 363-10 PARKS AND RECREATION § 363-11
363:675
§ 363-12. Conditions of permits. [Added 5-15-1984 by Ord. No.
84-051; amended 4-25-1995 by Ord. No. 95-025]
All permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conditioned on the
following:
G. That the applicant has supplied any necessary information required by
this chapter, including but not limited to evidence of liability insurance
and a cash bond.
A. The permittee shall be bound by all of the recreational facility's rules
and all applicable ordinances.
B. The person, persons or organization to whom the permit is issued shall
be liable for all loss, damage or injury sustained by any person, whether
a participant or a spectator at the event. The Division of Recreation
shall require the applicant to enter into a hold-harmless agreement,
which shall provide that the applicant shall agree to save and hold the
city harmless of and from any and all obligations and liabilities which
may arise, whether from the use of and/or the failure to maintain the
facilities which represent the subject matter of the application. The
applicant shall further agree, as part of those provisions, to save and
hold harmless the city, to defend at his or her own cost and expense any
such claims or lawsuits instituted by third parties, which obligations or
liabilities might otherwise accrue against the city. The Division of
Recreation shall further require that prior to the issuance of a permit or
commencement of the activity, the applicant shall submit evidence of
liability insurance which shall include the City of Paterson as an
additionally insured party and shall cover injuries to any person arising
out of such permitted activities and in such amounts as shall be
determined by the Division of Recreation in accordance with the
following provisions. Where the number of people anticipated at the
event, including participants, is eleven (11) to fifty (50), the amount of
insurance required by the Division of Recreation shall be not less than
twenty-five thousand dollars ($25.000.). Where the number of people
anticipated at the event, including participants, is greater than fifty
(50), the amount of insurance required by the Division of Recreation
shall be not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.). Where the use of
any city pool is requested, then the amount of insurance required shall
not be less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.), regardless
of the number of participants anticipated. The following are some
additional factors which shall be considered by the Division of
Recreation as grounds to raise the amount of insurance required from
the amounts stated above:
(1) Where the serving or consuming of alcohol is anticipated at the
event.
(2) Where the event is open to the general public and not limited to the
members of the organization or group sponsoring the event.
§ 363-11 PATERSON CODE § 363-12
363:676
C. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the imposition of the above
insurance requirements in accordance with the provisions of § 363-15
of this chapter.
D. The permittee shall maintain the park, recreational area or other
facility by removing all trash or debris and restoring the area or facility
to a condition equal to or better than its condition prior to the granting
of the permit. In the event that special or extraordinary maintenance is
required or additional costs are incurred by the city for a proposed use
or activity, such costs shall be borne by the applicant.
E. No structure shall be erected or placed upon a city park or other
recreational facility, nor shall any utility be installed, run or extended
thereon, nor shall any alteration be made to any feature, facility or
object, whether natural or man-made, unless so authorized in the
permit issued by the Division of Recreation and then only in accordance
with the stated requirements for such use or alteration.
F. All permits shall be available for inspection by any person authorized to
enforce the provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations
promulgated therefrom.
G. No permit shall be valid except for the facilities, area and time
expressly set forth therein.
H. Any other reasonable requirement, condition or restriction which the
Division of Recreation shall authorize.
I. Every application for a permit shall be accompanied by the applicable
permit fee in the amount prescribed by the Division of Recreation.
J. The Division of Recreation shall require a bond in a reasonable amount,
not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.), to ensure performance of the
terms and conditions of the permit. In the alternative, the applicant may
leave a deposit in cash or a certified check made payable to the city. The
applicant's money shall be refunded after deducting the cost of
necessary expenses incurred by the city in restoring the area in
question to the same condition as it was in, at the time the permit was
issued, reasonable wear and tear excepted and after deducting the cost
of compensating city employees for their services which were rendered
at the event in question. In no event shall any bond or other deposit be
held for longer than thirty (30) days after the scheduled event. This
section shall in no way limit the city's ability to pursue the applicant for
liabilities pursuant to this chapter, in excess of the amount of the posted
bond or other deposit. The Coordinator of Recreation may, for good
cause and utilizing the standards set forth in this chapter, at the request
of the applicant, waive the requirement of a bond or other deposit.
K. The Division of Recreation shall require the applicant to hire one (1)
constable or other law enforcement officer for every one hundred (100)
persons anticipated at the event, including participants, unless
alcoholic beverages will be served, then the applicant shall hire one (1)
§ 363-12 PARKS AND RECREATION § 363-12
363:677
§ 363-13. Restrictions on alcoholic beverages; special liquor permit
required. [Added 5-15-1984 by Ord. No. 84-051; amended 4-25-1995
by Ord. No. 95-025]
Alcoholic beverages shall not be consumed, served or otherwise dispensed
at any city pool. At any other location, a special permit is required from
the state in order to sell, dispense or serve alcoholic beverages, pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 13:2-5.1 and § 113-22 of the Code of the City of Paterson. It
is therefore a violation of this section to consume, sell, dispense or serve
alcoholic beverages at any city pool at any time or at any other location
without this permit. The application for this special permit may be picked
up from the City Clerk's office and must be filed with the State's Division
of Alcoholic Beverage Control at least two (2) weeks prior to the date of
the event. A copy of that application shall also be filed with the Division of
Recreation, along with the application for the special activity permit. The
special liquor permit shall be prominently displayed at the event and shall
be produced for inspection upon demand of any police officer or any other
person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
§ 363-14. Application for liquor permit. [Added 5-15-1984 by Ord.
No. 84-051]
Application for a permit shall be submitted to the Division of Recreation
or its duly authorized representative. Action thereon shall be taken within
a reasonable time in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Recreation Commission. If a permit is denied, the applicant shall be given
written notice setting forth the reasons therefor.
§ 363-15. Appeals. [Added 5-15-1984 by Ord. No. 84-051; amended
4-25-1995 by Ord. No. 95-025]
If an applicant wishes to appeal any action of the Division of Recreation
in connection with an application for a special activities permit, including
constable or other law enforcement officer for every fifty (50) persons
anticipated at the event, including participants. Applicants shall also
file with their application a copy of the contract to hire said constable
or other law enforcement officer.
L. Before issuing a permit, the Division of Recreation shall require each
applicant to agree in writing to reimburse the city for any reasonable
and foreseeable expenses the city incurs resulting from the activity
stated in said permit, including but not limited to the services of city
lifeguards.
M. The Division of Recreation shall not issue a permit to any individual,
individuals or organization which unlawfully or unreasonably
discriminate based on age, sex, race, creed, color, religion, national
origin or sexual preference. In this regard, all applicants shall submit to
the Division of Recreation a sample of any and all advertisements for
said event, at least five (5) business days prior to said event.
§ 363-12 PATERSON CODE § 363-15
363:678
denial of a permit, imposition of a bond requirement, imposition of liability
insurance, imposition of security requirement or forfeiture of a posted
bond, the applicant shall have a right to appeal the decision to the City
Council by serving written notice thereof on the City Clerk within five (5)
days from receipt of notice of denial or other decision of the Division of
Recreation or its duly authorized representatives, and the applicant shall
also serve a copy of this notice on the Division of Recreation within the
same time. The Division of Recreation shall immediately forward a copy of
the application and the reasons for its refusal or other decision thereon
to the City Council, which shall consider the application under standards
set forth in this chapter. The City Council shall consider the appeal at its
next regularly scheduled meeting, which shall be considered on the record
without public hearing or further testimony, unless the applicant requests to
confer with the City Council in the notice of appeal filed with both the City
Clerk and the Division of Recreation and that request is granted by the City
Council. The City Council shall then affirm, reverse or modify the decision
of the Division of Recreation within thirty (30) days from the filing of the
notice of appeal, in default whereof the appeal shall be considered denied.
Written notice of the decision of the City Council upon any appeal shall be
given to the applicant within ten (10) days thereof.
§ 363-16. Revocation of permits. [Added 5-15-1984 by Ord. No.
84-051; amended 4-25-1995 by Ord. No. 95-025]
The Division of Recreation shall have the authority to revoke a permit
if the applicant, any person acting on his behalf or on the behalf of the
organization sponsoring the event shall violate any of the provisions of this
chapter or any rule, regulation or bylaw of the Division of Recreation or any
of the restrictions, terms or conditions under which the permit was issued.
In the event of such revocation, the applicant shall have the right to appeal
to the City Council in the same manner and on the same terms set forth in
§ 363-15 above.
§ 363-17. Enforcement; ejection from park; confiscation of property.
[Added 5-15-1984 by Ord. No. 84-051; amended 4-25-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-025]
The Division of Recreation or its duly authorized representatives, including
the custodians, supervisors and assistants appointed by the Board, or any
police officer or authorized constable shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter and the rules, regulations and bylaws of the
Division of Recreation and shall have the authority to eject from any park or
recreation area any person or persons acting in violation thereof and shall
also have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device
which is used or permitted to be in any park or recreational area in violation
thereof.
§ 363-18. Violations and penalties; restoration of property. [Added
5-15-1984 by Ord. No. 84-051; amended 4-25-1995 by Ord. No.
§ 363-15 PARKS AND RECREATION § 363-18
363:679
95-025; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 2-8-2005 by Ord. No.
05-012]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, except as provided
below, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty of imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, by a fine not exceeding $1,250 or by a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof,
except that violations of § 363-6 are subject to punishment by payment of
fines in the amount of $50. Fines for violation of § 363-6 are payable at
the Violations Bureau without a court appearance. Costs of court of $30
will be imposed, consistent with New Jersey Court Rule 7:11-4 for all such
payments. The Court may also order the replacement, repair, or restoration
of any property damaged by such person, or, in the case of minor, his or her
parent or guardian shall be liable for the replacement, repair or restoration
of any property damaged by such minor.
Chapter 367
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 125.
Bazaars — See Ch. 129.
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 179.
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 227.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 231.
Food vending vehicles — See Ch. 243.
Garage sales and flea markets — See Ch. 249.
Sale of ice — See Ch. 279.
Motor vehicle junk dealers — See Ch. 287.
Junkyards — See Ch. 291.
Milk and milk products — See Ch. 325.
Close-out sales — See Ch. 395.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 399.
§ 363-18 PATERSON CODE § 363-18
363:680
ARTICLE I
Canvassing and Soliciting
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 9, Art. 5, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 367-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSER or SOLICITOR — A person who goes from place to place,
house to house or person to person, selling or taking orders for or offering
to sell or take orders for goods, wares, merchandise or any article for future
delivery or for services to be performed in the future or for the making,
manufacturing or repairing of any article or thing whatsoever for future
delivery or for the solicitation of money for any purposes whatsoever or to
deliver circulars. "Canvasser" or "solicitor" also means a person who makes
surveys for research purposes, analyses, opinion polls, rating data and any
similar work by which of its nature involves a door-to-door, place-to-place or
person-to-person activity and includes a person who goes from door to door,
place to place or person to person for the purpose of seeking contributions,
donations or alms for any organization of a charitable, religious, patriotic,
philanthropic or community nature.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY — The Director of the Department of Public
Safety or his designee.
§ 367-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prevent fraud, crime and unethical or
dishonest business practices and for the general protection, health and
welfare of the residents of the City.
§ 367-3. Registration required.
No person shall engage in the activity of a canvasser or solicitor in the City
without first registering with the Director of Public Safety or, in his absence,
the Chief of Police.
§ 367-4. Application for registration; contents; accompanying data.
Each applicant for registration shall file with the Director of Public Safety:
A. An application, in writing, containing the following information:
(1) The name and address of the organization or person for whom the
solicitation or canvassing is being made.
(2) If the organization is a corporation, the names and addresses of all
stockholders who own directly or indirectly 10% or more of the
outstanding stock, and the names and addresses of all officers and
directors and the address of the corporation.
§ 367-1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-4
363:681
§ 367-5. Issuance of registration certificate; fee.
§ 367-6. Display of certificate.
The registration certificate shall be worn and displayed at all times on the
outside portion of the clothing worn by the registrants.
§ 367-7. Hours of operation; limited term.
§ 367-8. Disapproval of application; appeal.
(3) The names, ages and physical descriptions of all persons who will
actually solicit or canvass within the City.
(4) A description of the nature of the business and the goods, wares,
merchandise or services to be sold or the nature of the surveys,
opinion polls, etc., to be sold.
(5) The date, days and route of his business in the City.
(6) A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any person
engaged in soliciting or canvassing has been convicted of a crime,
misdemeanor or disorderly persons offense, when or where so
convicted, nature of the offense and the penalty, if any.
(7) The make, model, year, color and license plate numbers of all
automobiles to be used by the registrant during the period of
canvassing and soliciting within the City, and the number of each
driver's license and date of issuance.
B. Together with the application, two photographs of each person who will
actually solicit or canvass, which photographs to be approximately two
inches by two inches in size showing the heads and shoulders of the
persons, front view, in a clear and distinguishing manner.
A. After approval of the application, the Director of Public Safety shall
issue the registration certificate.
B. All applicants for registration shall pay a fee of $25.
A. The hours of operation for canvassers and solicitors shall be limited to
the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday.
B. The Director of Public Safety shall determine the period of time during
which the canvassing and soliciting can take place.
C. The issued registration certificate shall be valid for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
A. The Director of Public Safety may disapprove the application for the
following reasons:
(1) Reported unethical business practices.
§ 367-4 PATERSON CODE § 367-8
363:682
§ 367-9. Nonprofit organizations; exemptions.
(2) Previous conviction of crime.
(3) Applicant's character or business responsibility is found
unsatisfactory as the result of an investigation of the applicant's
business and moral character, and the Director of Public Safety
further determines that the denial of the application is necessary
for the protection of the public good.
B. The applicant may appeal any denial to the Council, which shall then
schedule a hearing within 15 days after the appeal is taken. The
applicant will be given an opportunity to present his reasons why the
registration certificate should be issued. The decision of the Council
shall be final.
A. Any charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic organization
desiring to solicit or canvass in its name shall be exempt from the
provisions of §§ 367-4 and 367-5B of this article, provided that there is
filed with the Director of Public Safety the following information:
(1) The names of solicitors or canvassers and the purpose or cause for
which the solicitation or canvassing is being made.
(2) The names and addresses of the officers of the organization.
(3) The names and addresses of the agents or representatives who will
solicit or canvass or distribute literature.
(4) The make, model, year, color and license plate numbers of all
automobiles to be used during said soliciting or canvassing.
(5) A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any person
engaged in soliciting or canvassing has been convicted of a crime,
misdemeanor or disorderly persons offense, when and where so
convicted, nature of the offense and the penalty, if any.
B. The Director of Public Safety shall have the right to limit the time
period during which such solicitation or canvassing shall take place.
C. Each solicitor or canvasser for such organizations shall carry proper
identification and shall display the same on request.
D. Each solicitor or canvasser for such organizations shall wear and
display on his outer clothing the registration certificate issued by the
Director of Public Safety.
E. Notwithstanding the provisions hereinabove set forth, students
attending Paterson schools shall be exempted entirely from the
provisions of this article, provided that any solicitation or canvassing
undertaken by said students shall be in connection with school funding
drives only.
§ 367-8 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-9
363:683
§ 367-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
F. Notwithstanding the provisions herein set forth above, all non-profitmaking
organizations whose purpose is to service the youth of the City
shall be exempted from the provisions of this article, provided that the
leaders of the particular organizations involved shall comply with
Subsection A of this section.
§ 367-9 PATERSON CODE § 367-10
363:684
ARTICLE II
Ice Cream Peddlers
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 9, Art. 9, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 367-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDDLER — Includes a person who goes from place to place or from
house to house by traveling on the streets by vehicle or otherwise and who
carries with him goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose of selling
or delivering them to consumers.
§ 367-12. License required. [Amended 2-9-2016 by Ord. No. 16-006]
No peddler of ice cream, ice cream products, water ices, frozen water
products or frozen confectionery products of any kind or character shall
sell, solicit, dispose of or offer his goods, wares or merchandise for sale
within the City unless he first obtains a license issued by the Paterson
Division of Health. However, notwithstanding any other provision of this
Code to the contrary, after December 31, 2015, no further licenses shall be
issued pursuant to this article. Instead, effective January 1, 2016, persons
who would otherwise be subject to the licensing requirements of this article
shall be licensed solely pursuant to Chapter 243, entitled “Food Vending
Vehicles.”
§ 367-13. Application for license; contents.
A. An application for license under this article shall be made by the
applicant, in writing, verified under oath, on forms approved by the
Council.
B. The application shall be filed in the office of the Licensing Division and
shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name and permanent home address of the applicant at the time
of the application.
(2) The name and address of the firm represented.
(3) All permanent home addresses of the applicant within the past
three years.
(4) The length of time for which a license is desired.
(5) A description of the vehicle to be used, if a motor vehicle is to be
used, including:
(a) The name and address of the owner of the vehicle as registered
with the Director of the Division of Motor Vehicles.
§ 367-11 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-13
363:685
§ 367-14. Investigation; issuance of license.
Upon the filing of the application, the Council shall cause an investigation
to be made concerning the facts therein set forth and of the applicant's
business and moral character as it deems necessary for the protection of the
public good. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character
and business responsibility is found to be satisfactory and the products
proposed to be sold, disposed of or offered for sale comply with all state
laws and ordinances of the City relating to food and food product, then
upon approval of the application by the Council and upon payment to the
Licensing Division of the fee prescribed in § 367-17 hereof, the license shall
be issued by the Licensing Division.
§ 367-15. Rights conferred by license; transferability; term.
(b) A description of the vehicle, giving the name of the
manufacturer, serial number, motor number and the name of
the person and any other insignia appearing thereon.
(c) The date of purchase of the vehicle and the name and address
of the person from whom acquired.
(d) If the applicant is not the owner, the interest of the applicant in
said vehicle.
(e) If any person, other than the applicant, has any interest
whatsoever in the vehicle, the name and address and interest
of each such person.
(6) Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a crime or
disorderly persons offense or violation of any municipal ordinance
and the nature of each offense, if any, for which convicted.
(7) The names and addresses of persons from whom the products to be
sold, disposed of or offered for sale under this article have been or
are to be purchased for the purpose of resale in the applicant's
business.
C. If the applicant is an employee or representative of any person, there
shall be appended to the application a letter from the employer or
principal authorizing the applicant to act as his representative.
A. The license issued shall not authorize any person, except the person
designated therein, to engage in business thereunder. The license shall
not be transferable from person to person. A separate license shall be
obtained by each peddler and every agent or representative working for
him.
B. Licenses issued under this article shall be valid only for the term of one
year beginning on the first day of May in each year and terminating on
April 30 of the following year.
§ 367-13 PATERSON CODE § 367-16
363:686
§ 367-16. Display of plate or badge.
Upon the issuance of a license, the Licensing Division shall furnish the
licensee with a plate, badge or other evidence bearing a number
corresponding to the number of license and the year in which it is issued.
The plate, badge or other evidence shall be displayed at all times on a
conspicuous part of the vehicle, if any, used by the licensee in the conduct
of his business. If no vehicle shall be used, the license shall be carried by
the licensee and shall be exhibited on demand of any resident of the City or
member of the Police Division.
§ 367-17. License fees. [Amended 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-056]
The fee for a license issued under this article for each yearly period
beginning on the first day of May, for revenue purposes, shall be $140 for
each wagon, pushcart, automobile, bicycle or other vehicle or receptacle in
which the products are carried or from which they are sold. In addition, a
fee of $10 shall be paid for each salesman, except that a license for one
salesman shall be issued without charge upon issuance of the license for
each wagon, pushcart, automobile or other vehicle or receptacle in which
such products are carried or sold.
§ 367-18. Misrepresentation of product.
No peddler licensed under this article shall misrepresent the character or
quality of the merchandise offered for sale.
§ 367-19. Conduct of peddlers.
No peddler licensed under this article shall importune or otherwise annoy
any person for the purpose of effecting a sale.
§ 367-20. Compliance with food laws.
All products sold, disposed of or offered for sale under this article shall
comply with all laws and ordinances of the City relating to food and food
products.
§ 367-21. Suspension or revocation of license; hearing.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 367-22, any license issued under
this article may be revoked by the Council for the violation of any provision
hereof upon notice and hearing. A license may be suspended for a period
of two weeks pending hearing. No part of the license fee shall be returned
upon revocation of the license.
§ 367-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
§ 367-16 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-22
363:687
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 367-22 PATERSON CODE § 367-22
363:688
ARTICLE III
Itinerant Vendors of Photographs and Photographic Services
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 9, Art. 10, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 367-23. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ITINERANT VENDOR OF PHOTOGRAPHS AND PHOTOGRAPHIC
SERVICES — Includes any person, whether as principal or agent, clerk
or employee, either for himself or for any other person or for any body
corporate, or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise who engages
in the business of selling or offering to sell photographs or rendering any
photographic services in the City by means of traveling by any means or
methods from house to house or from street to street or from place to place
and who does not have a permanent local studio within the City which is
equipped to perform a complete job of photography or who intends to close
out and discontinue such studio and business within a period of one year
from the date of commencement thereof.
§ 367-24. License required.
No person shall engage in or carry on the business of itinerant vendor of
photographs and photographic services, as hereinabove defined, in the City
without first having obtained a license issued by the Licensing Division,
after prior approval thereof by the Council.
§ 367-25. Application for license; contents; accompanying items.
A. Application for a license under this article shall be made, in writing, in
duplicate by the applicant, verified under oath, on forms approved by
the Council. The application shall be filed with the Licensing Division.
B. The application shall state the following:
(1) The applicant's full name; his permanent address and local
address, if any.
(2) The name and address of the employer, unless the applicant is selfemployed,
in which event it shall be so stated.
(3) The nature of the photographic services to be offered, sold or
rendered.
(4) A statement of whether or not the applicant has been convicted of a
crime or disorderly persons offense and the nature of each offense,
if any, for which he was convicted and the punishment therefor. If
the applicant is a partnership or corporation, such statement shall
be made as to each partner and each corporate officer, respectively.
§ 367-23 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-25
363:689
§ 367-26. Processing application; furnishing of fingerprints;
investigation of information; report.
§ 367-27. Issuance of license.
Upon submission of the report, the Council at its next meeting shall
consider said application for appropriate action thereon. Upon being
satisfied that the applicant has complied with the requirements of this
article, is of good moral character and is engaged in a project free from
fraud, the Council shall approve the issuance of a license by the Licensing
Division after prior payment of the annual license fee prescribed in
§ 367-28A and the filing of the bond prescribed in § 367-29 and the written
instrument prescribed in § 367-30.
§ 367-28. License fee; term; license not transferable.
§ 367-29. Bond; amount; conditions.
C. The application shall be accompanied by:
(1) A letter from his employer or principal authorizing the applicant to
act as his representative, if the applicant is an employee or
representative of any person, firm or corporation.
(2) Two photographs, size two inches by two inches, of the applicant
taken not more than three months prior to the filing of the
application.
A. Upon the filing of said application, the Licensing Division shall
forthwith forward a copy of the same to the Chief of Police of the City.
The Chief or his designee shall investigate as to the truth of the
information set forth in the application, the character of the applicant
and whether the applicant is engaged in a project free from fraud. In
connection with such investigation, the Chief of Police may require that
the applicant be fingerprinted.
B. The Chief of Police shall report, in writing, to the Council the results of
such investigation and his recommendation for approval or disapproval
of the application.
A. The fee for a license under this article, which is hereby fixed for the
purpose of raising revenue and for regulation, shall be $440. Such
license shall be issued for a term of one year from the date of issuance.
No part of such license fee shall be refunded on account of a cessation
of the licensed business before the term of the license has expired.
[Amended 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-078; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
10-056]
B. No license granted under this article shall be in any manner transferred
or assigned, nor authorize any person other than the person therein
named to carry on the business for which the license was granted.
§ 367-25 PATERSON CODE § 367-29
363:690
§ 367-30. Licensing Division as agent for service of process.
Before a license shall be issued, the applicant shall file with the Licensing
Division an instrument in writing, nominating and appointing the Licensing
Division his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to
acknowledge service or notice of process for and on behalf of said applicant
in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the license and
the bond given as required by the provisions of § 367-29 of this article
or for the performance of the conditions of the bond or for any breach
thereof. It shall also contain recitals to the effect that the applicant consents
and agrees that service of any notice or process may be made upon said
agent and, when so made, shall be as valid as if personally served upon
the applicant according to the laws of this or any other state, and waiving
all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or
manner of service.
§ 367-31. Revocation or suspension of license.
In addition to the penalty prescribed in § 367-33, any license issued under
this article may be suspended or revoked by the Council after due notice
and hearing:
A. Before a license shall issue, the applicant shall execute and post with
the Licensing Division a bond with surety in the sum of $1,000. The
bond shall remain in force one year and be conditioned to indemnify
and pay or reimburse any purchaser of photographs or photographic
services in a sum equal to at least the amount of any payment that such
purchaser may have been induced to make through the
misrepresentation as to the kind, quality or value of such goods or
services, whether the misrepresentation was made by the owners or
their agents or employees either at the time of making the sale or
through any advertisement of any character whatsoever, printed or
circulated or made orally with reference to said goods or services or
any part thereof.
B. Before the issuance of the license, the aforesaid bond shall be approved
as to form and sufficiency by the Corporation Counsel.
A. For any violation by the licensee of any provision of this article.
B. If the business of the licensee is conducted:
(1) In a disorderly or improper manner.
(2) In violation of any law of the United States, the State of New Jersey
or any ordinance of the City.
C. If the person conducting the licensed business is of unfit character to
conduct the same.
D. If the purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to
the detriment of the public.
§ 367-29 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-31
363:691
§ 367-32. Exemptions.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to apply to any person who sells or
offers to sell photographs or renders photographic services wholly for the
benefit of charitable, religious, philanthropic or educational purposes and
from which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by the person
carrying on said projects.
§ 367-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
E. If the license is used for a purpose foreign to that for which the license
was issued.
F. For false statements made in the application.
§ 367-31 PATERSON CODE § 367-33
363:692
ARTICLE IV
Peddlers, Hawkers, Transient Merchants and Itinerant Vendors
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 9, Art. 14, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson; amended in its
entirety 3-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-019]
§ 367-34. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CUSTOMER — Any person who inquires about the purchase of a good
or service or stops to inspect a good or service from one who is in the
business of selling said good or service, without regard to whether or not
the purchase of the good or service is actually completed.
PEDDLER or HAWKER — A person who goes from place to place by
traveling on the streets or from house to house, who stops just long enough
to sell or attempt to sell his goods, wares or merchandise to a particular
person or persons. A "peddler" or "hawker" carries with him the goods,
wares or merchandise in question for the purpose of selling and delivering
them to consumers or buyers.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association or other
entity.
SELL — To give in exchange for money or some other benefit, including but
not limited to money.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT or ITINERANT VENDOR — Includes any person,
whether as principal or agent, who engages in the business of selling goods
or services in the City from a particular location or locations, with the
intent to discontinue such business within one year from the date of its
commencement, including but not limited to sales from motor vehicles and
vacant lots. A business shall be construed to be discontinued not only when
it ceases to be operated in the regular course of business, but also when
its location is changed or the goods sold or services rendered at a given
location are substantially changed.
§ 367-35. License required.
No person, whether peddler, hawker, itinerant vendor or transient
merchant, shall sell any goods, wares, merchandise or services or offer to
sell the same without first obtaining a license therefor, as provided in this
article.
§ 367-36. Exceptions.
A. The requirements of this article shall not apply to any of the following:
(1) Any person already possessing a valid license pursuant to Article II,
Ice Cream Peddlers, Article III, Itinerant Vendors of Photographs
and Photographic Services, or Chapter 243, Food Vending Vehicles.
§ 367-34 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-36
363:693
(2) Sales at wholesale to retail merchants by commercial travelers or
selling agents in the usual course of business.
(3) Wholesale trade shows and/or conventions.
(4) The sale of goods, wares or merchandise by sample catalogue or
brochure for future delivery.
(5) The prearranged delivery of milk, eggs, bread, newspaper or such
other necessary and perishable articles of food or merchandise of
the type commonly delivered on a house-to-house basis.
(6) Garage sales or flea markets properly licensed under Chapter 249,
Garage Sales and Flea Markets.
(7) Any veteran or volunteer fireman who holds a special license issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 shall be exempt from application for a
license but shall be required to comply with all other applicable
sections of this article.
(8) Any new home construction contractor, residential developer,
master plumber or electrical contractor who is licensed or
regulated by any state, county or municipal agency, division,
department or professional board and any contractor of home
improvements as defined in N.J.A.C. 13:45A-16-1 who, in the
normal course of business, advertises or performs his service in the
City of Paterson; provided that any such tradesman complies with
all state, county and municipal regulations enforceable by the City
Construction Official, including but not limited to the regulations
which require him to be licensed in Paterson.
(9) Sale of produce, flowers or other agriculture products, so long as
the sale takes place on the land where the produce is grown, unless
prohibited by the Paterson Zoning and Land Development
Ordinance.
(10) Any bona fide charitable organization or religious society that shall
conduct the sales of personal property, when the proceeds
therefrom shall be applied to the payment of the expenses incurred
in conjunction with the sale or the expenses incurred from the
charitable or religious object for which the organization or society
exists.
(11) Any art, antique or historical society that conducts an exhibition
and sale of art objects, pictures, paintings, prints, historical articles
and furniture generally known and designated as "antiques" and
"kindred objects."
(12) Any agricultural show, fair or garden society selling or closing out
certain of their exhibits, if such society was an incorporated
association not for pecuniary profit of this state prior to March 25,
§ 367-36 PATERSON CODE § 367-36
363:694
§ 367-37. Application for license; contents; accompanying
photograph and fee.
1935, or if incorporated subsequent thereto; such society shall
have a bona fide membership of at least 100 persons.
B. A peddler, hawker, transient merchant or itinerant vendor not
otherwise exempted from the provisions of this article shall not be
relieved or exempted from the provisions of this article by reason or
associating himself temporarily with any local dealer, auctioneer,
trader, contractor or merchant or by conducting such temporary or
transient business in connection with or in the name of any local dealer,
auctioneer, trader, contractor or merchant.
A. Any person desiring a license under this article shall file, on forms
supplied by the Licensing Division, a signed application with the
Licensing Division.
B. The license application shall contain the following:
(1) The name of the applicant, his residential address and his mailing
address.
(2) The purpose for which license is desired.
(3) A declaration to the Licensing Division of the number of days he
proposes to engage in such business, together with a true invoice
or detailed statement of the amount and type of such personal
property he proposes to offer for sale within the City. Itinerant
vendors, transient merchants shall also provide a statement as to
the specific street address(es) of the intended sale location(s), a
letter from the Division of Zoning and Planning stating that the
proposed use is permitted at the locations in question and a letter
from the owner of the intended sale location stating that the
proposed use is permitted.
(4) An instrument nominating and appointing the Licensing Division
his true and lawful agent with full power and authority to
acknowledge service or notice of process for and on behalf of said
applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of
any license issued under this article. It shall also contain a clause
whereby the applicant consents and agrees that service of any
notice or process may be made upon said agent and, when so made,
shall be as valid as if personally served upon the applicant
according to the laws of this state and waiving all claim or right of
error by reason of such acknowledgment of service or manner of
service. The Licensing Division shall keep a record of all notices
and processes served upon it pursuant to the above provisions, and
such records shall contain the date of such service. The Licensing
Division shall also notify the licensee of such service forthwith, by
registered or certified mail addressed to the licensee at the
§ 367-36 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-37
363:695
§ 367-38. Issuance of license; nontransferable; scope of license.
residential address or address of the registered agent, shown on
the licensee's application. Such notification shall be deemed
complete upon mailing.
(5) A signed statement authorizing the Chief of Police or his designee
to have access to the applicant's criminal history and make said
history, if any, a part of this application.
C. The application shall also contain the applicant's New Jersey State sales
tax identification number and proof that the applicant has complied
with the minimum prepaid provisions of said Sales Tax Law.
D. Where said license involves the operation of or sale from a motor
vehicle, the following information must be supplied:
(1) A copy of the driver's license, registration and insurance card for
every driver and motor vehicle, as well as a written statement of
the names, addresses and driver's license numbers of all persons in
said vehicle(s).
(2) A certified copy of the official driving abstract for each driver, along
with a written statement of all convictions for motor vehicle
violations for a period of five years prior to the date of the
application, indicating the date of the conviction, offense and
violation, court of conviction and the penalty imposed.
E. The application shall be accompanied by:
(1) Two recent photographs of the applicant taken within 90 days of
the date of the application, the dimensions of which photograph
shall be two inches by two inches. The photograph shall clearly
show the front view of the applicant's face, without wearing of a hat
by the applicant, and said photograph shall be signed on the
margin by the applicant.
(2) Fees as hereinafter described in this article.
F. An applicant shall notify the Licensing Division in writing regarding any
change in address or other information required to be submitted to the
Licensing Division by this article during the term of the license.
A. When said application has been properly made, the Licensing Division
shall refer the original to the Chief of Police or his designee, who shall
make or cause to be made within 10 days such investigation of the
applicant's business responsibility and character as he deems
necessary for the protection of the public good.
(1) If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of
Police or his designee shall endorse on such application his
disapproval and his reasons therefor and shall return the
§ 367-37 PATERSON CODE § 367-38
363:696
application to the Licensing Division. Any determination by the
Chief of Police or his designee that an application is unsatisfactory
shall be based on one or more of the following findings with respect
to the applicant:
(a) Conviction of a crime or disorderly persons offense involving
moral turpitude. Any applicant who is disqualified as a result of
the above but shall have completed a sentence for the
conviction of any crime of the first, second, third and fourth
degree or equivalent crimes in other states or the federal
system or a disorderly persons offense involving moral
turpitude more than three years prior to the date of this
application or the date of annual renewal of same shall have
the ability to request that the Municipal Council waive this
provision of the licensing requirement. Said request must be in
writing and require action of the Municipal Council regarding
same. The Municipal Council has the discretion to grant said
waiver if it finds the applicant poses no threat with the public
safety, health or welfare of the citizens of Paterson. [Amended
6-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-057]
(b) Prior violation of this article or its predecessor.
(c) Prior violation of the Zoning Ordinance in connection with any
act governed by the provisions of this article.
(2) In the absence of any of the above such findings, the Chief of Police
or his designee shall find the application satisfactory, shall endorse
his approval on the application and shall return the application to
the Licensing Division. If an application is found satisfactory by the
Chief of Police or his designee, the Licensing Division shall issue to
such applicant a proper license in accordance with the application.
B. If an application is found unsatisfactory by the Chief of Police or his
designee and he or his designee has endorsed his disapproval upon the
application, the Licensing Division shall notify the applicant by mail
that the application is disapproved and shall deny the applicant a
license. The applicant shall then have 10 business days from the date of
the decision to file an appeal with the Director of Finance or her
delegate. Said appeal shall be in writing and shall state the grounds for
the appeal. The Director of Finance or her delegate shall then have 10
business days from the date the appeal is filed to render a decision,
which shall state the grounds for the decision and shall be mailed to the
applicant. The ten-business-day time limit may only be extended upon a
showing of good cause by the party requesting the extension.
C. Such issued license shall not be transferable or assignable to any other
person.
D. The license shall permit the licensee to sell or offer to sell services and
goods, wares or merchandise in retail quantities and not at wholesale.
§ 367-38 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-38.1
363:697
§ 367-38.1. Temporary peddler's license. [Added 6-27-2006 by Ord.
No. 06-056]
In the event that the Chief of Police or his designee, pursuant to § 367-38,
finds that an application is unsatisfactory based on the standards set forth
within § 367-38A(1), the applicant may make an application, within 10 days
of said denial, to the City Council for a temporary license. Said application
must be in writing. The City Council shall hold a hearing as to the issuance
of a temporary license and may, in its discretion, issue such temporary
license to the applicant upon a finding that the applicant poses no threat
to the public safety, health, or welfare of the citizens of Paterson. Said
temporary license shall be good for a period of 30 days. After 30 days, the
applicant may request no more than two additional thirty-day extensions of
said temporary license, which will also require City Council approval.
§ 367-39. Fees; term of license.
§ 367-39.1. Prohibited conduct.
A. The license fee for peddlers and hawkers shall be: [Amended
12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-080; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-056]
(1) One hundred sixty-five dollars each for an application covering one
to four individuals.
(2) One hundred ten dollars each for an application covering five to 10
individuals.
(3) Eight hundred eighty dollars total for an application covering 11 to
15 individuals.
(4) Two thousand two hundred dollars total for an application covering
16 to 25 individuals.
B. Licenses for peddlers and hawkers shall be issued for a term of 365
days from the date of issuance.
C. The license fee for transient merchants and itinerant vendors shall be
$220 for each thirty-day period commencing with the date of issuance
until the business is discontinued, its location changes or the goods sold
or services rendered at a given location are substantially changed.
[Amended 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-080; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
10-056]
A. No person shall:
(1) Station, place, set up or maintain his goods, wares or merchandise
on any sidewalk.
(2) Engage in any conduct which shall:
(a) Substantially restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the
pedestrian's right-of-way; it is presumed that the right-of-way
§ 367-38.1 PATERSON CODE § 367-39.1
363:698
is substantially restricted where the unobstructed area
available to pedestrians is less than six feet.
(b) Substantially restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the
ingress or egress from the abutting property.
(c) Create a condition which endangers the safety or health of any
person.
(d) Increase traffic congestion, or cause or increase traffic delay or
hazards.
(e) Cause or constitute a danger to life, health or property; nor
shall any peddler leave any location without first picking up,
removing and disposing of any trash or refuse, whether
resulting from himself or customers, without regard to
whether or not an item was sold to said customers.
(3) Use any vehicle which, when fully loaded with merchandise, cannot
be easily moved and maintained under control by the licensee, his
employee or attendants.
(4) Leave any merchandise or other property unattended at any time
or store, place or leave the same overnight on any sidewalk or
public way within the City.
(5) Engage in the business of selling between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(6) Engage in the business of peddling within 10 feet of any location
where the curb has been depressed to facilitate pedestrian or
vehicle movement.
(7) Engage in the business of peddling on any sidewalk or along any
street which has been designated as a bus stop. For the purpose of
this article, the word "bus stop" shall include the sidewalk and the
adjoining street where that street has been designated as a bus
stop.
(8) Engage in the business of peddling on any sidewalk or along any
street within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, crosswalk or driveway.
(9) Station, place, set up or maintain his cart or goods against display
windows of fixed-location businesses, nor shall they be within 20
feet from an entranceway to any store, theater, library, school,
museum, movie house, sports arena or other place of public
assembly.
(10) Place a vehicle or cart or conduct a general peddling business at a
location in the street where stopping, standing or parking is
prohibited.
(11) Violate any law, ordinance or regulation pertaining to parking or
the operation of a motor vehicle.
§ 367-39.1 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-39.1
363:699
§ 367-40. Records of licenses issued.
The Licensing Division shall keep a record of all such licenses issued by it,
and said record shall set forth the information contained in the application,
the date and fee of each license.
§ 367-41. Display of metal plate or badge.
(12) Act in such a manner as to restrict the continued maintenance of a
clear passageway for vehicles, whether through his own conduct or
that of a customer.
(13) Sell or attempt to sell any good or service from private property
without the consent of the owner.
(14) Sell or attempt to sell any good or service at a location in violation
of the Zoning Ordinances of the City.
(15) Sell or attempt to sell any good or service within the downtown
area. For the purposes of this article, the "downtown area" shall be
defined as the area from the intersection of Main Street and Market
Street, east on Market Street to Memorial Drive and from the
intersection of Market Street and Memorial Drive, northwest along
Memorial Drive to the intersection of Memorial Drive and Main
Street.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person covered by this article to importune,
threaten or otherwise annoy any person for the purpose of effecting a
purchase or to use unreasonably loud or offensively coarse or abusive
language, given the circumstances of the person present and the
setting.
C. For the purpose of sentencing, each violation of each subsection shall
be considered a separate offense.
A. Each wagon, handcart or other vehicle or mobile unit used as provided
in this article shall have upon the outside thereof, in a conspicuous
place, a metal plate with the following words: "License, Paterson, N.J.
No. . . ."
B. Every person licensed under this article who does not use a wagon,
handcart or other vehicle shall wear conspicuously, while engaged in
his occupation, a metal badge with a passport-size photo of the
applicant on which shall be the following words: "License, Paterson, N.J.
No. . . ."
C. The metal plates and badges required by this article shall be furnished
by the Licensing Division.
§ 367-39.1 PATERSON CODE § 367-42
363:700
§ 367-42. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to regulate the businesses referred to in this
article.
§ 367-43. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 367-42 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-43
363:701

ARTICLE V
(Reserved)152
§ 367-44. through § 367-53. (Reserved)
152. Editor's Note: Former Art. V, Transient Merchants and Itinerant Vendors, adopted
12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 9, Art. 17, of the 1979 Revised General Ordinances
of Paterson, as amended, was repealed 3-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-109. See now Art. IV,
Peddlers, Hawkers, Transient Merchants and Itinerant Vendors.
§ 367-44 PARKS AND RECREATION § 367-44
363:703
Chapter 371
PROPERTY REGISTRATION
§ 371-1. Registration of address of nonresident property owners.
Any owner of real property situated within the City of Paterson who does
not reside at that property in the case of residential premises or does
not operate a business at the property in the case of commercial property
shall be required to register with the City Clerk the street address of
his residence. The City Clerk shall maintain a record of said addresses.
Further, the City Clerk may forward a copy of any address registration made
pursuant to this section to the Passaic County Clerk.
§ 371-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
REAL PROPERTY — Any type of real estate, including commercial or
residential, improved or unimproved lots, single-family homes, multiple
dwellings and property held in any manner, including fee simple,
condominium or cooperative forms of ownership.
STREET ADDRESS — The address at which the person actually resides and
shall include a street name or rural delivery route in addition to any postal
office box number which may be included.
§ 371-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of noncompliance with the above-referenced sections
shall receive a fine of no more than $500 on a first offense and no less than
$1,000 on subsequent offenses.
Chapter 373
PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Builders and contractors — See Ch. 153. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
§ 373-1. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
APPROPRIATE LABOR ORGANIZATION — An organization representing,
for collective bargaining purposes, journey level workers and apprentices in
one or more crafts or trades and which:
§ 367-44 PATERSON CODE § 373-1
371:704
CITY OF PATERSON or CITY — The City of Paterson and all public agencies
and authorities created, controlled or directed by the City of Paterson.
PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT — Any contract for the construction,
reconstruction, demolition or renovation of buildings or property at the
public expense for which:
§ 373-2. Labor force requirements.
Operates an apprenticeship training program in an appropriate craft or
trade that is registered with the United States Department of Labor,
Employment and Training Administration, Bureau of Apprenticeship
and Training;
A.
Has entered into a labor agreement with an employer or multiemployers
in the building and construction industry in New Jersey;
B.
Has represented journey level workers, mechanics and apprentices
employed on public construction contracts; and
C.
Possesses the ability to refer, provide or represent qualified and journey
level workers in the crafts or trades required by the public construction
contract in sufficient numbers to perform the contracted work involved
in that contract.
D.
It is required by law that workers be paid the prevailing wage
determined by the Commissioner of Labor pursuant to the provisions
of the New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act, P.L. 1963, c. 150 (N.J.S.A.
34:11-56.26 et seq.); and
A.
The City of Paterson estimates that the total cost of the contract,
exclusive of any land acquisition cost, will equal or exceed $500,000,
and providing part or all of said funding is supplied by or through the
City of Paterson. [Amended 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-006]
B.
A. Mandatory apprenticeship for public construction contracts. All
requests for proposals and specifications for public construction
contracts, and all such contracts, shall require that 20% of the building
trade labor hours required under each such contract shall be performed
by a person or persons enrolled in a local federally registered
apprenticeship program or who are apprenticeship equivalents as that
term is used by the State of New Jersey in the Abbott Project Labor
Agreement (2003). In addition, 50% of all such apprentices shall be
first-year apprentices who shall have completed a preapprenticeship
training program, either approved and funded by the New Jersey
Department of Labor as of January 1, 2003, or approved by the Paterson
Community Apprenticeship Initiative (PCAI), through processes
developed pursuant to § 373-3 of this chapter.
B. Contractors and subcontractors. All public construction contracts must
require that the contractor and subcontractors hire workers in federally
registered apprenticeship programs to comply with this chapter. All
requests for proposals and all specifications relating to public
§ 373-1 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 373-2
371:705
§ 373-3. Paterson Community Apprenticeship Initiative.
construction contracts subject to this chapter shall contain such
requirements.
C. Labor hours. All requests for proposals and all specifications for public
construction contracts, and all such contracts, shall require that 20% of
the labor hours required under such contracts in all trades and at all
levels shall be performed by workers who have participated in a federal
or state approved apprenticeship program or who are apprenticeship
equivalents as that term is used by the Department of Labor of the State
of New Jersey. Apprenticeship equivalents shall be utilized to the extent
permitted by the regulations and guidelines of the Department of Labor
of the State of New Jersey, and they shall be paid prevailing apprentice
wages and shall have identical benefits pending their admission as full
apprentices. In addition, 50% of all said apprentices shall be first-year
apprentices and shall be drawn from PCAI approved preapprenticeship
programs.
D. Special circumstances. In the event that a condition exists whereby
there are not sufficient available applicants to satisfy the labor farce
requirements of this chapter, then the affected contractor or
subcontractor shall be required to supply funding equal to the cost of
training an equivalent number of preapprentices in a PCAI approved
preapprenticeship program. Such contractor or subcontractor must
provide proof to the PCAI that a good-faith effort has been made to
comply with the conditions of this chapter.
A. Establishment. The City of Paterson thereby establishes the Paterson
Community Apprenticeship Initiative (PCAI), to ensure the ongoing
training of preapprentices qualified to apply for federally registered
apprenticeship programs and to provide the support services such
preapprentices need to pursue successful careers in the construction
trades.
B. Advisory Board. The PCAI shall be governed by an Advisory Board of
nine members, comprising the Chairman of the Municipal Council's
Community Development Committee, one member appointed by the
Municipal Council President, one member appointed by the Municipal
Council as a body, two members appointed by the Mayor of the City of
Paterson, one member appointed by the Paterson Board of Education,
one member appointed by the Paterson Housing Authority and two
members selected by representatives of the Passaic County Building
Trades Council and the Carpenters Union.
C. Referral source. The PCAI shall select one or more preapprenticeship
programs to serve as the designated preapprentice referral source for
purposes of this chapter.
D. Operation and curriculum. The PCAI shall supervise the development
and operation of the approved preapprenticeship programs and shall
§ 373-2 PATERSON CODE § 373-3
371:706
§ 373-4. Funding for preapprenticeship programs.
All public construction contracts shall include a requirement that the
contractor and all subcontractors performing work pursuant to such
contracts contribute to the PCAI a certain sum per worker hour projected
to be worked on the project. The PCAI is hereby authorized to adopt this fee
consistent with the laws of the State of New Jersey and the Code of the City
of Patterson. This contractor contribution rate shall be calculated according
to a formula to be determined by the PCAI that takes into account the cost
of operating a preapprenticeship program such that there will be adequate
funding to ensure the graduation of workers sufficient to perform 20% of
the work hours projected for each public construction contract, and also
to provide adequate funding to cover the costs of monitoring compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. The imposition of such fee, however,
shall require approval by resolution of the Municipal Council of the City of
Paterson.
§ 373-5. Inclusion of minorities and women.
Public construction contracts shall require that 20% of the labor force be
composed of women and minority group members, as that term is defined
by N.J.S.A. 40A:11-41. All requests for proposals and specifications for
public construction contracts shall set forth this requirement.
§ 373-6. Monitoring and enforcement.
retain authority to review and approve their curriculum and procedures
for recruiting and selecting participants. The PCAI shall ensure that all
approved preapprenticeship programs are operated in such a manner
that successful graduates of the preapprenticeship programs will be
equipped and eligible for entry into the apprenticeship programs of the
Passaic County Building Trades Council and the Carpenters Union.
E. Preparatory services. The PCAI shall ensure that the selected
preapprenticeship programs provide all necessary preparatory services
for enrolled preapprentices, including assistance with GED
preparation, obtaining drivers' licenses where appropriate, mentoring
and other supportive services for preapprentices.
F. Training and monitoring. The PCAI stall administer the training and
monitor the funding utilized to provide the preapprenticeship programs
approved hereunder.
G. Duty to enforce. The PCAI shall coordinate, monitor and enforce the
requirements of this chapter so as to ensure that the apprentices are
being utilized by the contractors and subcontractors in public
construction contracts as required by this chapter.
A. Declaration of compliance. Each proposed contractor and
subcontractor subject to the provisions of this chapter shall submit to
the City of Paterson a completed certified declaration of compliance
§ 373-3 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 373-6
371:707
form as part of its proposal in response to a request for proposals and
in order to meet the City specifications. The completed declaration of
compliance form shall be made part of the executed contract and shall
be in a form approved by the City.
B. Contractors and subcontractors. All contractors in public construction
contracts shall require that their subcontractors comply with the
provisions of this chapter. Language indicating the subcontractor's
agreement to comply shall be included in the contract between the
contractor and subcontractor. Copies of such agreements shall be
submitted to the City for approval.
(1) Reports. All contractors and subcontractors shall report to the
PCAI and the City by March 31, June 30, September 30 and
December 31 of each year and shall provide the following
information certified and notarized:
(a) The workforce employed during that quarter on public
construction contracts;
(b) The value of contracts and subcontracts covered by this
chapter;
(c) The name, address, date of hire, occupation classification,
apprenticeship status, rate of pay and benefits provided to
each of the employees of the contractor and subcontractor; and
(d) The number and percentage of hours worked by apprentices on
said contacts.
(2) Records. Contractors and subcontractors shall maintain certified
payroll records for all employees and shall preserve them for a
period of three years after completion of the public construction
contract, making such records available within 10 days of a written
request authorized by this chapter.
(3) Site and records access. All contractors and subcontractors subject
to this chapter shall permit appropriate access for representatives
of the City and the PCAI to all worksites and to all applicable
records of the contractor or subcontractor in order to monitor
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
C. City Council hearings. The Municipal Council of the City of Paterson
may hold public hearings at times to be determined by the Council with
respect to the implementation of this chapter.
(1) PCAI reports. Prior to any such hearing, the PCAI shall provide
relevant reporting information to the City Council, including the
following items:
(a) The number of apprentices who worked on public construction
contracts during the reporting period;
§ 373-6 PATERSON CODE § 373-6
371:708
Chapter 377
(b) The number of individuals trained and approved by
preapprenticeship programs who became apprentices during
the reporting period;
(c) The number and percentage of women and minority group
members who were employed in public construction contracts
during the reporting period; and
(d) Detailed reports disclosing any violations found and sanctions
imposed.
D. City remedies. In the event the City determines that any contractor or
subcontractor has failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter, it
shall have available all legal remedies.
(1) Options. Such remedies shall include, but not be limited to, all
remedies available at law or in equity and all such remedies
included in the specifications or contract, which may provide for:
(a) Suspending or terminating the contract;
(b) Completing the contract and requiring the contractor or
subcontractor to pay all damages and costs in utilizing a
substitute contractor or subcontractor;
(c) Debarring the contractor or subcontractor from eligibility for
future City contracts;
(d) Requiring the refunding of payments made by the City to the
contractor or subcontractor prior to the suspension or
termination; and
(e) Assessing a daily fine and other penalties payable to the City of
Paterson. A schedule of fines and penalties necessary to
enforce this chapter shall be recommended by the PCAI and
enacted by ordinance of the City Council. The City shall
withhold funds from any final payment due to covered
contractors in an amount sufficient to cover unpaid fees or
potential penalties for shortfalls regarding the apprenticeship
requirements of this chapter. Such fines and penalties shall be
not less than 3% nor more than 10% of the total price of the
contract in question.
(2) Notice and hearing. In the event the City has good cause to believe
that any contractor or subcontractor has failed to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, said contractor or subcontractor shall be
given written notice and afforded an opportunity for a hearing
before the Municipal Council before the imposition of the sanctions
set forth in this section.
§ 373-6 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 373-6
371:709
RECORDS, AVAILABILITY OF
§ 373-6 PATERSON CODE § 373-6
371:710
ARTICLE I
Vital Statistics Records
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 13, Art. 27, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 377-1. Fee for searches and certified copies of records; revision to
records. [Amended 5-19-1981 by Ord. No. 81-027; 4-14-1992 by Ord.
No. 92-009; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-073; 12-16-2003 by Ord. No.
03-092; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-071]
Requests for searches or certified copies of the records of births, deaths and
marriages filed in the Bureau of Vital Statistics of the City shall be made to
the registrar and shall be accompanied by the fee of $25, plus $5 for each
additional certified copy, plus $1 if mailing is requested. Revisions to the
aforesaid records will be made for a fee of $10 each, such fee to be waived
in cases of correction of typographical errors or errors of the Bureau of Vital
Statistics.
§ 377-2. Issuance of certificate; additional searches and fees.
§ 377-3. Disposition of fees.
All fees paid for searches or certified copies of records as provided by
§ 377-1 of this article shall be deposited with the Treasurer in the same
manner as all other moneys received by the Treasurer.
§ 377-4. Limitations on persons requesting searches and certified
copies of certain records.
No request shall be accepted from any person for a search or certified
copy of a record of birth, death or marriage other than from the person
named in such record or from the parent, guardian or attorney or other
A. If a three-year search of the records of the Bureau of Vital Statistics of
the City discloses the requested record of birth, death or marriage, the
Registrar shall, at the request of the applicant, issue a certified copy of
such record without an additional fee.
B. If a three-year search does not disclose the requested record of birth,
death or marriage, the applicant shall be so advised, but the fee of $10
as prescribed by § 377-1 of this article shall be retained by the City.
[Amended 5-19-1981 by Ord. No. 81-027; 4-14-1992 by Ord. No.
92-009; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-073]
C. If the applicant shall request an additional search beyond the threeyear
period, an additional fee of $1 shall be paid by him to the Registrar
for each year searched beyond the original three-year period regardless
of whether the additional search is successful, but such additional
search shall be limited to four additional years. [Amended 4-14-1992
by Ord. No. 92-009]
§ 377-1 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 377-4
371:711
authorized representative of such person or as may be provided by law or
by the judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 377-5. Request for search of record of legal change of name; fee.
§ 377-6. Issuance of certified copies of record of legal change of
name; fee. [Amended 5-19-1981 by Ord. No. 81-027; 4-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-009; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-073]
If certified copies of the record of the Bureau showing a legal change of
name are requested, the Registrar shall issue such certified copies upon
payment by the applicant of $10 for each certified copy issued.
§ 377-7. Certified copies issued without fees.
Certified copies of records of the Bureau of Vital Statistics of the City shall
be issued by the Registrar, without fee, where such request is made, in
writing, by:
A. Requests for a search of the record filed in the Bureau of Vital Statistics
respecting a legal change of name of a person shall be made to the
Registrar and shall be accompanied by the fee prescribed by
Subsection B of this section.
B. The fee for each search of the record of a legal change of name for a
person is $10 for the initial search, which fee shall be retained by the
City whether or not the search discloses the record requested. If the
records disclose the information requested, a fee of $1 shall be charged
for each additional person affected by the court judgment permitting
such change of name. [Amended 5-19-1981 by Ord. No. 81-027;
4-14-1992 by Ord. No. 92-009; 10-27-1998 by Ord. No. 98-073]
A. Authorized persons with respect to:
(1) Veterans' benefits.
(2) Veterans' allotments.
B. Public agencies for such records for official public purposes.
§ 377-4 PATERSON CODE § 377-7
371:712
ARTICLE II
Copies of Public Records from Police Division; Fingerprinting
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 20, Art. 9, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 377-8. Fees for copies.
The following fees shall be charged and collected by the Police Division
for furnishing photostatic copies or machine-duplicated copies of public
records or photographs in the possession or custody of the Police Division:
§ 377-9. Fingerprinting fees. [Amended 3-4-1980 by Ord. No.
80-011; 1-19-1982 by Ord. No. 81-087A]
A. For any copies of documents and reports: [Amended 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068]
(1) First page to 10th page: $0.75 per page.
(2) Eleventh page to 20th page: $0.50 per page.
(3) All pages over 20 pages: $0.25 per page.
B. Photographs.
(1) For any eight-by-ten photograph: $3 per copy.
(2) For any three-by-five photograph: $3 per copy.
A. Qualified members of the Police Division of the City may perform
fingerprinting service for members of the general public. The service
shall be provided in that area set aside for the purpose of fingerprinting
in the Police Division, Paterson, New Jersey. Fingerprint cards will be
provided by the party requesting the fingerprinting service.
B. Hours of fingerprinting services.
(1) The fingerprinting service as set forth in Subsection A hereinabove
shall be available at the Police Division of the City during the
following hours:
(a) Monday: 12:00 noon to 3:30 p.m.
(b) Tuesday through Friday, inclusive: 10:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m.
(2) The services as provided during these hours shall be subject to the
priority of demands of Police Division personnel for providing
official fingerprinting services such as for the booking of prisoners.
C. Fees; exemptions.
(1) The fee for the fingerprinting service to be provided for members of
the general public is $10 per fingerprint card. [Amended
6-11-1991 by Ord. No. 91-029]
§ 377-8 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 377-9
371:713
§ 377-10. Disposition of fees.
All fees collected under the provisions of this article shall be deposited with
the Revenue Collections Division within the Department of Finance.
§ 377-11. Confidential material.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as requiring the Police
Division to furnish any copy of any record unless the same is a public record.
§ 377-12. Public examination and copying permitted.
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit or prevent any person
from examining any public records in the possession of the Police Division
or from making his own written copy thereof.
(2) No fee shall be paid for fingerprinting services when the services
are required for the issuance of municipal licenses or permits to be
issued by the City, the licenses and permits including but not
limited to firearms purchasers' activity, solicitor and canvasser
permits, applicants for alcoholic beverage control licenses, special
police applicants and others as may be required from time to time
by ordinance. [Amended 1-19-1982 by Ord. No. 81-087A]
D. The hours that the services are to be provided and the fees to be
charged for the services rendered shall be posted in a prominent place
in the main lobby of City Hall and in the reception area of the Police
Division of the City. [Amended 1-19-1982 by Ord. No. 81-087A]
§ 377-9 PATERSON CODE § 377-12
371:714
ARTICLE III
Fees for Police Motor Vehicle Accident Reports
[Adopted 6-3-1981 byOrd. No. 81-035]
§ 377-13. Fees established by statute.
Copies of police motor vehicle reports may be purchased in person at the
fees established by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-2.
§ 377-14. Additional fee for requests not made in person.
Pursuant to P.L. 1981, c. 105,153 copies of Public Motor Vehicle Reports
may be purchased, when requested other than in person, at an additional
fee of $5 for the first three pages and $1 per page thereafter to cover
administrative costs.
153. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 39:4-131.
§ 377-13 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 377-14
371:715

ARTICLE IV
Transcripts by the Court Stenographer
[Adopted 10-9-1979 byOrd. No. 79-092]
§ 377-15. Fees for copies.
The following fees shall be charged and collected by the City Clerk for
copies of transcripts by the Court Stenographer:
A. For any single page of transcript: $2.50 per copy.
B. For each additional page of transcript: $2.50 per copy.
§ 377-15 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 377-15
371:717
Chapter 381
RENT LEVELING
§ 381-1. Statement of policy. [Amended 6-18-1985 by Ord. No.
85-055]
The governing body of the City of Paterson does hereby declare that:
A. An emergency exists within the City of Paterson with respect to the
rental of housing space in dwellings.
B. This emergency has been created by housing demolitions, deterioration
of a substantial portion of the existing housing stock, insufficient new
housing construction, increased cost of construction and finance and
growing inflation. This has caused high rents and a substantial and
increasing shortage of rental housing accommodations for families of
low and moderate income.
C. Unless residential rents of tenants are regulated and controlled, such
emergency and the further inflationary pressures resulting therefrom
will produce serious threats to the public health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the City of Paterson.
D. The fear of being evicted without just cause and being forced to seek
housing in such a market discourages tenants from complaining about
exorbitant increases in rent and about the continued deterioration of
housing, and this fear thus contributes to these harmful conditions; this
warrants legislative action by the governing body.
E. Legislative action by the governing body shall serve the interests of:
(1) Tenants, in terms of assuring their occupancy of well-maintained
and improved housing at fair and reasonable levels of rent.
(2) Landlords, in terms of assuring them as far as possible rentals
which will yield a fair return on their investments while affording
them the opportunity to make expenditures designed to upgrade
the quality of the housing stock.
(3) The City of Paterson, in terms of assuring the maintenance of the
fiscal well-being of the City to the extent that this well-being is
based on the taxing of real property and on the welfare of tenants
and landlords as well as on the preservation of good housing and
the enhancement of neighborhoods.
F. Except as otherwise set forth, it is the intent of this chapter to exercise
control over rents in existing housing stock to the maximum extent,
excluding control over federally and state subsidized housing.
G. Under the police powers granted to the City of Paterson and in order to
protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of
§ 377-15 PATERSON CODE § 381-1
371:718
§ 381-2. Definitions. [Amended 3-4-1980 by Ord. No. 80-009;
1-6-1981 by Ord. No. 80-063; 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055]
The following terms whenever used or referred to in this chapter shall have
the following respective meanings for the purposes of this chapter, unless a
different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ADMINISTRATOR — Rent Leveling Administrator.[Amended 12-19-1995
by Ord. No. 95-068]
BASE RENT — The legal rent charged or actually received by the landlord
for the rental of a housing space on January 11, 1976; or if not occupied
at that date, the "base rent" shall be that actually charged to and received
from the previous tenant; plus any increases under this chapter except tax
capital improvement surcharge increases.[Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord.
No. 17-022]
BOARD — The Rent Leveling Board.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A permanent improvement that must benefit
the dwelling and can be reasonably expected to last more than five years.
DWELLING — Any building or structure rented or offered for rent to one or
more tenants for family residential units.
EQUITY IN REAL PROPERTY INVESTMENT — The actual cash contribution
of the purchaser at the time of closing of title and any principal payments to
outstanding mortgages.
FAIR MARKET VALUE OF REAL ESTATE — Presumed to be assessed value
of said property divided by the county equalization ratio for Paterson. Any
owner may also introduce an appraisal of said property in an effort to
rebut the formula definition of "fair market value" set forth above. The Rent
Leveling Board may accept or reject the fair market value set forth in an
appraisal and shall set forth the reasons for said action.
FAIR RETURN — The percentage of return on equity in real property
investment. Amount of return shall be measured by the net income before
depreciation.
HOUSING SPACE — Includes that portion of a dwelling rented or offered
for rent for living and dwelling purposes with all privileges, services,
furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements connected
with the use or occupancy of such portion of the real property.
LANDLORD — An owner, lessor, sublessor or any other person entitled to
receive rent for the use of occupancy of any dwelling unit, or any agency or
successor of any of the aforegoing.
LIVING AREA — The amount of total rentable space applicable to any given
housing space, measured either in terms of rooms or square footage.
Paterson, it is necessary to regulate, control and stabilize rents and
create a Rent Leveling Board for the City of Paterson.
§ 381-1 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 381-2
371:719
NET INCOME BEFORE DEPRECIATION — Annual income derived from the
dwelling after reasonable allowances for the following items of expenses
are considered: heating fuel; utilities; real estate taxes; insurance; payroll;
janitorial materials; painting and decorating; repairs and replacements;
additions to furniture and furnishings; and allowances for vacancies and
uncollectibles.
RENT — Any price for the use of a housing space. It includes any charge,
no matter how set forth, paid by the tenant for the use of any service in
connection with the housing space. Security deposits, late fees and charges
for accessories, such as air conditioners, boats, mobile homes, garages and
automobiles not used in connection with the housing space, shall not be
construed as "rent."[Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
REPRESENTATIVE — A person who acts on behalf of a tenant or landlord
before the Rent Leveling Board.[Amended 1-28-1986 by Ord. No.
86-010]
ROOMING HOUSE — Any building, together with any related structure,
accessory building, any land appurtenant thereto and any part thereof,
which contains two or more units of dwelling space arranged or intended
for single room occupancy, exclusive of any such unit occupied by an
owner or operator, including any residential hotel or congregate living
arrangement, but excluding any hotel, motel or established guest house
wherein a minimum of 85% of the units of dwelling space are offered for
limited tenure only, any foster home, as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4C-26.1,
any community residence for the developmentally disabled, as defined in
N.J.S.A. 30:11B-2, any dormitory owned or operated on behalf of any
nonprofit institution of primary, secondary or higher education for the use
of its students, any building arranged for single-room occupancy wherein
the units of dwelling space are occupied exclusively by students enrolled in
a full-time course of study at an institution of higher education approved by
the Department of Higher Education and any facility or living arrangement
operated by or under contract with any state department or agency upon
the written authorization of the Commissioner.
SERVICE — The provision of electric power, heat, hot water, maintenance,
painting, elevator service, air conditioning, storm windows, screens,
superintendent service, kitchen, bath, laundry facilities and privileges,
refuse removal, furnishings, parking and any other benefit, privilege or
facility connected with the use or occupancy of any dwelling or housing
space.
SERVICE RENT INCREASE — Refers to an additional charge over and
above the rental due to new or additional services. Existing services may be
subject to a "service rent increase" also, under extenuating circumstances
as may be determined by the Rent Leveling Board.
SUBSTANTIAL COMPLIANCE — The housing space and dwelling are
essentially in compliance with the municipal health, safety, housing and fire
codes.
§ 381-2 PATERSON CODE § 381-2
371:720
SUBSTANTIALLY REHABILITATED RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — Defined
in § 381-12 of this chapter.[Amended 4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-012]
TENANT — A tenant, lessee or any other person entitled under the terms of
a rental housing agreement to the use or occupancy of any rental unit.
§ 381-3. Rent leveling established. [Amended 6-18-1985 by Ord. No.
85-055]
§ 381-4. Rent Leveling Board; membership; terms; meetings;
operation; records. [Amended 2-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-005;
8-4-1981 by Ord. No. 81-043; 3-5-1985 by Ord. No. 85-020;
6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055]
A. Establishment of rents between a landlord and tenant in dwellings to
which this chapter is applicable shall hereafter be determined by the
provisions of this chapter.
B. Any rental increase in excess of that authorized by the provisions of this
chapter shall be void and reimbursed to the tenant(s) who were
overcharged and the landlord subject to the provisions of § 381-22.
C. All rents for rental of housing space and services in dwellings to which
this chapter is applicable are hereby controlled at the base rent level
received by the landlord as of January 11, 1976, and no rental increases
shall be hereinafter demanded or paid except as provided in this
chapter.
D. No new leases shall be executed or performed except as provided in
this chapter, and the base rent level in leased housing space shall be the
rental in effect at the expiration of the existing lease.
E. Notwithstanding any language to the contrary, this chapter shall apply
to all dwellings offered for rent within the City of Paterson of three or
more units when the dwelling is owner-occupied, or two or more units if
the dwelling is not owner-occupied. [Added 3-28-2017 by Ord. No.
17-022]
A. There is hereby continued a Rent Leveling Board within the
Department of Health and Human Services. The Board shall consist of
11 members. Nine members shall be appointed by the Council and two
members shall be appointed by the Mayor. The composition shall be five
tenants, four landlords, and two homeowners. The terms shall be for
periods of two years. Tenant and homeowner Board members shall
reside in the City during their tenure. Three landlord Board members
shall reside in the City during their tenure. [Amended 8-28-2001 by
Ord. No. 01-043; 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078; 3-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-022]
B. Disqualification for interest; removal. No member of the Rent Leveling
Board shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has,
either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interests.
§ 381-2 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 381-4
371:721
Members may be removed for inefficiency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office by the Council at its discretion after proper
hearing.
C. Disclosures by candidates. Candidates for the position of Rent Leveling
Board member shall submit a verified statement listing all of their
interest and dealings in real property, including but not limited to the
ownership, sale or management of real property during the previous
three years.
D. Attendance required. Unless otherwise provided by law, no member of
the Board shall be allowed to vote on a case for which that member has
not been present for the full hearing or hearings concerning said case.
E. Compensation. All members of the Rent Leveling Board shall serve
without compensation. [Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
F. Rules and regulations; public inspection of documents. The Rent
Leveling Board shall issue and abide by such rules and regulations,
including those which are contained in this section, as will further the
purposes of this chapter. All rules and regulations shall be promulgated
by the Council by ordinance and filed in the City Clerk's office. All rules
and regulations, internal staff memorandum and written
correspondence explaining the decisions and policies of the Board shall
be kept in the office of the Board and shall be available to the public for
inspection and copying.
G. Meetings. Pursuant to the Sunshine Law,154 the Board shall determine
the schedule of meetings and hearings as necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. Special meetings may be called as provided
by law. All meetings shall be open to the public. Rent adjustments shall
be conducted during regularly scheduled meetings and in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. The Board shall hold a minimum of
six regularly scheduled meetings per year. [Amended 3-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-022]
H. For the purpose of convening a meeting, six Board members shall
constitute a quorum, at least one of whom shall be a tenant member,
one of whom shall be a landlord and one of whom shall be a homeowner.
In the event that a proper quorum is convened at the beginning of a
meeting pursuant to this section and Board members later leave said
meeting while in progress, any remaining eight members, regardless of
appointment designation, shall constitute a quorum. [Amended
8-28-2001 by Ord. No. 01-043; 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
I. Dockets. The Board shall maintain and keep at its office rent adjustment
hearing dockets. The dockets shall list the time, date, place of hearing,
the names of the parties involved and the final disposition of the
petitions heard by the Board.
154. Editor's Note: See the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 381-4 PATERSON CODE § 381-4
371:722
J. Languages. All rules, notices, orders and regulations of the Rent
Leveling Board shall be printed in English, Spanish and other
languages as deemed necessary based on the availability of funds.
Information disseminated to the public by the Board may be
disseminated in English, Spanish and other languages as deemed
necessary based on the availability of funds. At the request of a Board
member or party to a hearing, provision shall be made for concurrent
oral translation of any hearings before the Board into Spanish and other
languages as deemed necessary based on the availability of funds.
[Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
K. Registration of dwelling units.
(1) The Board shall require registration of all dwelling units to be
provided upon enactment of this chapter. An annual update is
required if there is any change in status. In lieu of an annual
update, the landlord is required to submit a registration with all
applications to the Rent Leveling Office. This registration shall
include the following:
(a) The address of each dwelling unit.
(b) The name and usual address of the manager of the dwelling.
(c) The name and usual address of the owner or person authorized
to act for and on behalf of the owner for the purpose of
receiving services of process and for the purpose of receiving
and receipting all notices and demands.
(d) The rents for each unit.
(e) The housing services provided for the unit or the occupants or
tenants thereof.
(f) The surcharge, if any, presently being charged.
(g) The surcharge expiration date.
(h) The date of the last increase.
(2) Registration must be completed within a six-month period after
adoption of this chapter.
(3) All registration forms shall be provided by the Rent Leveling Office
and shall be included in the tax bills to be mailed in the next tax
period. [Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
L. Records. A copy of this registration information shall be kept at the
office of the Board.
M. Board members absent from three or more consecutive meetings or five
meetings during the course of an appointment year shall be subject to
immediate consideration for a request of dismissal by the Board. This
§ 381-4 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 381-4
371:723
§ 381-5. Powers of Rent Leveling Board; hearings; determinations;
requests for increases and decreases. [Amended 2-5-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-005; 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
§ 381-6. Rent Leveling Board Attorney. [Amended 2-5-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-005]
recommendation will be forwarded to the City Council for prompt
action.
A. The Rent Leveling Board is hereby granted and shall have and exercise,
in addition to other powers herein granted, all powers necessary and
appropriate to see that the purposes of this chapter are carried out and
executed, including but not limited to the following:
(1) To issue such procedural rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter, provided that
such rules and regulations are adopted pursuant to the provisions
of § 381-4F.
(2) To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to
help them comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) To hear and decide, when the procedures set forth in § 381-10 lead
to no agreement, all requests for increases or decreases in the
amounts paid by the tenant to the landlord.
(4) To issue subpoenas requiring the production of witnesses and
documents and to take testimony and swear in witnesses in the
execution of its power.
B. Corporation Counsel shall assign a current City Attorney to the Rent
Leveling Board who shall be given compensatory time.
C. The duties of the Rent Leveling Board Attorney shall be as follows:
(1) To attend scheduled Board meetings and advise on matters of
official procedure and law which come before the Board.
(2) To be available for legal consultation with the Board personnel,
members and staff.
A. There is hereby continued the position of Attorney to the Rent Leveling
Board.
B. The Council shall annually appoint an Attorney to the Rent Leveling
Board. The Attorney shall be paid an annual salary as provided by
ordinance.
C. The duties of the Rent Leveling Board Attorney shall be as follows:
(1) To attend monthly Board meetings and advise on matters of official
procedure and law which come before the Board.
§ 381-4 PATERSON CODE § 381-6
371:724
§ 381-7. Rent Leveling Board Secretary. [Amended 2-5-1980 by Ord.
No. 80-005; 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055; 3-28-2017 by Ord. No.
17-022]
§ 381-8. Appeals; fee; transcript of proceeding. [Amended 2-5-1980
by Ord. No. 80-005; 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055; 12-23-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-048; 4-28-1987 by Ord. No. 87-015; 2-13-1990 by Ord.
No. 90-004]
(2) To be available for legal consultation with the Board personnel,
members and staff.
A. There is hereby continued the position of Secretary to the Rent Leveling
Board. Said position shall be filled by the Rent Leveling Administrator,
who shall be given compensatory time.
B. The duties of the Secretary to the Rent Leveling Board shall be as
follows:
(1) To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants and
to help them to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) To keep an accurate record of the procedures of the Board and to
enter the same upon the minutes.
(3) To receive all applications and to process the same for
determination by the Rent Leveling Board.
(4) To submit a monthly report of the activities of the Rent Leveling
Board to the Council.
(5) To perform such other duties as the Rent Leveling Board may
specify.
A. Both the landlord and the tenant may appeal the findings of any
determination of the Board to the Council by filing an appeal with the
City Clerk within a period of 15 days from the date notification of the
determination of the Board is received. The fee for filing said appeal
should be $20, payable to the City Clerk upon the filing of said appeal.
The applicant should also bear the responsibility for the cost of
preparation of the transcript of the Rent Leveling Board proceeding,
which cost shall be a current charge for such transcript as quoted by a
certified shorthand reporter. The applicant shall arrange with a
certified shorthand reporting firm for preparation of the transcript, and
the applicant shall be responsible for the deposit and payment for the
same directly to said certified shorthand reporting firm. Upon being
notified by the certified shorthand reporting firm retained by the
applicant, the Secretary to the Rent Leveling Board, after making a
copy of the audiocassette tape(s) of the meeting in question, shall
forward the original tape(s) to the certified shorthand reporting firm
retained by the applicant. The above copies of the transcript of the Rent
Leveling Board proceedings which form the basis of the appeal shall be
§ 381-6 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 381-8
371:725
§ 381-9. Office of Rent Leveling; appointment of Rent Leveling
Administrator. [Amended 2-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-005; 11-23-2010
by Ord. No. 10-078; 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
received by the City Clerk prior to the matter being heard by the City
Council. Such transcripts shall be received by the City Clerk within 90
days of the filing of the appeal or the appeal shall be dismissed by the
City Council, subject to being reopened upon a finding of good cause
for such late receipt of transcript by the City Council upon a written
request by the applicant which is on notice to the opposing party and
the Secretary of the Rent Leveling Board. [Amended 5-28-1996 by
Ord. No. 96-036; 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-017]
B. Any appeal to the Council of a determination of the Board shall be heard
by the Council solely on the basis of the record before the Rent Leveling
Board and without recourse to a de novo hearing. In the event that no
record of proceedings before the Rent Leveling Board shall exist,
regardless of the reason for the absence of such transcript, the Council
shall not have jurisdiction to hear said appeal. Under no circumstances
shall the Council have jurisdiction to conduct de novo hearings on
appeals from actions of the Rent Leveling Administrator or Rent
Leveling Board. This provision shall not affect the ability of any
applicant to appeal the actions of the Rent Leveling Administrator or
the Rent Leveling Board to a court of competent jurisdiction.
[Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
C. The City Council shall hear any appeal from the Rent Leveling Board
within 45 days after receipt of a complete transcript of the proceeding
below or within such extension of time as may be consented by the
appellant, provided that the appellant has paid the fees as required in
Subsection A above. Notice of the appeal shall be sent by certified mail
to the appellant and all persons appearing at the rent leveling hearing
below at least 10 days prior to the scheduled hearing. Notice shall be
effective upon mailing.
D. All contested rent increases or surcharges shall be kept in an interestbearing
escrow account administered jointly by the landlord and the
Rent Leveling Administrator pending the outcome of an appeal and/or
final adjudication of the case. Whenever, under this chapter, rent
increase or surcharges are put in an interest-bearing account, the
interest earned thereon will be paid to whomever wins the appeal of
final adjudication.
A. There is hereby continued within the Department of Health and Human
Services an Office of Rent Leveling, as heretofore created, the head of
which shall be the Rent Leveling Administrator. The Rent Leveling
Administrator shall possess all the qualifications necessary to
administer this chapter and the Office of Rent Leveling.
B. The Rent Leveling Administrator is a Civil Service titled position and
shall be appointed by the Director of the Department of Health and
§ 381-8 PATERSON CODE § 381-9
371:726
§ 381-10. Powers and functions of Rent Leveling Administrator.
[Amended 2-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-005; 6-18-1985 by Ord. No.
85-055]
Human Services. The Rent Leveling Administrator shall be a resident of
the City.
C. The annual salary for the position of Rent Leveling Administrator shall
be established by the Administration and approved by the Council.
A. Under the direction of the Rent Leveling Board, the Rent Leveling
Administrator shall have the following powers and functions:
(1) To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants and
to bring together tenants and landlords in informal conferences
and suggest resolutions of conflicts between them, in order to help
them comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(2) To remedy violations of this chapter by ordering rebates and
increases and bringing appropriate legal charges as provided in
this chapter.
(3) To accept and process complaints from tenants of illegal rental
increases, provided that all claims are sworn to and acknowledged
by a person authorized by law to administer oaths.
(4) To accept and process applications from landlords for rental
increases under the hardship, exemption, capital improvement and
service rent increase and tax surcharge provisions of this chapter,
provided that all applications are sworn to and acknowledged by a
person authorized by law to administer oaths.
(5) To review applications and investigate complaints prior to a
decision being rendered in any case.
(6) To collect and update housing data to include property owner
contact information. [Added 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
B. Any rebate ordered by the Rent Leveling Administrator or the Board
shall be considered a penalty against the landlord if said rebate is not
made to the tenant within 30 days of the service of a final determination
by the Administrator or the Board. The Administrator or Board may
authorize a reduction in rent until such time as the overpayment is
reimbursed. The tenant may bring an action in the Municipal Court for
the collection of this penalty after the time allowed as provided in New
Jersey Court Rules 4:70-1.
C. In case of failure by a tenant to pay rents as determined by the
Administrator or the Board, the landlord may resort to the appropriate
legal remedies for nonpayment of rent.
§ 381-9 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 381-10
371:727
§ 381-11. Exemptions, limitations and prohibitions. [Amended
2-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-005; 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055]
D. Recommendations of the Rent Leveling Administrator shall be final
unless, within 30 days of the service of such recommendations, an
aggrieved party appeals to the Rent Leveling Board under § 381-5.
E. Any rebate for payment of rent in excess of the maximum lawful rent
shall include the excess payments plus the maximum passbook demand
deposit savings account interest rate in the City. Any such payment of
interest shall not be reimbursable under the hardship provision of this
chapter.
A. The following types of dwellings are exempt from this chapter:
(1) Buildings in which only one dwelling unit is rented.
(2) Motels.
(3) Hotels.
(4) Multiple dwellings constructed after December 23, 1999, for a
period of time not to exceed the period of amortization of any initial
mortgage loan obtained for the multiple dwelling, or for 30 years
following completion of construction, whichever is less. In the
event there is not initial mortgage financing, the period of
exemption from this chapter shall be 30 years from the completion
of construction. [Amended 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
(5) Substantially rehabilitated residential structures, as defined in
§ 381-12 of this chapter, and for a period as specified in § 381-13 of
this chapter. [Amended 4-24-1990 by Ord. No. 90-012]
(6) Dwelling units which are certified by the Director of the
Department of Community Development or his designee as part of
the City's neighborhood preservation or rehabilitation program
within the City's innovative grant program or as being in
accordance with an agreement, determined by the Director or his
designee to have been voluntarily arrived at, between the landlord
or his duly authorized representative and a tenant or tenants
occupying premises of the landlord, which agreement shall be
certified by the Director of the Department of Community
Development or his designee to be in accordance with the interests
directed to be served by the governing body in § 381-1E of this
chapter.
(7) Rooming houses, licensed by the Director of the Department of
Community Development or his designee, the Division of
Community Improvements or the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs.
§ 381-10 PATERSON CODE § 381-11
371:728
§ 381-12. Guidelines and qualifications for exemptions for
substantially rehabilitated structures. [Added 4-24-1990 by Ord. No.
90-012]
(8) Housing developments owned or subsidized by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), the New
Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency (HMFA) or
regulated by the New Jersey Public Housing and Development
Authority. [Added 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
B. Any landlord seeking to convert to a co-op or condominium must file
appropriate notification with the Rent Leveling Board. The Rent
Leveling Board may request any additional information necessary to
see that the landlord is in compliance with all state and federal laws.
C. The owner of any multiple dwelling claiming an exemption from a rent
control or rent leveling ordinance pursuant to this chapter shall file
with the Municipal Construction Official, at least 30 days prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the newly constructed
multiple dwelling, a written statement of the owner's claim of
exemption under this chapter, including therein a statement of the date
upon which the exemption period so claimed shall commence, such
information as may be necessary to effectively locate and identify the
multiple dwelling for which the exemption is claimed, and a statement
of the number of rental dwelling units in the multiple dwelling for which
the exemption is claimed. The owner shall, at least 30 days prior to the
date of the termination of the exemption period afforded pursuant to
this chapter, file with the Municipal Construction Official a notice of the
date of termination of the exemption period for the affected multiple
dwelling. [Added 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
D. The owner of any multiple dwelling exempted from this chapter shall,
prior to entering into any lease with a person for tenancy of any
premises located in the multiple dwelling, furnish the prospective
tenant with a written statement that the multiple dwelling in which the
premises is located is exempt from rent control or rent leveling for such
time as may remain in the exemption period. Each lease offered to a
prospective tenant for any dwelling unit therein during the period the
multiple dwelling is so exempted shall contain a provision notifying the
tenant of the exemption. [Added 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
A. Substantially rehabilitated residential structures are properties or any
portion thereof which, in the determination of the Rent Leveling
Administrator of the Department of Health and Human Services
(hereinafter "RLA"), are in need of significant renovation or
improvement based upon defects in or deterioration of their physical
condition and the proposed rehabilitative work substantially renovates
or improves the overall condition of such properties as well as all
essential service systems of such properties which are in need of
significant renovation or improvement. The existence or absence of
building, housing and related code violations shall be considered in the
§ 381-11 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 381-12
371:729
determination of need for improvement or renovation of a structure
or portion thereof or of any essential service systems. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078]
B. Essential service systems are plumbing, heating, cooling, electrical and
fire protection, and it is the intent of this section that all such systems in
need of improvement or renovation must be included in the proposed
substantial rehabilitation work in order for an exemption under
§ 381-11A(5), as amended, to be granted.
C. In this section, "significant renovation or improvement" means
modernization, rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of the affected
properties or portions thereof and does not include landscaping, normal
maintenance or repairs, including but not limited to interior painting,
and the conversion of existing single heating or hot-water systems to
multiple units for individual apartments.
D. In determining whether a property or portion thereof is to be
substantially rehabilitated in order to qualify for exemption under
§ 381-11A(5), as amended, the RLA and/or his or her designee shall
inspect the current condition of such property or portion thereof and
shall examine the plans, specifications and projected costs for such
work which shall be made available to the RLA by the landlord of such
property. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
E. No applications for substantial rehabilitation exemptions from rent
leveling of a property or of a portion thereof shall be preliminarily or
finally approved by the RLA unless it is determined that such
rehabilitation work will increase the value of such properties and also
benefit the living conditions of the affected tenants. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
F. The amount required to be spent to qualify for a substantial
rehabilitation exemption from rent leveling shall be at least 25% of the
dollar amount resulting from dividing the assessed value of the subject
property by the Passaic County equalization ratio for Paterson at the
time the application is submitted for consideration. If only a portion of
the subject building is to be substantially rehabilitated, the required
expenditures shall be adjusted on a pro rata basis according to the
square footage of the area to be worked on. [Amended 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068]
G. Costs which are not directly contributory to the improvement of the
building in question, including but not limited to reasonable
professional fees, may be included in the overall amount of the
expenditures necessary to qualify for a substantial rehabilitation
exemption from rent leveling but only in an amount not to exceed 20%
of the overall project costs as approved by the RLA. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 381-12 PATERSON CODE § 381-12
371:730
§ 381-13. Approval process for exemption from rent leveling for
substantially rehabilitated structures. [Added 4-24-1990 by Ord. No.
90-012; amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
H. The costs of proposed capital improvements may be included in the
overall amount required to be spent in order to qualify for a substantial
rehabilitation exemption from rent leveling if such capital
improvements are part of the overall rehabilitation work to be done
pursuant to the application for such exemption. Any such capital
improvement cost which becomes part of the costs of an approved
rehabilitation exemption may not also at any time qualify for a capital
improvement rental increase under § 381-16 of this chapter. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
I. All applications for substantial rehabilitation exemptions from rent
leveling pending prior to the effective date of this amendatory section of
this chapter as well as the amended §§ 381-11A(5) and 381-13 of this
chapter shall be considered under the within definition of substantially
rehabilitated residential structures. Such pending applications are
exempt from the filing fee requirement of § 381-13 of this amended
chapter and may be considered for exemption from rent leveling,
notwithstanding that the work for the proposed exemption had been
completed prior to the decision of the RLA. Such applications shall be
processed in such a manner as to comply as closely as possible with the
aforesaid amendatory sections of this chapter. [Amended 12-19-1995
by Ord. No. 95-068]
A. The property owner shall submit an application to the RLA in such form
as the RLA may require, together with a fee of $50 per apartment with a
minimum fee of $200, prior to the rendering of a decision by the Rent
Leveling Administrator (hereinafter "RLA") to preliminarily approve or
disapprove an application for a substantial rehabilitation exemption
from rent leveling. The application shall set forth the manner in which
the exemption request complies with the requirements of the pertinent
sections of this chapter as to the nature of and the need for the
rehabilitation work and in detail as to the expenditures for such work.
The application must specify the defects or deteriorated areas to be
worked on and describe the nature of any improvements to the
essential service systems to be included in the work and shall include
such other information and documentation as may be deemed relevant
and necessary by the RLA. [Amended 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-017;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-075]
B. At the time of such application, the property owner will provide the RLA
with the disclosure of rental registration information required pursuant
to § 381-4K(1) of this chapter for all or part of the immediately
proceeding three-year period for which no such information has been
filed with the RLA. If the current owner has owned the subject property
for less than said three-year period, he or she shall provide the required
information for their period of ownership. In the event that three years
§ 381-12 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 381-13
371:731
of rental registration information is unavailable due to a change in
ownership of the subject property, good faith efforts shall be made by
the current owner to obtain the required information, but if the same is
found to be wholly or partially unobtainable, despite evidence of such
good faith efforts, this requirement may be waived by the RLA to the
extent that the information is not available.
C. The application, certified to be true, must also contain a schedule of
current and proposed estimated range of initial rents for the units to be
rehabilitated. Within five days of filing of the application, a copy of the
application and rent schedule along with notice of the tenant's right to
object must also be submitted by the applicant to the affected tenants,
simultaneously by certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular
mail. Proof of service of the same in the form of the certified mail
receipt card or affidavit of mailing by regular mail and certified mail,
return receipt requested, must be filed with the RLA. The tenants have
35 days from such mailing service of notice to file any objections in
writing to the substantial rehabilitation application with the RLA who
shall investigate and consider the validity of these objections in
determining the eligibility of the application for a substantial
rehabilitation exemption. The validity of any such objections shall be
considered and evaluated by the RLA under the standards of § 381-12 of
this chapter.
D. The RLA shall, within 60 days of receipt of the completed application,
render a decision and notice all affected parties of such decision as to
the preliminary eligibility of the property or portion thereof for a
substantial rehabilitation exemption. Such decision shall include
findings and reasons as to which items of rehabilitation work were
approved or rejected under the pertinent section(s) of this chapter.
E. In the event that either the landlord and/or tenant(s) object to the
determination of the RLA, an appeal of the decision must be filed within
20 days of the date of the notice of decision by either party with the RLA
for a hearing before the Rent Leveling Board (hereinafter "RLB"). Such
appeals shall set forth the reasons upon which the appeal is based. The
hearing of such appeal must be held and a decision rendered within 45
days of the filing of the appeal or else the determination of the RLA
shall stand as valid. Any appeal from such decision of the RLB or RLA in
cases where the RLB does not render a timely decision must be made to
the City Council within 15 days of the notice of such decision of the RLB
or within 15 days of the expiration of the forty-five-day appeal period if
the RLB does not render a timely decision.
F. Following a decision of preliminary approval of an exemption, the
property owner must advise the RLA of any changes in the
rehabilitation work or cost of such work as such changes may result in a
reversal or revision of the preliminary approval. The RLA shall decide
whether or not any such changes affect the preliminary approval and
advise all affected parties of his or her findings, in writing, with reasons
for the same, and such decision may be appealed to the RLB.
§ 381-13 PATERSON CODE § 381-13
371:732
§ 381-14. Rent increase restrictions; cost of housing index.
[Amended 2-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-005; 6-18-1985 by Ord. No.
85-055]
G. Upon completion of the rehabilitation work following a decision in favor
of preliminary eligibility for an exemption, the property owner shall
submit to the RLA proof of approvals of all required governmental
inspections as well as proof of the actual work completed and the
amount actually spent for such work for the purpose of receiving final
approval for an exemption from rent leveling. If such items are
submitted and are consistent with the application and preliminary
approval of exemption, implementation of rent increases may occur
pursuant to Subsection H of this section. The failure to produce any
such approvals of governmental inspections, variations between the
completed work and the proposed work included in the application
which the RLA determines adversely affects part or all of the exemption
status and the actual expenditure of less than the amount required by
§ 381-12 to qualify for such exemption shall result in disapproval of all
or part of the rent leveling exemption. The RLA shall advise all affected
parties of his or her findings, in writing, as to final approval or
disapproval for the exemption, with reasons for the same, and such
decision may be appealed to the RLB.
H. Upon final approval of a substantial rehabilitation exemption from rent
leveling, the initial rents charged for any exempted rehabilitated
structure or portion thereof shall be in accordance with the schedule of
proposed estimated rents submitted with the original application and
may be put into effect only upon compliance with the provisions of any
existing leases and with state statutes governing landlord tenant law.
After an initial rent increase exempted from this chapter, two additional
exempted rent increases may, at the option of the property owner, be
effectuated annually thereafter in the two years immediately
succeeding the year of the initial exempted increase.
I. Any landlord whose substantial rehabilitation application for exemption
from rent leveling has been approved must accept rent subsidy
program participation from existing tenants in the affected building
who are eligible for such program.
J. No tenant shall be evicted from any dwelling unit for the purpose of
effecting rehabilitation work pursuant to this chapter, and the RLA shall
have the authority to determine if any coercion was used to remove
tenants in order to do such work. If it is determined that prior to the
preliminary or final approval of a substantial rehabilitation exemption
such coercion was used, the RLA shall deny the entire application.
A. Rent increases.
(1) Every landlord without recourse to the Board or Administrator may
annually request of a tenant an increase in rent which shall not be
greater than 5%, or 3 1/2% for head of household tenants 65 years
§ 381-13 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 381-14
371:733
§ 381-15. Procedure for seeking rent increase. [Amended 3-11-1986
by Ord. No. 86-013]
of age or older or found to be disabled by the Social Security
Administration under either the Social Security Disability or
Supplemental Security Income Disability Programs, of the existing
rent at the time notice of increase is delivered to the tenant.
[Amended 6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-035; 3-10-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-018]
(2) Landlords about to execute leases for a term of more than one year
may provide in such leases for annual increases not to exceed 5%,
or 3 1/2% for tenants 65 years of age or older or found to be
disabled by the Social Security Administration under either the
Social Security Disability or Supplemental Security Income
Disability Programs, for each year of the lease. [Amended
6-13-1995 by Ord. No. 95-035; 3-10-1998 by Ord. No. 98-018]
(3) Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, no landlord under this
section shall request or receive more than one rental increase
during any twelve-month period for the same apartment. The
allowable annual increase will not be permitted, if the dwelling is
not in substantial compliance and/or if the landlord has not met the
registration requirements as specified in this chapter. [Added
3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
B. The provisions of Subsection A above shall apply until such time as a
cost of housing index has been established for the City and which has
been adopted by ordinance of the City.
C. The establishment and adoption of a cost of housing index for the City
shall not be valid unless said index shall have taken into account the
ratio of operating expenses of apartment units in relation to the total
income derived from such units and shall consider specifically expenses
such as but not limited to taxes; labor; heating fuel; gas and electricity;
water; contract services; administrative costs; insurance; and supplies.
D. The Council shall appoint a committee of persons living and/or working
in the City to undertake the preparation of a cost of housing index for
Paterson utilizing any cost of housing figures prepared in conjunction
with the Master Plan of the City.
A. Any landlord seeking a rental increase pursuant to § 381-14 shall give
the Rent Leveling Administrator and the affected tenant written notice
of the proposed increase at least 30 days in advance.
B. The written notice shall provide the following information:
(1) The name and address of the tenant and the apartment number.
(2) The date the tenant's existing lease began.
§ 381-14 PATERSON CODE § 381-15
371:734
§ 381-16. Computation of capital improvements and services rent
increase; dwellings to be in compliance with all standards.
[Amended 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055]
(3) The present rent of the tenant.
(4) The previous year's rent and the date of the last increase in rent
prior to the current notice of increase.
(5) The actual dollar amount of the proposed increase.
(6) The amount of the proposed increase stated as a percentage of
tenant's present rent.
C. Any landlord seeking a rent increase based on the cost of housing index
for Paterson shall comply with the procedures promulgated at the time
of the public advertisement of such index.155
A. A landlord may apply to the Administrator for a rental increase for
capital improvements or for increased or improved services. The
landlord shall compute the average cost of the improvements or
services per year of useful life by dividing the cost of the computed
capital improvements of services by the number of years of useful life of
the improvements or services and as agreed to by the Board or
Administrator as to the reasonable duration of such improvements or
services. The landlord shall apportion the average cost of the completed
improvements or services per year of useful life among the tenants in
the dwelling in accordance with one of the following methods:
(1) If the capital improvements or services benefit certain housing
spaces only, then the cost of the improvements or services shall be
surcharged to only these units.
(2) If the capital improvements or services benefit all housing spaces
but in varying degrees according to the amount of living area of
each housing space, then the cost for the improvements or service
shall be surcharged according to either the number of rooms or the
number of square feet in the housing space in proportion to the
total rentable area in the dwelling.
(3) If the capital improvements or services is equally beneficial to all
housing spaces regardless of the living area within any housing
space, then the cost of the improvements or services shall be
surcharged according to the number of housing spaces within the
dwelling.
155. Editor's Note: The following sections, which immediately followed this section, were
repealed as indicated: Former Sec. 14-52, Tax surcharge request, amended 3-4-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-009, was repealed 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055. Former Sec. 14-53, Notice of
tax surcharge request, was repealed 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055. Former Sec. 14-54,
Payment of tax surcharge, amended 3-4-1980 by Ord. No. 80-009, was repealed 6-18-1985
by Ord. No. 85-055. Former Sec. 14-55, Tax surcharge not rent in computation; tax
reduction, was repealed 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055. Former Sec. 14-56, Tax appeals;
surcharge rebate, was repealed 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055.
§ 381-15 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 381-16
371:735
§ 381-17. Notice of capital improvements and services rent increase
request; date of increase; fee. [Amended 3-9-2004 by Ord. No.
04-017]
§ 381-18. Criteria for hardship rental increase request; application;
dwellings to be in compliance with all standards. [Amended
2-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-005; 1-6-1981 by Ord. No. 80-063;
6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055]
B. Permits as required by law are to be secured from all agencies having
control and jurisdiction for alterations, repairs, replacements,
extensions and new buildings. All work must adhere to appropriate
code standards and must be inspected by all agencies having control
and jurisdiction and their approval obtained. A certificate of occupancy
must be secured as required by law.
C. A landlord shall not be granted a rental increase for capital
improvements or increased services unless the dwelling is in
substantial compliance with all municipal codes that affect the
habitability of the dwelling.
A. Prior to any application under § 381-16, the landlord shall serve upon
each tenant, by registered or certified mail or personal service or a
notice of application to the Administrator setting forth the basis for said
application, the amount of rental increase applied for with respect to
that tenant and the calculations involved. A sample copy of such notice
shall be filed with the application of the landlord, together with an
affidavit or certification of service of notice of application upon each
tenant.
B. It shall be within the discretion of the Board or Administrator, if
empowered by the Board, to fix the effective date of any approved rent
increase to be at any reasonable time prior to or after the decision on
the application has been made.
C. A fee for processing all capital improvement applications will be
collected. The fee shall be $50 per apartment but not more than $500
per building. [Amended 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-075]
D. All fees should be paid to the Receiver of Collections for the City. The
rate schedule will be kept on file in the Rent Leveling Office.
A. In the event that a landlord cannot meet his mortgage payments,
operating expenses or does not make a fair return on his investment, he
may appeal to the Administrator for increased rentals.
B. A fair return on the equity investment in real property shall not exceed
6% above the maximum passbook demand deposit savings account
interest rate in the City. The maximum of 6% above the maximum
passbook demand deposit savings account interest rate is specified to
add incentive for investment in residential real estate, to compensate
§ 381-16 PATERSON CODE § 381-18
371:736
§ 381-19. Notice of hardship rental increase request; date of
increase; fee. [Amended 2-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-005; 3-4-1980 by
Ord. No. 80-009; 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055]
for the greater risk involved in such investment, for the lesser liquidity
which such investment offers and for other factors associated with
ownership of residential real estate.
C. Tax, capital improvement and service surcharges duly authorized by the
Rent Leveling Board shall either be included in annual gross income
and included as an operating expense or be totally disregarded so that
they are excluded from annual gross income and excluded from
operating expenses. All items of expense and the amount of annual
income shall be presented in affidavit form by the owner. All landlords
shall submit statements of expenses and of annual income for the
current year wherein the application is made and for two years prior
thereto, together with documentary evidence in support thereof. In
dwellings involving 50 units or more, the statement of expenses for the
current year and for two years prior to the making of the application
shall be certified by a certified public accountant. All statements of
expenses submitted to the Board shall be judged by the Board as to the
reasonableness of such items and the amount stated for each item.
D. The Rent Leveling Board, subject to the specific approval of the
Council, shall promulgate rules and regulations establishing adequate
standards to guide the Rent Leveling Board in determining the amount
of increase to be granted to landlords pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
E. A landlord shall not be granted a rental increase unless the dwelling is
in substantial compliance with all municipal codes affecting the
habitability of the dwelling.
A. Prior to any application under § 381-18, the landlord shall serve upon
each tenant by registered or certified mail or personal service a notice
of said application setting forth the basis for said application, the
amount of rental increase applied for with respect to that tenant and
the calculations involved. A sample copy of such notice shall be filed
with the application of the landlord together with an affidavit or
certification or service of notice of application upon each tenant.
B. The Administrator must decide any hardship case within 45 days from
the date of completion of application by the landlord.
C. It shall be within the discretion of the Board, or Administrator if
empowered by the Board, to fix the effective date of any approved
rental increase to be at any reasonable time as determined by the
Board, subject to the landlord's compliance with statutory and legal
requirements of notice of rent increase. [Amended 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 381-18 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 381-19
371:737
§ 381-20. Standards to be maintained; decrease in rent on failure to
comply. [Amended 2-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-005; 6-18-1985 by Ord.
No. 85-055]
D. A fee for processing all hardship applications will be collected. The fee
shall be $50 per apartment. [Amended 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-017;
11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-075; 3-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-022]
E. All fees should be paid to the Receiver of Collections for the City. The
rate schedule will be kept on file in the Rent Leveling Office.
A. During the term of this chapter, the landlord shall maintain the same
standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings and
equipment in the housing space and dwelling as he provided or was
required to do by law or lease at the date the lease was entered into.
B. When services, care or maintenance or when the standards of service,
maintenance, furniture, furnishings and equipment in the housing
space or dwelling are not substantially maintained as specified above,
any tenant may apply to the Rent Leveling Board for a decrease in rent.
A copy of said application shall be served upon the landlord and all
other tenants setting forth, in detail, the reasons for such application.
At least 20 days shall elapse before a hearing thereon can be set.
C. A decrease in services, such as to justify a rent decrease under this
section, shall include any cessation or inadequate provision of the vital
services listed herein, due to deterioration or improper maintenance of
the services, where it's the responsibility of the landlord to provide the
services. For the following decrease in services, a petitioner's or
petitioners' rents may be decreased in accordance with the following
percentages of the total rent or rents collected during the period of the
decrease in services:
(1) No heat (when provisions of heat is the responsibility of the
landlord): 45%.
(2) No water (when provision of water is the responsibility of the
landlord): 30%.
(3) No hot water (when provision of hot water is the responsibility of
the landlord): 20%.
(4) Roof leaks (such as to make an apartment or dwelling unit
uninhabitable): 50%.
(5) Nonfunctioning stove or refrigerators (where supplied by
landlord): 10%.
(6) Faulty electrical fixtures (such as to constitute a dangerous
condition or threat to the health and safety to the tenants): 35%.
§ 381-19 PATERSON CODE § 381-20
371:738
(7) Faulty plumbing (defined as inoperable fixtures, i.e., tub, sink,
toilet, kitchen sink): 15%; (15% per fixture, but not to exceed a
maximum of 75% of the total rent of all petitioners).
(8) Inoperable elevator (when inoperability is due to the neglect of the
landlord): 10%.
D. No petition for a rent decrease due to a decrease in service shall be
considered under this section unless the potential decrease in rent for
each petitioner or each tenant in a group petition shall be greater than
44% of their rent for the period for the decrease in services, as
determined by the administrative branch of the Rent Leveling Board. In
no event shall any rent decrease for a decrease in services exceed
100%.
E. In considering any alleged decrease in services, the Board shall not
take into account evidence of the alleged decrease terminating more
than 30 days prior to the filing of the petition, and no rent decrease
shall be imposed by the Board for any period terminating prior to the 30
days.
F. No petition for a decrease in rent shall be considered when the failure
to maintain services is beyond the control of the landlord, insofar as
technical assistance on a timely basis, to remedy the reduction of
service.
G. If a rent decrease is made conditional upon the landlord's performing
whatever repairs are deemed necessary to correct a decrease in
services, the landlord may petition, upon completion of 75% or more of
the repairs ordered, for a restitution of all or part of the decreased
rents. A specific time for the completion of the remaining 25% of all the
work to be performed shall be reported to the Rent Leveling
Administrator's office.
H. Where it is found that the landlord has contracted to change the
heating service by changing a heating unit or otherwise requiring the
tenants to pay for their heat, the Board may grant a rent decrease equal
to the cost of providing heat as that cost is determined by the office of
rent leveling. A maximum period for the decreased services stated
above shall elapse before a hearing can be held concerning the
maintenance of service. The minimum periods are as follows:
(1) No heat.
(a) No heat during a period wherein the average temperature is
less than 55° F.: two days.
(b) No heat during a period wherein the average temperature is
55° F.: five days.
(2) No water: five days.
(3) No hot water: five days.
§ 381-20 PROPERTY REGISTRATION § 381-20
371:739
§ 381-21. Time for filing complaints and claims; agreed increases.
[Amended 2-5-1980 by Ord. No. 80-005; 6-18-1985 by Ord. No.
85-055; 1-14-1986 by Ord. No. 86-004; 5-28-1996 by Ord. No.
96-036]
Any complaint of an illegal increase or failure to maintain standards or
claim to lower rentals or any other claim or application brought by either
a tenant or a landlord must be filed with the Office of Rent Leveling no
later than 24 months after the effective date of the disputed increase or the
date of the action or inaction which is the subject of the complaint, unless
a different time period is specifically designated by other provisions of the
Rent Leveling Ordinance.
§ 381-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-18-1985 by Ord. No.
85-055; 8-6-1985 by Ord. No. 85-062; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068; 3-9-2004 by Ord. No. 04-017; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-075]
§ 381-23. When effective. [Amended 6-18-1985 by Ord. No. 85-055]
This ordinance codified in this chapter shall take effect upon final passage
and publication in accordance with the law. All rents for rental of housing
space and services in dwellings to which this chapter is applicable are
(4) Roof leaks: 10 days.
(5) No functioning stove or refrigerator: five days.
(6) Faulty electrical fixtures: five days.
(7) Faulty plumbing: five days.
(8) Inoperable elevator: 10 days.
I. In instances of petitions for a decrease in rent not listed in the above
schedules, a period of 20 days must elapse prior to the scheduling of a
hearing.
A. A violation of § 381-14 of this chapter constituting an illegal increase of
rent shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100 and not more
than $1,500, imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
B. A willful violation of any other provision(s) of this chapter, including but
not limited to the willful filing with the Board of any material
misstatement of fact, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,500, imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination
thereof. A violation affecting more than one leasehold shall be
considered a separate violation as to each leasehold. No landlord shall
bring any action to recover possession of a dwelling unit as a reprisal
for the tenant's efforts to secure or enforce any right under this chapter.
§ 381-20 PATERSON CODE § 381-23
371:740
controlled at the rent level received by the landlord as of the date the
ordinance codified in this chapter was adopted, and no rental increase shall
hereafter be instituted except as provided in this chapter.
§ 381-24. Dwellings decontrolled and exempted. [Added 3-28-2017
by Ord. No. 17-022]
Chapter 385
RODENT CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Rat baiting — See Ch. 161, Art. I.
Retail food establishments — See Ch. 231.
Preparation and sale of food — See Ch. 239.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
§ 385-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOODSTUFFS — Includes but is not limited to prepared foodstuffs, as
defined in this section, and all raw materials used in the making of prepared
foodstuffs, as defined in this section.
A. Upon the rehabilitation of a property previously on the City of
Paterson's vacant and abandoned property list pursuant to TCOP
Chapter 157, the units contained therein shall become decontrolled and
exempt from the provisions of this chapter for the new tenant's initial
rental.
B. The landlord shall file with the RLA and provide a copy to the tenant in
occupancy a "vacancy decontrol certification" within 15 days after
renting the dwelling to a new tenant, which shall include the following
information:
(1) Property address.
(2) Apartment number.
(3) New tenant's monthly based rent.
(4) Name, address and telephone number of landlord.
(5) A certification stating that the property was previously on the City
of Paterson's abandoned property list and was removed from the
list by the public officer due to the rehabilitation of the property.
C. No dwelling unit shall be decontrolled pursuant to this section more
than once in any three-year period.
§ 381-23 RODENT CONTROL § 385-1
385:741
PREPARED FOODSTUFFS — Includes breads, pies, cakes and other bakery
products; confectionery; shelled nuts; cheese; dried fruits such as dates,
figs, peaches and apricots; cereal products such as tapioca and breakfast
foods; pickled products such as pickled pigs' feet; dried, salted or smoked
fish; prepared meats such as cooked beef, pork, veal, boiled ham, chipped
beef, mincemeat; and other food prepared for eating or subject to attacks of
worms or insects.
§ 385-2. Notice of vacancy of buildings containing food products.156
All owners of real property located within the city whose property is
utilized, either by the owner or a tenant or lessee thereof, for the
production, manufacturing, storage, transportation of wholesale or retail
sale of foodstuffs of any type shall notify the Health Division within five
(5) days after any building on said property becomes vacant. Should any
portion of the above building remain vacant, the owner shall have the
continuing obligation to report said vacancy to the Health Division at threemonth
intervals, in order that the Health Division may conduct an
inspection of the property, including any building thereon.
§ 385-3. Nonapplicability to residential property.
This chapter is not intended to apply to residential dwelling units.
§ 385-4. Notice to be in writing; effective date of notice.157
All notices required to be given by the property owners to the Health
Division in this matter shall be in writing. Notice shall be effective upon
receipt by the Health Division.
§ 385-5. Copies of chapter; acknowledgment of receipt.158
§ 385-6. Violations and penalties.
Any property owner who fails to comply with the notice provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars
($100.) a day for the first day of knowing noncompliance and not more
A. In addition to publication as required by law, copies of this chapter will
be distributed by the Health Division representatives on their regular
inspections of properties within the city.
B. A copy of this chapter shall be addressed to the landlord of the property
and left at the premises. Along with the copy of this chapter, there shall
be a statement to the landlord that he shall acknowledge receipt of the
notice by a telephone call to the Health Division.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 385-1 PATERSON CODE § 385-6
385:742
than twenty-five dollars ($25.) a day for each subsequent day of knowing
noncompliance.
Chapter 389
ROLLER-SKATING RINKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Amusements and amusement devices — See
Ch. 117.
§ 389-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ROLLER-SKATING RINK — Any place or establishment where roller-skating
is carried on and admission is obtained by purchase of a ticket or token or
payment of a fee or by payment of a charge for checking clothing or other
properties.
§ 389-2. License required.
No person shall conduct or operate a roller-skating rink in the city without
having first obtained a license therefor as hereinafter provided in this
chapter.
§ 389-3. Application for license; grounds for denial; issuance.
A. Application for a roller-skating rink license shall be addressed to the
Council and filed with the Licensing Division, on forms supplied by said
Licensing Division, and approved by the Council. The application shall
be accompanied by the license fee prescribed in § 389-4.
B. No license shall be approved by the Council if the Council finds that:
(1) Such rink and its location do not conform to all ordinances of the
city and to all laws, rules and regulations of the State of New Jersey
or to any board, body or commission thereof which may be
applicable to such rink or the premises on which it is situated.
(2) Such rink will not be safe and sanitary.
(3) Such rink will be a hazard to life and property.
(4) The individual applicant or any partner of a partnership applicant
or any stockholder of a corporate applicant holding ten percent
(10%) or more stock interest in said corporation is not of good
moral character.
§ 385-6 ROLLER-SKATING RINKS § 389-3
389:743
§ 389-4. License fee; term of license.
§ 389-5. Revocation of license; hearing.
§ 389-6. Violations and penalties.159
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(5) The application for a roller-skating rink license fails to comply with
other requirements of this chapter.
(6) There is material falsification in the application for the license.
C. After approval of the application for a license by the Council, the
Licensing Division shall issue the license.
A. The fee for a roller-skating rink license shall be three hundred dollars
($300.). Such fee is imposed for revenue as well as regulation.
B. The term for a license issued under this chapter shall be one (1) year,
commencing with the date of issuance.
A. Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked by the Council for:
(1) Any disorderly or immoral conduct permitted by the licensee upon
the licensed premises.
(2) Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of other
applicable ordinances of the city.
(3) Violation of any applicable state law.
(4) Material falsification in applying for the license.
(5) Any reason which would have been cause for the denial of the
license in the first instance.
B. No license shall be revoked unless the licensee shall be served with a
copy of the written charges and be given the opportunity of being heard
thereon upon five (5) days' notice of the hearing.
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 389-3 PATERSON CODE § 389-6
389:744
Chapter 395
SALES, CLOSE-OUT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 125.
Bazaars — See Ch. 129.
Garage sales and flea markets — See Ch. 249.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 367.
Secondhand dealers — See Ch. 399.
§ 395-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISE, ADVERTISEMENT, ADVERTISING — Includes any and all
means of conveying to the public notice of a sale or notice of intention
to conduct a sale, and specifically, although not exclusively, includes
advertising by outside or inside signs, including billboards, neon or other
electrical signs, advertising by radio, television, telephone, newspaper,
magazine, book, notice, circular, pamphlet, letter, handbill, poster, placard,
card and any and all other means, including oral, written or printed.
CLOSE-OUT SALE — Includes the sale or an offer to sell to the public goods
on hand and in stock, in connection with a declared purpose as set forth
by advertising that such sale is anticipatory to the termination, closing,
liquidation, division, windup, dissolution, conclusion or abandonment of the
business in connection with such sale. "Close-out sale" shall also include any
sale advertised to be a fire sale, smoke sale, water damage sale or any and
all sales advertised in such manner as reasonably to convey to the public
that damaged or soiled goods are offered for sale. "Close-out sale" shall also
include any sale advertised to be a removal sale, going-out-of-business sale,
loss of lease sale or any type of sale so advertised as reasonably to convey
to the public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the person
conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale.
GOODS — Includes any goods regulated under this chapter.
§ 395-2. Exemptions.
The following persons shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
A. Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Duly licensed auctioneers selling at auction.
§ 389-6 ROLLER-SKATING RINKS § 395-3
389:745
§ 395-3. License required.
No person shall advertise or conduct any close-out sale without first
obtaining a close-out sale license, as hereinafter provided in this chapter.
§ 395-4. Application for license; contents.
§ 395-5. Inventory of goods to be sold.
A. Any person who desires to conduct a sale regulated by this chapter
shall make a written application, under oath, addressed to the Council
and filed with the Licensing Division on forms approved by the Council.
B. The application shall set forth and contain the following information:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the goods to be sold.
(2) The applicant's business name and address and the nature of the
applicant's interest in said business.
(3) A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
(4) The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy.
(5) The dates during which the sale is to be conducted.
(6) The means to be employed in advertising such sale, together with
the proposed content of any advertisement.
(7) A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale,
including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of
goods and the manner in which the sale will be conducted.
(8) A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold as
required by the provisions of § 395-5 hereof. Said inventory shall be
attached to and become a part of the application.
A. The inventory shall contain:
(1) A description of each article of goods (e.g., by serial number,
distinctive markings, size, weight or other description) in such a
manner as to be readily identifiable.
(2) The quantities thereof.
(3) The names and addresses of the person or persons from whom the
applicant purchased or otherwise acquired articles of goods within
six months prior to the filing of the application.
B. All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased or
acquired by the owner thereof for resale on bona fide orders without
cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased or
acquired on consignment. Such inventory shall not include goods
§ 395-3 PATERSON CODE § 395-5
389:746
§ 395-6. Hearing on application.
Upon receipt of an application for a license with the required fee, the
Licensing Division shall set forth a date on which the Council will hold
a public hearing on the application and shall so notify the applicant, in
writing, of the date, time and place of such hearing.
§ 395-7. Publication of notice of application and hearing; proof of
publication.
§ 395-8. Bond.
As a condition precedent to the granting of a license under this chapter,
the applicant shall enter into and deliver to the Licensing Division a bond
in favor of the City in the sum of $500 with two responsible freeholders
as sureties or, in lieu thereof, a bond of a surety company, authorized to
do business under the laws of the State of New Jersey, which bond shall
first be approved by the Corporation Counsel as to form and sufficiency.
The bond shall be forfeited upon a showing that the applicant has willfully
misrepresented any material fact required in the application.
§ 395-9. License fees; partial refund on disapproval of application.
ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated hereunder and
for the purpose of selling said goods at such sale. Any unusual purchase
or additions to the stock of goods and of the business within 60 days
before the filing of an application shall be deemed to be goods ordered
in contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of selling said goods
at such sale.
A. Following the notice of hearing, the applicant shall forthwith cause to
be published a notice of his application to obtain a license for a closingout
sale. Said notice shall be published for two consecutive weeks, once
a week, prior to the hearing in a daily newspaper published and
circulated in the City.
B. The notice shall contain the name and address of the owner of the
goods to be sold; the object of the sale; the type of sale to be conducted;
the general nature of the goods to be sold; and the date, time and place
of the public hearing.
C. An affidavit of the proof of such publication shall be filed with the
Licensing Division prior to consideration of the application by the
Council at the public hearing.
A. The applicant for a license under this chapter shall submit to the
Licensing Division a license fee of $220 with his application. [Amended
12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-079; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-058]
§ 395-5 ROLLER-SKATING RINKS § 395-9
389:747
§ 395-10. Eligibility for license.
No license shall be issued to:
§ 395-11. Issuance of license; length of sale restricted.
§ 395-12. Renewal of license; term; procedure.
B. An applicant for a renewal license shall submit to the Licensing Division
a renewal license fee of $220 with his renewal application. [Amended
12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-079; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 10-058]
C. If the application for a license is disapproved by the Council, $50 of the
license fee or renewal license fee paid shall be retained by the
Licensing Division to defray the cost of investigating the statements in
the application, and the balance of the fee shall be returned to the
applicant.
A. Any person who, either directly or indirectly and within one year prior
to the date of the application, has conducted a sale licensed under this
chapter.
B. Conduct a sale under this chapter where a similar sale has been held at
the same premises within a period of one year from the date of the
expiration of the previous license.
C. Any person who has not owned the business advertised or described in
the application for a period of at least six months prior to the date of the
filing of the application, except where:
(1) A person who was the owner of the business in the City dies; or
(2) The goods, owned by the applicant, have been damaged, destroyed
or affected by fire, smoke or water at a time when the goods were
physically located in the City.
A. After investigation of the application and the public hearing, the
Council shall determine whether or not such license shall be granted. If
approved, the license shall be issued by the Licensing Division.
B. The license granted by the Council shall authorize the sale described in
the application for a period of not more than 30 days following the
issuance thereof.
A. The Council may renew a license for one period of time only, such
period not to exceed 30 days, provided that the goods described in the
original inventory have not been disposed of and that the provisions of
Subsection B hereof have been complied with.
B. No less than seven days prior to the expiration of the initial license, the
licensee shall submit an application for renewal, in writing and under
oath, and attach thereto as a part thereof a revised inventory showing
§ 395-9 PATERSON CODE § 395-12
389:748
§ 395-13. Display of license; license not assignable or transferable.
§ 395-14. License restricted to one location.
§ 395-15. Advertising.
§ 395-16. Records to be kept on premises; inspection; daily revision
of inventory.
items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold. No goods not
shown on the original inventory shall be included.
A. Every license issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously
displayed near the entrance of the premises upon the commencement
of and for the duration of the sale.
B. The license shall not be assignable or transferable.
A. The license granted shall authorize the licensee to conduct the sale only
on the premises specified in the license.
B. If the licensee operates more than one place of business:
(1) The license issued shall apply to the one store or branch specified
in the application.
(2) Such store or branch conducting the licensed sale shall not
advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating
with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale; nor shall
such other store or branch advertise or represent that it is
cooperating or participating in any way in the licensed sale.
(3) No goods shall be brought from any other store or branch and
placed on sale at the store or branch authorized to conduct the
licensed sale.
A. All advertising shall be descriptive of the nature of the sale as stated in
the application therefor. The language in such advertising shall be
identical with the advertising content as set forth in the application.
B. It shall be unlawful to indicate in any advertising, either directly or
indirectly, that the sale is held with the approval of the Council. It shall
be lawful, however, for such advertising to contain a statement in the
following words and no others:
"Sale held pursuant to License No. ____ of the City Council granted the
____ day of ________________, 19___" and in such blank spaces the license
number and applicable date shall be indicated.
C. No advertising shall contain any assertion, representation or statement
of fact which is untrue, deceptive or misleading.
§ 395-12 ROLLER-SKATING RINKS § 395-16
389:749
§ 395-17. Promulgation of regulations; suspension of license.
§ 395-18. Duties of licensee.
The licensee shall:
§ 395-19. Suspension or revocation of license; hearing.
In addition to the penalty provided in § 395-20, any license may be revoked
by the Council, after due notice and hearing, for violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter or if the licensee has made any material
misstatement in his application. A license may be suspended pending such
hearing, as provided in § 395-17B, provided that, within 15 days of written
notice of suspension given to the licensee, the licensee shall be granted a
hearing before the Council, after which the Council shall determine whether
A. A duplicate copy of the filed application, together with a duplicate copy
of the filed inventory of the goods, shall be kept at the premises where
the sale is being held and shall be available at all times to inspection by
the inspectors of the Licensing Division and any person who shall be
duly authorized, in writing, for that purpose by the Council. The
licensee shall also permit such inspector, investigator or person duly
authorized in writing to examine all of the goods on the premises for
comparison with said inventory.
B. At the close of business each day during the sale, the licensee shall
revise the inventory of the goods by indicating thereon the items which
have been disposed of during that day.
A. The Council may make such rules and regulations, not in conflict with
the provisions of this chapter, for the administration and enforcement of
this chapter as, in its opinion, will serve to prevent deception and to
protect the public.
B. The Council may, at any time during the sale, suspend the license and
stop said sale upon a prima facie showing that said sale is being
conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
Thereafter, and upon the giving of written notice of suspension, said
sale shall not continue unless permission so to do is authorized by the
Council following a hearing, upon due notice, as provided in § 395-19.
A. Make no additions, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of
goods set forth in the inventory attached to the license application.
B. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or
representation incident thereto.
C. Not sell or offer for sale any goods not in the stock listed as a part of the
inventory submitted with the application.
D. Be limited to the sale of goods described in the inventory submitted
with the application.
§ 395-16 PATERSON CODE § 395-19
389:750
to set aside the suspension or revoke the license. The notice of suspension
shall fix the date and time and place of hearing.
§ 395-20. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not more than
90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 399
SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Auctions and auctioneers — See Ch. 125.
Bazaars — See Ch. 129.
Garage sales and flea markets — See Ch. 249.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 367.
Close-out sales — See Ch. 395.
§ 399-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEALER — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity,
whether permanent or itinerant, who on one or more occasions (through
any means) buys or sells secondhand gold, silver, precious metals, gems or
jewelry, and includes anyone advertising the purchase or sale of any of the
aforementioned items.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business conducted intermittently within the
City or at varying locations.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PERMANENT BASED BUSINESS — Any business conducted on a yearround
basis and housed in a single structure, such as a store or residence.
WORKING DAY — Includes Monday through Friday and excludes Saturday,
Sunday and legal holidays.
§ 399-2. License required; investigation; issuance or denial.
[Amended 9-1-1981 by Ord. No. 81-053]
Each dealer conducting business within the jurisdiction of the City shall
obtain a license and shall first register with the Chief of Police, who shall
fingerprint and institute an investigation of the applicant's moral character
§ 395-19 ROLLER-SKATING RINKS § 399-2
389:751
and business responsibility as he deems necessary for the protection of the
public welfare. Upon completion of the investigation, which in no case shall
take more than 10 days, the Chief of Police shall return the application
or a copy thereof to the Licensing Division, accompanied by his
recommendations as to whether the license should be issued or denied.
If the recommendation of the Chief of Police is to deny the license, the
grounds for such recommendation shall be stated. Grounds for
recommending denial of a license may include information indicating that
the applicant has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude,
dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation. Upon receipt of the
recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Licensing Division shall issue
or deny the license accordingly. Appeals from the decision of the Chief of
Police shall be made in accordance with § 399-3.
§ 399-3. Appeal from denial of license; hearing.
An appeal from the decision of the Chief of Police to deny an application
for a license shall be made, in writing, to the Municipal Council within
seven days of the receipt of a decision. The appeal shall state the specific
grounds for the appeal. The Municipal Council shall hold a hearing within
a reasonable time from the receipt of the appeal. At the hearing, the
applicant or permit holder may be represented by counsel, may crossexamine
witnesses and may present evidence in his favor. The Municipal
Council may affirm or reverse the decision of the Chief of Police. The
decision of the Municipal Council shall be final.
§ 399-4. License fees; transferability of license; term.
§ 399-5. Records to be kept by dealers; inspection of records.
Each dealer shall maintain a complete record of each purchase and sale,
including the amount paid, description of the item, any identifying numbers,
name, residence, age and description of the person from whom the items
were purchased, received or sold, and each dealer shall require said person
to sign a receipt for each item. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer of the City.
A. Upon issuance of the license, the fee shall be based as follows:
[Amended 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-082; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No.
10-060]
(1) Permanent based business: $110 per year.
(2) Itinerant business: $110 per day of business.
B. A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be
transferable and shall terminate on December 31 of the year in which
said license is issued.
§ 399-2 PATERSON CODE § 399-6
389:752
§ 399-6. Dealers to provide police with forms regarding
transactions.
Each dealer doing business in the City shall deliver to the Chief of Police the
description of all items purchased, received or sold within 48 hours of the
completion of the transaction on forms prescribed by the Chief of Police.
§ 399-7. Time limit for retention of purchased items.
No dealer shall sell, melt or change the form of or dispose of any articles
purchased or received within 10 days of the date of the purchase, and all
such items shall remain on the premises where the purchase was made and
be made available to the Chief of Police, upon request, for at least 10 days.
§ 399-8. Identification required; restrictions on persons conducting
transactions.
Each dealer must require identification of the person with whom it is
transacting business, and no transaction may be made with any minor, as
herein defined, and also with any individual who is in an intoxicated state
and/or is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics, hallucinogenic
or habit-producing drugs.
§ 399-9. Revocation of license; hearing.
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Municipal Council after hearing on notice for any of the following
causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of purchasing secondhand precious
metals, gems and jewelry.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or disorderly persons offense involving
moral turpitude, dishonesty, fraud, deceit or misrepresentation.
(5) Conducting the business of soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five days prior
to the date set for the hearing.
§ 399-6 ROLLER-SKATING RINKS § 399-10
389:753
§ 399-10. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
§ 399-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof, within the discretion of the
Municipal Judge. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 403
SECURITY GATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
§ 403-1. Approval of design required.
No security gates shall be installed without prior approval as to design by
the Construction Official.
§ 403-2. Permit required.160
A permit shall be issued by the Construction Official prior to installation
of any security gate in accordance with Chapter 183, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 403-3. Metal construction; rustproof and stainproof.
Security gates shall be constructed of metal and so finished as not to rust
or stain either buildings or sidewalks.
A. Garage sales as defined by Chapter 249, Garage Sales and Flea
Markets.
B. Auction sales pursuant to Chapter 125, Auctions and Auctioneers.
C. Close-out sales pursuant to Chapter 395, Sales, Close-Out.
160. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 399-10 PATERSON CODE § 403-4
403:754
§ 403-4. Open grill requirements.
Security gates shall be of an open grill design except that solid panels shall
be allowed from the bottom of the security gate up to a maximum of fortyeight
(48) inches from the sidewalk.
§ 403-5. Violations and penalties.161
Any person who fails to comply with § 403-3 or 403-4 of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand
dollars ($1,000.), imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days or a period
of community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 407
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
Water — See Ch. 473.
Passaic Valley Sewerage Commissioners Rules
and Regulations — See Ch. A505.
161. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 403-4 SECURITY GATES § 403-5
403:755

ARTICLE I
Privately Financed Sewers
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 22, Art. 1, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 407-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person or persons, firm or firms, corporation or
corporations, association or associations, or any group of the same.
CITY ENGINEER — The head of the Engineering and Operations Division of
the Department of Public Works.
DIRECTOR — The Public Works Director of the Department of Public Works.
§ 407-2. Nonapplicability to house service connections.
This article shall not apply to house service connections.
§ 407-3. Compliance required.
The construction, including all work in connection therewith, of any and all
privately financed sewers, drains and manholes in whole or in part in streets
of the City and any and all privately financed extensions, additions and
alterations of or to any public sewers of the City shall be done in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
§ 407-4. Application for permit; contents.
Prior to the commencement of any such construction, including all work in
connection therewith, the applicant shall file with the Public Works Director
a written application, in duplicate, executed by him on a form prescribed by
said Director, setting forth the following:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. The interest of the applicant in such construction either as the owner of
specifically described property to be served or benefited by such
construction, when completed, or otherwise.
C. The name and address of the contractor who is to do the work, with
such statement as may be required by said Director as to such
contractor's responsibility, including his competence, experience,
facilities, available equipment and his financial ability to perform such
work in a good workmanlike and expeditious manner.
D. The location, size, length, depth and approximate cost of the work.
§ 407-1 SECURITY GATES § 407-4
403:757
§ 407-5. Processing application; investigation; recommendations;
approval of permit.
Upon the filing of such an application in duplicate, in proper form, the
Public Works Director shall give it a number and shall promptly transmit
the duplicate copy thereof to the City Engineer for the official records
of his Division. The Director shall forthwith make such investigation as
may be required and thereafter present such application with his written
recommendations to the City Council. The Council may require the City
Engineer to review the application for his recommendations. If satisfied
with the favorable recommendation of the Director and the City Engineer, if
any, and of the contractor's responsibility and that the work can and will be
done expeditiously and in a good and workmanlike manner in accordance
with the provisions of the application and of this article and without undue
loss, hazard or danger to the public or to public or private property by
reason of traffic or street pavement conditions, the proximity of water,
sewer or public utility lines, buildings, structures or other improvements,
the Council shall direct the Public Works Director to issue a permit for
the doing of the work involved in the construction, upon the applicant's
complying with the provisions of this article. The action of the Council shall
be duly recorded in its official minutes of the meeting.
§ 407-6. Preparation of plans and specifications by City Engineer.
If he deems it necessary, the City Engineer shall thereafter prepare
specifications and plans of the work to be done and the manner in which and
time within which the work is to be done. Such specifications shall include
but not be limited to size and type of pipe, sewer or drain required; precise
location and grade of the line; joint and jointing material; number, location
and type of manholes, if any; grade, course and depth of the line; means or
methods of excavation; point or points of connection with the sewer system
of the City; such bracing, shoring and sheeting as may be required; such
underdrains as may be required; manner of removal of rock; protection
against subsurface water; protection of the public and of property; removal
and replacement of excavated material and of pavements, curbs and
sidewalks; and such other details with reference to the construction as the
City Engineer shall deem customary, desirable and proper for adequate
and well-drawn specifications for the character of work to be done. Such
specifications shall, so far as is practicable, be in accordance with existing
standards of the City for such work or with standards to be reduced to
writing by the City Engineer and approved by the Council; subject, however,
without restriction or limitation, as to any change or variance from such
standards and the imposition of additional requirements where, under the
E. A commitment by the applicant that he will perform or cause to be
performed all the work in accordance with his application and in
accordance with the requirements of this article and not otherwise.
F. Such other relevant data as may be required for the information of said
Director or the City Engineer in relation to the matter.
§ 407-4 PATERSON CODE § 407-6
403:758
circumstances of any particular case, the City Engineer deems it advisable.
A copy or copies of such specifications when so prepared shall be furnished
to the applicant upon request.
§ 407-7. Filing of contract, specifications, bond and insurance
requirements.
The applicant shall thereupon file with the Public Works Director the
construction contract and specifications, in duplicate, the same having been
duly executed by the applicant and the contractor and approved by the City
Engineer. The applicant shall, at the same time, file a bond of the contractor
if and when required to do so by the City Engineer, with sufficient surety
to the City in the amount of the contract, conditioned upon his and the
applicant's performing the contract. Said bond shall be in such form as
the Corporation Counsel approves. The applicant shall also file insurance
policies as to workmen's compensation and the public liability and property
damage indemnifying the City against loss, approved as to form by the
Corporation Counsel and as to amount by the City Engineer. The duplicate
executed copy of the contract and specifications shall, upon receipt by the
Public Works Director, be transmitted by him to the City Engineer for the
official records of his Division.
§ 407-8. Issuance of permit; fee.
Upon compliance with all of the provisions of §§ 407-4 through 407-7, the
Public Works Director shall issue a permit to do the work upon payment of
a fee of $10.
§ 407-9. Only contractor to do work authorized; variance in contract
and specifications.
No one other than the contractor named in the application shall do the work
and the permittee shall not authorize, suffer or permit any other than said
contractor to do the work except as herein otherwise provided. All such
work shall be done in accordance with the provisions of the contract and
specifications, except when a change or variance in performance because of
conditions and circumstances encountered is justified in the opinion of the
City Engineer and is approved, in writing, by him. Any change or variance,
except as permitted by the City Engineer as provided in § 407-6 and this
section, shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 407-10. Substitute contractor.
If the contractor referred to in the previous section shall die or become
incapacitated after the application has been filed and a permit granted and
before the completion of the work or if he shall abandon the work or fail to
proceed with the work in an expeditious or good and workmanlike manner
or for any other reason, the permittee shall select another contractor to
do the work, to remedy any defective work or to finish the work. Such
new contractor shall not proceed until he shall have complied with all
§ 407-6 SECURITY GATES § 407-10
403:759
the requirements of this article as was imposed upon or required of the
contractor designated in the first instance to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer.
§ 407-11. Inspection; work stopped for defect or variance on order;
revocation of permit; disregard of order as violation.
The City Engineer shall inspect the work as it progresses, and if he is of the
opinion that such work is not proceeding in accordance with the plans and
specifications, except as stated, and the provisions of this article, he may
order further work stopped until the improper or defective work has been
remedied or corrected or, if the progress of the work is lagging, order it
expedited. In default of compliance with an order of the City Engineer, the
Public Works Director shall, upon the recommendation of the City Engineer,
revoke the permit. The permittee and his contractor shall not thereafter
proceed with the work. Disregard of any order of the City Engineer under
this section or the continuance of the work by the contractor after the
revocation of the permit shall be a violation of this article. Such permit shall
not be reinstated except on terms prescribed by the Council after a hearing
when requested by the contractor.
§ 407-12. Obligation to restore site after stoppage of work by order;
responsibilities for costs.
The City Engineer, following any revocation of such permit, may order
the permittee to refill any excavation remaining from unfinished work and
to complete the restoration of all paving, curbing and sidewalks and the
restoration of the location in all respects to its original state and condition.
In default thereof, the City Engineer may do or cause the same to be
done at the sole cost and expense of the permittee or, if the City Engineer
deems it advisable, to replace or remedy any defective work or complete
any unfinished work or cause the same to be done, all at the sole cost and
expense of the permittee. Any violations of any provisions of this section
shall be separate violations of this article.
§ 407-13. City not liable for negligent or illegal acts of permittee or
contractor.
Nothing contained in this article shall authorize, require or constitute
approval by the City of any negligent, unlawful or improper act or conduct
on the part of the permittee or his contractor in the performance of the
work.
§ 407-14. Certification of completion or compliance.
Upon completion of the work in a good and workmanlike manner, and in
applicable cases upon the payment by the permittee or his surety of any
costs and expenses of the City incurred under § 407-12 hereof, the City
Engineer shall certify to the Council that all requirements of this article
have been met or substantially met and complied with. Record of such
§ 407-10 PATERSON CODE § 407-14
403:760
certification shall be noted in the minutes of the Council, and upon such
certification, said construction may be placed in operation and not before.
§ 407-15. Sewers and related facilities to become City property.
Upon the completion of the work, as aforesaid, any and all sewers, drains,
manholes, extensions, additions and changes constructed under or by virtue
of this article shall be the sole and separate property of the City and subject
to public use.
§ 407-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 407-14 SECURITY GATES § 407-16
403:761

ARTICLE II
Sewer User Charges
[Adopted 6-29-1981 by Ord. No. 81-040]
§ 407-17. Establishment of charges and regulations. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
The City of Paterson (City) hereby fixes and prescribes sewer user charges,
rents, rules and regulations in connection with and the use of sewers, drains
and appurtenant facilities in the City.
§ 407-18. Starting date of charges.
The charges set forth in this article shall be charged as of July 1, 1981.
§ 407-19. Unit charge. [Amended 6-27-2006 by Ord. No. 06-058;
1-24-2012 by Ord. No. 12-001]
A. The unit charge to be collected according to the Sewerage Rate
Schedule (annexed hereto as revised and made part hereof)162 for
calendar year 2012 shall be $140 per annum or $35 per quarter for a
single unit user and as listed for additional units.
B. The unit charge to be collected according to the Sewerage Rate
Schedule (annexed hereto as revised and made part hereof) for
calendar year 2013 shall be $168 per annum or $42 per quarter for a
single unit user and as listed for additional units.
C. The unit charge to be collected according to the Sewerage Rate
Schedule (annexed hereto as revised and made part hereof) for
calendar year 2014 shall be $196 per annum or $49 per quarter for a
single unit user and as listed for additional units.
D. The unit charge to be collected according to the Sewerage Rate
Schedule (annexed hereto as revised and made part hereof) for
calendar year 2015 and thereafter until amended shall be $224 per
annum or $56 per quarter for a single unit user and as listed for
additional units.
E. Thirty days from the effective date of this section, the City of Paterson
shall become authorized to make an upward adjustment to the
sewerage rate of any public entity benefitting from Paterson’s sewer
system in their roles as government entities and/or as property owners,
if the said public entities do not agree to join the City of Paterson in a
joint loan application to fund such studies as may be needed for system
operations and/or metering. [Added 1-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-002]
F. The fee resulting from Subsection E above shall be reviewed and
adjusted accordingly at the end of each budget year, until such studies
162. Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority Rates Schedule is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 407-17 SECURITY GATES § 407-19
403:763
§ 407-19.1. Terms of sewer service for areas outside municipal
borders. [Added 1-24-2012 by Ord. No. 12-002]
The City of Paterson may provide sewer service to areas beyond the City's
borders. If such service is to be provided, then it shall be in exchange for
uniform and equitable fees and charges, as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:26A-10.
Any such sewer service must be pursuant to agreements approved by
resolution of the Municipal Council. The said agreements shall under all
circumstances include terms substantially similar to the following:
are completed and accurate metering or methodology for ascertaining
the exact water flow for each entity is determined. [Added 1-19-2016
by Ord. No. 16-002]
G. Additionally, if the joint application for the loan to fund the
aforementioned study is unsuccessful, it is the City’s desire that the
study still be completed, and all entities benefitting from the system,
including the City of Paterson itself, shall pay an equal share of the total
cost of the study. [Added 1-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-002]
H. In the initial application of this section, if the public entity in question
enters into a shared service agreement with Paterson, then the City is
authorized to forgive the monies owed outlined in Attachment A163 with
the exception of the monies owed for 2012, 2013, 2014, and 2015, as
permitted by law. Each such public entity shall pay the City of Paterson
the outstanding connection rate monies for 2012 through 2015 prior to
June 30, 2016. [Added 1-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-002]
I. If any such public entity disconnects from Paterson’s sewer system, the
disconnected entity shall be responsible for the outstanding sewer
connection fees owed to the City of Paterson up until the date of
disconnection. [Added 1-19-2016 by Ord. No. 16-002]
A. The rates shall be adjusted upwards from the Sewerage Rate Schedule
(annexed hereto as revised and made part hereof)164 or any subsequent
Sewerage Rate Schedule in effect at the time, using as a baseline the
Schedule's "unit charge" method and/or one of its "volume account"
methods, as appropriate, or, where application of such methods is not
feasible, a reasonable approximation of such methods.
B. In each agreement, the entire calculation of the said upward
adjustment shall be set forth in full.
C. In each agreement, the fees and charges calculated by the Finance
Director and City Engineer shall include all of the following:
163. Editor's Note: Said attachment is on file in the City offices.
164. Editor's Note: The Sewerage Authority Rates Schedule is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ 407-19 PATERSON CODE § 407-19.1
403:764
§ 407-20. Charges to bear interest; lien; collection of charges.
All charges herein imposed for connection and use of sewers shall bear
interest from the time they become due, at the same rates as municipal real
estate taxes. Such unpaid charges shall be a lien on the premises, and the
City shall enjoy the same remedies for the collections thereof with interest
costs and penalties as it has for the collection of taxes upon real estate.
§ 407-21. Estimated volumes; retroactive adjustment of charges.
The City of Paterson (City) may use estimated volumes where exact
measurement is impractical; in such cases, the City reserves the right to
adjust charges retroactively if additional data is obtained at a later date.
§ 407-22. Authority to adjust charges and add surcharges.
The City reserves the right to adjust sewerage charges or to add any
volume, strength, loading, pollutant or other surcharge imposed by the
Passaic Valley Sewerage Commissioners or any federal, state or local
regulatory agency.
§ 407-23. Special equitable rate categories
Where sewage flow originates from a combined residential and large waterusing
nonresidential establishment or an establishment not described
above, the City reserves the right to establish special equitable rate
categories within the limitation of law.
§ 407-24. Standby charges.
The City reserves the right to establish a standby charge against any
account not using the public sewer during a sewerage billing period. The
standby charge however shall not be greater than 50% of the normal flat
(1) An upward adjustment to account for the true cost of sewer
operation, as funded by general revenues over and above sewer
fees.
(2) An upward adjustment to account for annual reconstruction bonds
and/or debt service.
(3) A presumptive upward adjustment of 10% to account for any
additional administrative services and/or expenses resulting from
providing the services addressed by the agreement in question,
unless it can be shown that the actual value of the administrative
services and/or expenses was substantially higher or lower.
D. If any portion of the above methodology cannot feasibly be applied, for
any reason, under no circumstances shall the fees and charges for such
use be permitted to fall below those set forth in the Sewerage Rate
Schedule (annexed hereto as revised and made part hereof) or any
subsequent Sewerage Rate Schedule in effect at the time.
§ 407-19.1 SECURITY GATES § 407-24
403:765
rate for residential dwelling types, not 50% of the most recent annual
volume charge for nonresidential customers.
§ 407-25. Billing.
Charges for sewerage service shall be billed quarterly by the City to the
owners of all properties using sewers.
§ 407-26. Payment of charges.
All sewerage charges shall be payable to the City of Paterson at the office
of the Tax Collector, 155 Market Street, Paterson, New Jersey 07505. Bills
shall be paid by personal check or money order; if paid in person during
normal business hours, bills may be paid in cash.
§ 407-27. Responsibility of property owner to pay bill.
The payment of all sewerage service charges shall be the responsibility of
the property owner. The failure of a tenant or lessee to transmit any such
charge or bill to the property owner shall not relieve the property owner
of his responsibility to pay said bill or the right of the City to collect such
charges according to the remedies prescribed by law.
§ 407-28. Interest penalty for unpaid bills.
If any sewerage service charge is not paid within 30 calendar days of post
date of the bill, an interest penalty shall begin to accrue at the same rate as
is charged on unpaid municipal taxes.
§ 407-29. Bills based on actual water consumption; extra charges
and credits. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
Bills to users whose charges are based on actual water consumption
(volume account on the Rate Schedule) shall be based on 1/4 of the user's
actual use in the preceding calendar year. A credit or extra charge shall be
rendered to such users in the first quarter of each year to account for overor
underpayments due to differences between actual and estimated use.
§ 407-30. Disconnection of service for nonpayment; reconnection.
In the event of nonpayment of any sewerage service charge for a period
of 90 days after the date when such charge becomes delinquent, the City
may cause the service to be discontinued and the same shall not be restored
until full payment has been made of all outstanding charges and penalties
thereon plus the actual costs of disconnecting and reconnecting the service
connection. Discontinuation of service, however, shall not abrogate the
right of the City to use whatever remedies are permitted by law to collect
outstanding charges and penalties.
§ 407-24 PATERSON CODE § 407-31
403:766
§ 407-31. Fees and charges. [Amended 6-9-1999 by Ord. No.
99-031]
Unless a fee is provided for below, fees and charges will be made by the City
at actual cost for the following:
§ 407-32. (Reserved)
A. Application for new connections: $25. [Amended 12-2-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-085]
B. Administrative or engineering review of new connections, including
field inspection of installations: See § 435-31B.
C. Inspection, installation or repair costs of facilities where the condition
is not caused by or the responsibility of the City.
D. Connection charges or reconnection charges: $250. [Amended
12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-085]
E. Sampling, analysis or flow monitoring charges.
F. Damages, reconstruction or repair costs where City facilities are
damaged by others.
G. Other costs incurred by the City at the request of or as a result of action
(or inaction) by other parties.165
165. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 16, Interpretation of Sewerage Authority Rates Schedule,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068.
§ 407-31 SECURITY GATES § 407-32
403:767

ARTICLE III
Maintenance of Sewer Laterals and House Connections
[Adopted 5-17-1983 as Ord. No. 83-041]
§ 407-33. Designation of sewer collection system. [Amended
6-19-1984 by Ord. No. 84-058]
The City main sewer shall be known as the sewer collection system
presently constructed in the roadway or easements and servicing all of the
many adjoining properties.
§ 407-34. Designation of sewer connections. [Amended 6-19-1984
by Ord. No. 84-058]
The sewer connections shall be designated as follows:
§ 407-35. Responsibility to repair existing sewer laterals. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
It shall be the responsibility of the City to repair any existing sewer lateral.
§ 407-36. Responsibility to maintain sewer connections.
It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to clean and rod, if
necessary, the entire sewer connection which is known as the sewer lateral
and house connection from the building to the collection system at the
property owner's expense.
§ 407-37. Responsibility to repair house connections.
It shall be the property owner's responsibility to make all necessary repairs
to the house connection which is that portion from the street curb or
curbline to the building at the property owner's expense.
§ 407-38. Responsibility to repair sewer lateral; costs. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
It shall be the responsibility of the City to repair the sewer lateral at no cost
to the property owner.
A. Sewer lateral shall be the portion from the street curb or curbline to the
sewer collection system, or in the event that no sewer collection system
presently exists in the roadway, the sewer lateral shall be the portion
from the street curb or curbline to that portion of the roadway where,
pursuant to the Direction of the Department of Public Works, the
missing section of the sewer collection system will be constructed.
B. House connection shall be that portion from the street curb or curbline
to the building.
§ 407-33 SECURITY GATES § 407-39
403:769
§ 407-39. Determination of City Engineer regarding repairs to
sewer connections.
In the event that repairs are to be made to the sewer connection, the City
Engineer shall make the determination whether repairs are to be made
to the sewer lateral portion or the house connection portion of the sewer
lateral portion or the house connection portion of the sewer connection.
§ 407-40. Installation of new sewer laterals and house connections.
[Amended 4-17-1984 by Ord. No. 84-035; 11-12-1985 by Ord. No.
85-096]
Where there are no existing laterals or house connections and it is required
to install a new sewer lateral and/or house connection, it shall be the sole
responsibility of the property owner to install the sewer lateral and/or house
connection at the property owner's cost and at no expense to the City,
except under the following circumstances:
§ 407-41. Construction of missing sections of sewer collection
system. [Added 6-19-1984 by Ord. No. 84-058]
In the event that a roadway within the City does not have a section of the
sewer collection system constructed therein and further that it is necessary
to construct said missing section of the sewer collection system in order to
allow a property owner to connect a sewer lateral into the existing sewer
collection system, the cost of installing said missing section of the sewer
collection system shall be the responsibility of the property owner. However,
upon application of said property owner, the City Council may by resolution
authorize said work or any part thereof to be the responsibility of the City of
Paterson at the City's expense. The City Council shall consider in connection
with the above application the location in question, the availability of that
portion of the sewer collection system to be constructed to additional
property owners and the recommendation of the Department of Public
Works. This section shall not be deemed to allow the City to assume the
A. Said work is done in a redevelopment area and in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55C-1 et seq.,166 in which event if authorized by the City
Council resolution, said work may be the responsibility of the City of
Paterson at the City's expense and at no cost to the property owner.
B. Said work is done by a nonprofit housing corporation or a private forprofit
corporation assisted by the State of New Jersey or a federal
agency and said work is performed in connection with the construction
of owner-occupied low- or moderate-income housing, in which event, if
authorized by the City Council resolution, the cost of said work may be
assumed, in part or in whole, by the Department of Community
Development, City of Paterson.
166. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:55C-1 et seq. was repealed by Chapter 79 of the Laws of 1992.
See now the Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.
§ 407-39 PATERSON CODE § 407-41
403:770
cost of installing sewer laterals or house connections except as particularly
specified in § 407-40.
§ 407-41 SECURITY GATES § 407-41
403:771

ARTICLE IV
Disposal of Waste Into Storm Sewers
[Adopted 11-9-2005 by Ord. No. 05-075167]
§ 407-42. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MSA) operated by the City of Paterson, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 407-43. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Paterson or other public
body, and is designated and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and
transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 407-44. Prohibited conduct.
The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Paterson
is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 407-45. Exceptions.
167. Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 153, but was redesignated as
Ch. 407, Art. IV, to maintain the organizational style of the Code.
§ 407-42 SECURITY GATES § 407-45
403:773
§ 407-46. Enforcement.
The article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Department of
Public Works and/or other municipal officials of the City of Paterson.
§ 407-47. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,250.
§ 407-48. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
B. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters).
C. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from fire-fighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing matter applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
(2) Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 407-45 PATERSON CODE § 407-49
403:774
§ 407-49. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
§ 407-49 SECURITY GATES § 407-49
403:775

ARTICLE V
Illicit Connections to Storm Sewers
[Adopted 11-9-2005 by Ord. No. 05-076168]
§ 407-50. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the City of Paterson, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the
failure to comply.
§ 407-51. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory. The definitions below are the same as or based on corresponding
definitions in the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or nonphysical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the City of Paterson,
unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit other than
the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Nondomestic waste, including, but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act [33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)].
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Paterson or other public
body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer systems
that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to collect and
transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
168. Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 152, but was redesignated as
Ch. 407, Art. V, to maintain the style of the Code.
§ 407-50 SECURITY GATES § 407-51
403:777
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature for
the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come in direct contact with any
raw material intermediate product (other than heat) or finished product.
Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain algaecides or biocides to
control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers and/or corrosion
inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any raw materials, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited
to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 407-52. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
City of Paterson any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 407-53. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Department of
Public Works and other municipal officials of the City of Paterson.
§ 407-54. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250.
§ 407-55. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
§ 407-56. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
§ 407-51 PATERSON CODE § 407-56
403:778
Chapter 411
SEX OFFENDERS
§ 407-56 SEX OFFENDERS § 407-56
411:779

ARTICLE I
Registration
[Adopted 10-11-1994 by Ord. No. 94-068]
§ 411-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following definitions shall apply:
CONVICTED OFFENDER — Any person who has been convicted of a
violation of the following statutes: N.J.S.A. 2C:14-2, N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3 and
N.J.S.A. 2C:14-4, where the victim of said crime was a person under the age
of eighteen (18).
PERMANENT RESIDENT — Any person who resides within the City of
Paterson for more than 30 days in any one year.
§ 411-2. Registration of permanent residents required; information
to be supplied.
Any convicted offender who is or becomes a permanent resident of the City
of Paterson shall, upon obtaining permanent residence status as defined in
this article or upon passage of this article, register at the Paterson Police
Division. At the time of registration, the following information shall be
supplied by the convicted offender:
§ 411-3. Continuing obligation to update registration information.
Obligation to provide that information contained in § 411-2 above shall be a
continuing obligation, and any change in any of the information so supplied
shall be immediately reported to the Paterson Police Division.
§ 411-4. Registry of convicted offenders.
The Chief of Police shall maintain a registry of convicted offenders
continuing the information required in § 411-2 of this chapter in
A. Name and social security number.
B. Street address.
C. Driver's license number.
D. Make, model and license plate number of any motor vehicle owned or
used.
E. Nature of each and every offense committed.
F. Date of each offense and date of each committed.
G. Date of release from custody.
H. Prosecuting agency for each offense.
I. Age of victim for each offense.
§ 411-1 SEX OFFENDERS § 411-4
411:781
alphabetical order by street name, which registry shall be available at all
times for inspection by any person. A copy of the registry shall also be
forwarded by the Chief of Police to the Paterson School District.
§ 411-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person charged
with violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, be subject to
imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days or be subject to a period
of community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
§ 411-4 PATERSON CODE § 411-5
411:782
ARTICLE II
Residency Restrictions
[Adopted 2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 06-026]
§ 411-6. Prohibition.
No person over the age of 18 who has been convicted of a violation of any
crime against a minor as listed in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2, and who as a result of
said conviction is required to register with the proper authorities pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., Registration and notification of release of certain
offenders, shall be permitted to reside or live within 1,000 feet of any school
in the City of Paterson.
§ 411-7. Exceptions.
§ 411-8. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this section shall be punishable by one or more of the
penalties contained in § 1-3, including: a fine not exceeding $1,250;
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days.
A. A person who resides or lives within 1,000 feet of any school in the City
of Paterson shall have 60 days from receipt of written notice of the
prohibition set forth herein to move. Failure to move to a location which
is in compliance with this section within that time period shall
constitute a violation of this section.
B. This section shall not apply to a person who has established a residence
prior to March 1, 2006.
§ 411-6 SEX OFFENDERS § 411-8
411:783
Chapter 412
SICK LEAVE FOR PRIVATE EMPLOYEES
§ 412-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 412-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENCY — The Department of Health and Human Services.
CALENDAR YEAR — A regular and consecutive twelve-month period, as
determined by an employer.
CONSTRUCTION UNION — A labor organization that represents, for
purposes of collective bargaining, employees involved in the performance
of construction, reconstruction, demolition, alteration, custom fabrication,
or repair work and who are enrolled or have graduated from a registered
apprenticeship program.
A. Ensure that all workers in the City of Paterson can address their own
health needs and the health needs of their family members by requiring
employers to provide a minimum level of paid sick time, including time
for care for family members;
B. Diminish public and private health care costs and promote preventative
health services in the City of Paterson by enabling workers to seek early
and routine medical care for themselves and their family members;
C. Protect the public's health in Paterson by reducing the risk of and
spread of contagion;
D. Promote the economic security and stability of workers and their
families, as well as businesses serving the City of Paterson and its
residents;
E. Protect residents and all workers in the City of Paterson from losing
their jobs or facing workplace discipline as a result of illness and the
use of sick time to care for themselves or their family members;
F. Safeguard the public welfare, health, safety and prosperity of the
people of the City of Paterson;
G. Accomplish the purposes described in Subsections A through F in a
manner that is fair and reasonable to both employees and employers
and rationally related to the objective sought, which is to promote the
overall health and safety of the residents and workers in the City of
Paterson by reducing the risk of and spread of communicable disease
and contagion.
§ 411-8 PATERSON CODE § 412-2
411:784
EMPLOYEE — As defined in N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a1(h), who works in the City of
Paterson for at least 80 hours in a year except that "employee," for purposes
of this chapter, does not include any person employed by any governmental
entity or instrumentality, including any New Jersey school district or board
of education or any person who is a member of a construction union and is
covered by a collective bargaining agreement negotiated by that union.
EMPLOYER — As defined in N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a1(g), except that "employer"
does not include the United States government; the state or its political
subdivisions or any office, department, agency, authority, institution,
association, society or any instrumentality of the state, including the
legislature or judiciary; or the City of Paterson.
FAMILY MEMBER —
HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed under federal or
New Jersey law to provide medical or emergency services, including but not
limited to doctors, nurses and emergency room personnel.
PAID SICK TIME — Time that is compensated at the same hourly rate and
with the same benefits, including health care benefits, as the employee
normally earns during hours worked and is provided by an employer to
an employee for the purposes described in § 412-4 of this chapter, but in
no case shall the hourly wage be less than that provided under N.J.S.A.
34:11-56a.
REGISTERED APPRENTICESHIP PROGRAM — An apprenticeship program
that is registered with and approved by the United States Department of
Labor and which meets not less than two of the following requirements:
A biological, adopted or foster child, stepchild or legal ward, a child of
a domestic partner, a child of a civil union partner, or a child to whom
the employee stands in loco parentis;
A.
A biological, foster, stepparent or adoptive parent or legal guardian of
an employee or of an employee's spouse, domestic partner or civil union
partner or a person who stood in loco parentis when the employee was
a minor child;
B.
A person to whom the employee is legally married under the laws of
New Jersey or any other state or with whom the employee has entered
into a civil union under N.J.S.A. Title 37;
C.
A grandparent or spouse, civil union partner or domestic partner of a
grandparent;
D.
E. A grandchild;
A domestic partner of an employee as defined in N.J.S.A. 26:8A-3 et
seq.; or
F.
G. A sibling.
A. Has active, employed, registered apprentices;
§ 412-2 SEX OFFENDERS § 412-2
411:785
RETALIATION — The denial of any right guaranteed under this chapter
and any threat, discipline, discharge, suspension, demotion, reduction of
hours, or any other adverse action against an employee for the exercise of
any right guaranteed herein, including for filing a complaint or informing
any person about any employer's alleged violation of this Act; cooperating
with the Agency in its investigations of alleged violations of this Act;
participating in any administrative or judicial action regarding an alleged
violation of this Act; and informing any person of his or her potential rights
under this Act.
§ 412-3. Employees covered by collective bargaining agreements.
§ 412-4. Accrual of paid sick time.
Has graduated apprentices to journey worker status during a majority
of the years that the program has been in operation; or
B.
Has graduated apprentices to journey worker status during three of the
immediately preceding five years, provides each trainee with combined
classroom and on-the-job training under the direct and close
supervision of a highly skilled worker in an occupation recognized as an
apprenticeable trade and meets the program performance standards of
enrollment and graduation under 29 CFR 29.63.1.
C.
A. All or any portion of the applicable requirements of this chapter shall
not apply to employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement,
to the extent that such requirements are expressly waived in the
collective bargaining agreement in clear and unambiguous terms.
B. With respect to employees covered by a collective bargaining
agreement in effect at the time of the effective date of this chapter, no
provision of this chapter shall apply until the expiration of the collective
bargaining agreement; however, if the terms of an expired collective
bargaining agreement provide paid sick leave that is more generous
than provided by this chapter, those terms of the expired collective
bargaining agreement apply to the extent required by law.
A. All employees accrue a minimum of one hour of paid sick time for every
30 hours actually worked, subject to the limits set forth below in
Subsections B and C.
B. Employers who employ 10 or more employees for compensation are not
required to provide more than 40 hours of paid sick time in a calendar
year.
C. Employers who employ fewer than 10 employees for compensation are
not required to provide more than 24 hours of paid sick time in a
calendar year, except for employees who are child care workers, home
health care workers and food service workers. For child care workers,
home health care workers and food service workers, employers are
required to provide up to 40 hours of paid sick time, so long as the
hours are accrued in a calendar year as set forth in Subsection A above.
§ 412-2 PATERSON CODE § 412-4
411:786
D. In determining the number of employees performing work for an
employer, all employees performing work for compensation on a fulltime,
part-time, or temporary basis shall be counted, provided that
where the number of employees who work for an employer for
compensation fluctuates, business size may be determined for the
current calendar year based upon the average number of employees
who worked for compensation during the preceding calendar year.
E. Employees who are exempt from overtime requirements under 29
U.S.C. § 213(a)(1) of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act are assumed
to work 40 hours in each work week for purposes of paid sick time
accrual unless their normal work week is less than 40 hours, in which
case paid sick time accrues based upon that normal work week.
F. Employees begin to accrue paid sick time on the first day of
employment. Employees are entitled to use accrued paid sick time
beginning on the 90th calendar day of their employment and,
thereafter, employees are entitled to use paid sick time as it is accrued.
G. Accrued but unused paid sick time shall be carried over to the following
calendar year, provided that no employer shall be required to carry over
more than 40 hours of unused paid sick time from one calendar year to
the next or allow the use of more than 40 hours of paid sick time in a
calendar year. An employer shall not be required to carry over unused
paid sick time if the employee is paid for any unused paid sick time at
the end of the calendar year in which such time is accrued.
H. Any employer with a paid leave policy, such as a paid time off policy,
that provides an amount of paid leave sufficient to meet the total annual
accrual requirements of this section that may be used for the same
purposes and under the same conditions as paid sick time under this
chapter is not required to provide additional paid sick time.
I. Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring financial or other
reimbursement to an employee from an employer upon the employee's
termination, resignation, retirement, or other separation from
employment for accrued paid sick time that has not been used.
J. If an employee is transferred to a separate division, entity, or location,
but remains employed by the same employer in the City of Paterson, the
employee is entitled to all paid sick time accrued at the prior division,
entity, or location and is entitled to use all paid sick time as provided in
this section. If there is a separation from employment and the employee
is rehired within six months of separation, previously accrued unpaid
sick time that had not been used shall be reinstated. Further, the
employee is entitled to use accrued unpaid sick time and accrue
additional unpaid sick time at the re-commencement of employment.
K. When a different employer succeeds or takes the place of an existing
employer, all employees of the original employer who remain employed
by the successor employer are entitled to all paid sick time accrued
§ 412-4 SEX OFFENDERS § 412-4
411:787
§ 412-5. Use of paid sick time.
when employed by the original employer and are entitled to use all paid
sick leave previously accrued.
L. At its sole discretion, an employer may loan paid sick time to an
employee in advance of accrual by such employee. A decision by an
employer to deny a loan request by an employee shall not subject the
employer to any liability under this chapter.
A. Paid sick time shall be provided to an employee by an employer for:
(1) An employee's mental or physical illness, injury, or health
condition; an employee's need for medical diagnosis, care, or
treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury, or health condition;
an employee's need for preventive medical care;
(2) Care of a family member with a mental or physical illness, injury, or
health condition; care of a family member who needs medical
diagnosis, care, or treatment of a mental or physical illness, injury,
or health condition; care of a family member who needs preventive
medical care;
(3) Closure of the employee's place of business by order of a public
official due to a public health emergency or an employee's need to
care for a child whose school or place of care has been closed by
order of a public official due to a public health emergency, or care
for family member when it has been determined by the health
authorities having jurisdiction or by a health care provider that the
family member's presence in the community would jeopardize the
health of others because of the family member's exposure to a
communicable disease, whether or not the family member has
actually contracted the communicable disease.
B. Nothing in this Act prohibits an employer from requesting that an
employee confirm, in writing, following use of paid sick time that the
paid sick time was used for an authorized purpose under this Act.
C. Where the need to use paid sick time is foreseeable, an employer may
require reasonable advance notice of the intention to use paid sick time.
In no event shall an employee be required to give notice more than
seven days prior to the date such sick time is to begin. Where such need
is not foreseeable, an employer may require an employee to provide
notice of the need for the use of sick time before the beginning of the
employee's work shift or work day or, in cases such as emergencies
where advance notice is not possible, notice shall be provided by the
employee as soon as practicable.
D. An employer may not require, as a condition of an employee's taking
paid sick time, that the employee search for or find a replacement
worker to cover the hours during which the employee is absent.
§ 412-4 PATERSON CODE § 412-5
411:788
§ 412-6. Exercise of rights protected; retaliation prohibited.
§ 412-7. Notice; posting and other requirements.
§ 412-8. Violations and penalties.
Any employer who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed $2,000 or the maximum permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:49-5,
E. Accrued sick time may be used in the smaller of hourly increments or
the smallest increment that the employer's payroll system uses to
account for absences or use of other time.
F. After an employee has used paid sick time for three consecutive days or
three consecutive instances, an employer may require an employee to
provide reasonable documentation that the time has been used for a
purpose covered by Subsection A. In this instance, the employer may
require documentation signed by a health care professional indicating
that the paid sick time was necessary; however, an employer may not
require that the documentation explain the nature of the illness.
A. No person shall interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of, or the
attempt to exercise, any right protected under this chapter.
B. No person shall retaliate against an employee because the employee
has properly exercised rights protected under this chapter.
A. All employers shall give written notice to each employee at the
commencement of the employee's employment (or as soon as
practicable if the employee is already employed on the effective date of
this chapter) regarding employees' rights under this chapter. Such
notice shall describe the right to paid sick time, the accrual rate and the
amount of paid sick time, and the terms of its use under this chapter;
the right to be free from retaliation for properly requesting use of paid
sick time; and the right to file a complaint or bring an action in
municipal court if paid sick time is denied by the employer or the
employee is retaliated against for requesting or taking paid sick time.
Such notice shall be in English and the primary language spoken by
that employee, so long as the primary language of that employee is also
the primary language of at least 10% of the employer's workforce.
B. Employers shall also display a poster in a conspicuous and accessible
place in each business establishment where employees are employed
containing the information required in Subsection A. The poster shall
be in English and in any language that is the first language of at least
10% of the employer's workforce.
C. The Agency can create and make available to employers notices and
posters in English and Spanish and any other languages deemed
appropriate by the Agency that contain the information required under
Subsection A for employers' use in complying with this section.
§ 412-5 SEX OFFENDERS § 412-8
411:789
or any successor law, or imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or
both. In addition to the penalties set forth above, any employer who violates
this chapter is subject to payment of restitution in the amount of any paid
sick time unlawfully withheld.
§ 412-9. Employer records.
Employers shall allow the Agency reasonable access to records and to
monitor compliance with the requirements of this Act. An employer's failure
to maintain or retain adequate records documenting hours worked by an
employee and paid sick time taken by an employee creates a rebuttable
presumption that the employer has violated this chapter, absent clear and
convincing evidence otherwise.
§ 412-10. Enforcement.
§ 412-11. Confidentiality and nondisclosure.
A. The Agency shall coordinate implementation and enforcement of this
chapter and promulgate appropriate guidelines or regulations for such
purposes.
B. The Agency shall have broad powers to ensure compliance with this
chapter.
C. In the event an allegation of noncompliance cannot be resolved by the
Agency with the employer, a complaint may be filed, by the Agency and/
or the employee as the complainant, in the Paterson Municipal Court
for any alleged violation of this chapter.
D. The Municipal Court shall have the power to adjudicate all allegations
of violations of this chapter and impose fines or penalties provided for
in this chapter, or any further relief deemed appropriate by the court,
including but not limited to restitution, reinstatement, injunctive or
declaratory relief.
E. Submitting a complaint to the Agency is neither a prerequisite nor a bar
to bringing a private action.
F. The Agency shall have the power to do outreach to inform the residents
of the City of their rights under this Act and to publicize online and in
other media the names of employers who violate this Act.
A. An employer may not require disclosure of the specific details relating
to an employee's or an employee's family member's medical condition
as a condition of providing paid sick time under this chapter. If an
employer possesses health information about an employee or an
employee's family member, such information shall be treated as
confidential and shall not be disclosed by the employer except to the
affected employee or with the permission of the affected employee.
§ 412-8 PATERSON CODE § 412-11
411:790
§ 412-12. Effect on other policies.
§ 412-13. Construal of provisions.
This chapter provides minimum requirements pertaining to paid sick time
and shall not be construed to preempt, limit, or otherwise affect the
applicability of any other law, regulation, requirement, policy, or standard
that provides for greater accrual or use by employees of sick time, whether
paid or unpaid, or that extends other protections to employees.
Chapter 414
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garage sales and flea markets — See Ch. 249.
B. The Agency shall maintain confidential the identity of any complaining
person unless disclosure of the identity is necessary for resolution of
the investigation. The Agency shall, to the extent practicable, notify a
complaining person that the Agency will be disclosing his or her
identity prior to such disclosure.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to discourage or prohibit an
employer from the adoption or retention of a paid sick time policy more
generous than the one required herein.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the obligation
of an employer to comply with any contract, collective bargaining
agreement, employment benefit plan, or other agreement providing
more generous paid sick time to an employee than required herein.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the rights of
public employees regarding paid sick time or use of paid sick time as
provided in the laws of the State of New Jersey pertaining to public
employees.
D. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as diminishing the rights
secured by S2177, the New Jersey Security and Financial
Empowerment Act169 for domestic violence victims in the City of
Paterson.
E. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted in a way that
would conflict with any state or federal law pertaining to paid sick time
or employee benefits.
169. Editor's Note: See N.J.S.A. 34:11C-1 et seq.
§ 412-11 SIGNS § 412-13
414:791

ARTICLE I
Real Estate Signs
[Adopted 5-23-1995 as Ord. No. 95-028]
§ 414-1. Requirements for erection of signs.
Real estate signs customarily necessary in the offering of real estate for
sale or to let by the owner thereof or by his real estate agent or broker
are permitted to be erected in the City, provided that the following
requirements are complied with:
A. In all zones, one real estate sign is permitted for each principal use.
B. All real estate signs shall be nonilluminated.
C. All real estate signs may be freestanding or attached to the building
which is for sale or to let.
D. Signs permitted hereby shall pertain only to the sale or lease of the lot
or premises upon which the sign was placed.
E. Signs customarily used to indicate that the real estate offered for sale
or to let has been sold or leased by the owner, real estate agent or
broker concerned are prohibited. Permitted real estate signs shall be
removed within seven days of the day that a contact of sale or lease of a
premises has been executed by both parties to the document.
F. In the event that the owner, real estate agent or broker conducts an
open house at the premises, an addition to the signs, stating "open
house," may be added to the on-premises sign.
§ 414-1 SIGNS § 414-1
414:793

ARTICLE II
Political Signs and Campaign Materials
[Adopted 2-10-2004 by Ord. No. 04-009]
§ 414-2. Legislative declaration.
The Municipal Council finds and declares that the safety and welfare of the
people of the City and others using the streets and sidewalks of the City are
endangered because of the common practice of candidates for public office
and their supporters, and of supporters and opposers of public questions
posed in elections to:
§ 414-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAMPAIGN MATERIAL — Any poster, sign, handbill, circular, banner, card,
advertisement, printed sticker, painted words or material having reference
to any election or to the adoption or rejection of any public questions at any
general, primary or special election.
PERSON — Any individual candidate, corporation, political committee,
citizen's committee or partnership, organization, association or any
committee or group of persons organized on behalf of or against any
candidate or public question to be voted on at any special, primary or
general election.
POLITICAL SIGN — Any sign, including on the lawns or grounds of private
property, advancing the candidacy of any candidate or group of candidates
for public office or supporting or opposing a public question, expressly
excluding, however, any such signs posted or displayed on existing
commercial billboards by or with the consent of the owner thereof and
any such signs posted or displayed on licensed motor vehicles in operating
condition; provided, however, that no such vehicle is parked or placed in any
location for the primary purpose of displaying any such signs, it being the
intention of this article to eliminate the unsightly condition created by the
parking or standing of motor vehicles bearing political signs at or adjacent
to trafficked areas for the purpose of displaying such signs.
A. Affix posters, signs and other campaign literature to trees, lawns, poles,
trestles, traffic signs and other structures in the City, causing same to
be obliterated, obstructed and defaced.
B. Write names and slogans upon the streets and sidewalks of the City,
causing lawful markings upon same to be confused, obstructed and
defaced.
C. Fail to remove such signs, posters and other campaign literature after
the elections, thereby requiring the diversion of the work effort of
municipal personnel and causing an unsightly condition and expensive
drain on municipal funds.
§ 414-2 SIGNS § 414-3
414:795
PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC FACILITY — Any property or item used for
public purposes, including but not limited to all public streets, sidewalks,
boulevards, alleys or other public ways, all public parks, squares, spaces,
grounds, buildings, medians, traffic signal facilities, utility poles or any
other type of public pole, public trees, litter receptacles, benches, bus
shelters, fences or any object affixed to or placed upon public streets,
parking lots or sidewalks which is affixed or placed thereon for public
purposes or for the use of the public.
§ 414-4. Political signs.
§ 414-5. Statement of information required.
All campaign material and political signs shall bear upon the face thereof
a statement of the name, address and other information required to be
disclosed by New Jersey Election Statutes.
§ 414-6. Persons responsible for removal.
The following persons shall be responsible under this article for the removal
of any campaign material or political sign posted:
§ 414-7. Time restraints on posting and removal. [Amended
2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 05-006]
No campaign material or political sign shall be erected, posted or displayed,
including on private property, more than 30 days prior to the date of the
A. Except as provided in Subsection B hereof below, any such political
signs shall be a ground sign or a sign placed on or in private property,
with the consent of the owner, and no such sign shall exceed eight
square feet in total display area nor have a setback less than 10 feet
from the inner line of the sidewalk upon which fronts the lot on which
such sign is situated or, where no sidewalk exists, less than 20 feet from
the street line upon which fronts the lot on which such sign situated.
B. Any privately owned building or part thereof designated and serving as
the campaign headquarters of any candidate or group of candidates for
election for public office or as headquarters of a person or entity
supporting or opposing a public question may display one political sign
not exceeding 20 square feet in total area.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall erect or display or who shall
cause or permit to be erected or displayed any campaign material or
political sign on premises subject to his, her or its control.
B. Persons whose names appear on any political sign or on any campaign
material and as required by New Jersey Election Statutes.
C. Any other person who actually places any campaign material or political
sign in any public place or public facility, even though his or her name
does not appear thereon.
§ 414-3 PATERSON CODE § 414-7
414:796
election to which such material or sign pertains, and any such material or
sign shall be removed not more than 14 days after the date of such election.
§ 414-8. General restrictions.
§ 414-9. Violations and penalties; issuance of warning. [Amended
2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 05-006]
A. No person shall draw, write or print or permit or suffer to be drawn,
written or printed upon any street or sidewalk or upon any public place
or facility any slogan, motto, name or symbol whether the same is
written with chalk, paint or any other substance. Each day the political
sign, advertisement or writing remains in violation of this section may
be considered a separate violation, and a separate complaint may be
issued for said violation until it is removed.
B. No campaign material or political sign shall be attached to or affixed
upon any public place, public facility or on public property by any
means. Each day the political sign, advertisement or writing remains in
violation of this section may be considered a separate violation, and a
separate complaint may be issued for said violation until it is removed.
C. No campaign material or political sign shall be painted or affixed upon
private property or private fence or a private tree without the consent
of the owner thereof. Each day the political sign, advertisement or
writing remains in violation of this section may be considered a
separate violation, and a separate complaint may be issued for said
violation until it is removed.
D. No person shall remove, tear down, deface or destroy any lawfully
erected political sign on private property without the consent of the
owner of said private property.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine in the amount of $50. Fines for
violation of any provision of this article are payable at the Violations
Bureau without a court appearance. Costs of court of $30 will be
imposed, consistent with New Jersey Court Rule 7:11-4, for all such
payments. [Amended 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-050]
B. No summons or complaint shall issue to a candidate or the owner of
private property on which a sign is located more than 14 days after the
election until a warning is first issued to the candidate and owner and
the sign is not removed within seven days of the issuance of said notice.
§ 414-7 SIGNS § 414-9
414:797
Chapter 417
SLAUGHTERHOUSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fowl and birds — See Ch. 121, Art. IV.
Preparation and sale of food — See Ch. 239.
Fats, bones and meat refuse — See Ch. 427,
Art. III.
§ 414-9 PATERSON CODE § 414-9
417:798
ARTICLE I
Sale and Slaughtering of Poultry
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 13, Art. 17, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 417-1. License required; term of license; fee.
§ 417-2. Conditions for issuance of license.
No license shall be issued under this article unless the applicant for the
license shall establish to the satisfaction of the Health Division of the City
that:
§ 417-3. Regulations; maintenance of buildings.
All buildings or places in which the slaughtering of poultry or the sale of live
poultry is conducted as a business in the City shall conform to the following
requirements:
A. No person shall carry on or engage in the business of selling live fowl or
preparing live fowl for sale or slaughtering poultry at or in any place in
the City without first obtaining a license therefor from the Health
Division as hereinafter set forth in this article.
B. Every license shall expire on December 31 of each year or prior thereto
if and when the premises covered by the license shall be converted to a
use other than one provided for in this article.
C. The annual fee for the license shall be $500, payable before issuance of
the license. [Amended 12-27-1988 by Ord. No. 88-047; 12-16-2003
by Ord. No. 03-094]
A. The building and the licensed business to be conducted therein
conforms and will conform to the requirements of § 417-3 of this article.
B. The premises for which the license is sought is not within 50 feet of a
building used in whole or in part as a dwelling. For purposes of this
Subsection B, said distance shall be ascertained by measuring from the
nearest point of the premises to be covered by the license to the nearest
point of the building used as a dwelling.
A. The building shall be used for the keeping, slaughtering and selling of
poultry only.
B. Such business shall be conducted on the ground floor only.
C. The floors of each building shall be paved with material impervious to
moisture and shall be properly sloped to a well-trapped inlet having
direct connection with a sewer. The walls of the room in which
slaughtering is actually carried on shall be covered to a height of six
feet with smooth, moistureproof material, and the remainder of the
walls and ceilings shall be finished with a smooth hard surface.
§ 417-1 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 417-3
417:799
§ 417-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
D. Plucking shall not be carried on in a room used for slaughtering.
Watertight receptacles shall be provided for all refuse and shall be
properly covered and removed daily.
E. All rooms or space used for the purpose of slaughtering poultry shall be
ventilated directly to the open air. No such ventilation shall in any way
enter a ventilating shaft which is used in connection with the living
apartments of any building.
F. All coops shall be made of heavy wire and of uniform size. All stands or
counters shall be built substantially and covered with marble, slate,
zinc or tin. Stands, counters and coops shall be raised from the floor in
such a way as to permit flushing underneath the same. A plentiful
supply of water shall be provided. Stands and counters for the sale of
poultry shall be arranged to allow a clear passageway to the public.
G. All parts of such poultry slaughterhouses shall be at all times kept in a
sanitary condition.
§ 417-3 PATERSON CODE § 417-4
417:800
Chapter 421
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 113.
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 179.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 363.
§ 417-4 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 417-4
417:801

ARTICLE I
Smoking in Public Areas
[Adopted 4-21-2012 by Ord. No. 12-021]
§ 421-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or
the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other matter or
substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked.
§ 421-2. Smoking prohibited in parks and recreational areas.
No person shall smoke within the boundaries of public parks, playgrounds,
ball fields, and similar property that is owned or otherwise possessed by
the City of Paterson upon which the public is invited or upon which the
public is permitted and where individuals gather for recreational activities,
including all areas adjacent to such facilities, including, but not limited to,
any parking area, driveway or drive aisle, which has been designated with
no-smoking signs.
§ 421-3. Signage required.
A sign shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted at every
property where smoking is prohibited by this article. The sign(s) shall
state "Smoke-Free Zone" or "This Public Property is 100% Smoke Free"
or substantially similar language, written in lettering that is not less than
two inches in height, and shall contain the international no-smoking sign or
symbol.
§ 421-4. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the City of Paterson Police Chief, Fire Chief,
Health Officer, and/or Director of Public Works and their designees.
§ 421-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person observed to be in violation of the provisions of this article shall
be issued a court summons and may be subject, at the discretion of the
court, to the following penalties:
A. A fine of not less than $50 but not exceeding $100 for the first violation.
B. A fine of not less than $100 but not exceeding $200 for the second
violation.
C. A fine of not less than $200 but not exceeding $500 for the third and
subsequent violations.
§ 421-1 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 421-5
417:803

ARTICLE II
Sale and Distribution to Persons Under 21 Years of Age
[Adopted 10-27-2015 by Ord. No. 15-078]
§ 421-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meaning
indicated:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic device that can be used
to deliver nicotine or vapor or smoke or any matter that can be smoked
or other substances that can be smoked and that are not FDA-approved
tobacco cessation nicotine patches or nicotine chewing gum, including,
but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, pipe, hookah,
electronic and vape pen (portable vaporizers/cigarettes) or vaporizers,
including but not limited to alcohol vaporizers.
MATTER THAN CAN BE SMOKED — Any substance that can be smoked
or vaporized, including but not limited to alcohol or Salvia divinorum,
synthetic cannabinoids or items similar to or commonly referred to as
"K2" or "spice," shredded plant material that is typically sprayed with a
synthetic compound chemically similar to THC (the psychoactive ingredient
in marijuana), synthetic cannabis, fake pot, synthetic marijuana, legal weed,
herbal incense or potpourri or other smoke blends or spray-on liquids.
NICOTINE — (Natural or synthetic) An addictive chemical which is made
by several types of plants, including the tobacco plant, or produced
synthetically that has powerful pharmacologic effects (including increased
heart rate, heart stroke volume, and oxygen consumption by the heart
muscle), as well as powerful psychodynamic effects (such as euphoria,
increased alertness, and a sense of relaxation). Nicotine is the primary
addictive agent in cigarettes, chewing tobacco, and cigars. Liquid nicotine
is commonly used in electronic smoking devices like e-cigarettes, e-hookah
and hookah pens.
NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCTS — Any product that is designed to
deliver tobacco or nicotine or vapor or smoke or any matter that can be
smoked, including, but not limited to, electronic nicotine delivery systems,
what are commonly known as "e-cigarettes" or e-hookah or hookah pens
or other types of electronic smoking devices, or any cartridge or other
component of such device, or tobacco and nicotine paraphernalia or related
products including but not limited to any substance used in such devices,
such as liquids or powders or other forms of tobacco or nicotine, but
excluding United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) tobacco
cessation approved nicotine patches and FDA tobacco cessation approved
nicotine chewing gum.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any
other legal entity.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Implies that a product is directly accessible to
the public through, for example, a rack, shelf, or counter-top display.
§ 421-6 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 421-6
417:805
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke or vapor
from, or the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any other
matter or substance which contains tobacco or any other matter that can
be smoked or vaporized, or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from
a smoking device or electronic smoking device, including but not limited to
alcohol or other liquid vaporizing (smoking).
SMOKING DEVICE — A device that can be used to deliver tobacco, nicotine,
alcohol, or any matter that can be smoked or vaporized, or that are not
FDA approved smoking cessation devices, including, but not limited to,
any electronic smoking devices, electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo, pipe,
bongs, hookah, electronic and vape pens (portable vaporizers/cigarettes) or
vaporizers, including but not limited to alcohol vaporizers.
TOBACCO — Any product made from the tobacco plant for the purpose
of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use including cigars,
chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, dip, cigars and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Any person or entity that owns, leases, operates
or otherwise exercises control over a store, stand, booth, concession, or
place at which the selling, furnishing or giving of tobacco, tobacco products,
nicotine, smoking devices, electronic smoking devices or nicotine delivery
products, or liquids used in any and all such products or devices, or any
other matters that can be smoked or vaporized, are made to purchasers
for consumption or use. The term shall also mean any person or entity
that owns, operates, leases or otherwise exercises control over vending
machines that dispense tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine, smoking
devices, electronic smoking devices or nicotine delivery products, or liquids
used in any and all such devices, and self-service displays of any and all such
products.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE — Any automated, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens, or other form of payment, or uses
a remote control device to operate such machine, that dispenses tobacco,
nicotine, electronic smoking devices, and/or nicotine delivery products.
§ 421-7. Sale and distribution to persons under 21 years of age.
A. Age 21 required to be sold product. No person or tobacco retailer shall
sell, furnish or give tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine, smoking
devices, electronic smoking devices or nicotine delivery products, or
liquids used in any and all such products or devices, or any other
matters that can be smoked or vaporized to anyone under the age of 21
years.
B. Age 21 signs at point of sale. Tobacco retailers of tobacco, tobacco
products, nicotine, smoking devices, electronic smoking devices or
nicotine delivery products, or liquids used in any and all such products
or devices, or any other matters that can be smoked or vaporized shall
conspicuously post and reasonably maintain signs that are a minimum
size of six inches by eight inches at all check-out counters notifying
§ 421-6 PATERSON CODE § 421-7
417:806
customers that they must be over 21 and proof of age is required to
purchase such products.
C. No self-service sales. No person shall sell tobacco, tobacco products,
nicotine, smoking devices, electronic smoking devices or nicotine
delivery products, or liquids used in any and all such products or
devices, or any other matters that can be smoked or vaporized in the
City of Paterson unless the tobacco retailer, person, owner or employee
of the establishment controls the retail sale of such products in a direct,
face-to-face exchange between the tobacco retailer and the consumer,
with all such products stored behind the counter and out of grasp of the
customers.
D. Self-service displays and vending machines. Self-service displays and
vending machines that dispense tobacco, tobacco products, nicotine,
smoking devices, electronic smoking devices or nicotine delivery
products, or liquids used in any and all such products or devices, or any
other matters that can be smoked or vaporized shall be prohibited in
facilities where people under 21 are allowed, including but not limited
to people under 21 who are employees, contractors, visitors and
patrons.
E. Entrance signage. Each tobacco retailer shall conspicuously post and
reasonably maintain signs that are a minimum size of eight inches by
eight inches on all entrances notifying customers they must be over 21
to enter their establishment if the tobacco retailer has self-service
displays or vending machines that dispense tobacco, tobacco products,
nicotine, smoking devices, electronic smoking devices or nicotine
delivery products, or liquids used in any and all such products or
devices, or any other matters that can be smoked or vaporized or mostly
sells these products, and not allow persons under age 21 to enter such
retail outlets.
F. Age verification. Any person selling tobacco, tobacco products,
nicotine, smoking devices, electronic smoking devices or nicotine
delivery products, or liquids used in any and all such products or
devices, or any other matters that can be smoked or vaporized shall
verify by means of government-issued photogenic identification
containing the bearer's date of birth that nobody purchasing the
tobacco or nicotine or nicotine delivery products is younger than 21
years of age. No person shall sell tobacco or nicotine or nicotine
delivery products to anyone under 21 years of age who has a note from
an adult requesting such sale.
G. Notice to employees. No tobacco retailer selling tobacco, tobacco
products, nicotine, smoking devices, electronic smoking devices or
nicotine delivery products, or liquids used in any and all such products
or devices, or any other matters that can be smoked or vaporized allow
any employers, managers, employees or persons to sell, furnish, give or
distribute such products until:
§ 421-7 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 421-7
417:807
§ 421-8. Enforcement.
§ 421-9. Violations and penalties.
(1) The tobacco retailer has provided each such employer, manager,
employee or person with this City article; and
(2) Each such employer, manager, employee or person has read this
article in full and signed paperwork that they have read and
understand this article; and
(3) That the tobacco retailer has filed each signed paperwork at the
retail location; and
(4) The tobacco retailer shall also sign paperwork that they have read
and understand the laws, and such paperwork shall be retained on
file at the retail location.
A. The enforcement authority for this article shall be the Paterson Health
and Human Services Director or his or her designee, Health Officer or
his/her designee, the Police Department or his/her designee.
B. The enforcement authority may, after giving proper identification,
inspect any matter, thing, premises, place, person, record, vehicle,
incident, or event as necessary to execute his or her official duties in a
manner prescribed by law.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the enforcing authority in his/her
enforcement of this article, and the enforcing authority may request the
assistance of the Paterson Police Department when necessary to
execute his or her official duties in a manner prescribed by law.
D. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this article to the
Paterson Health and Human Services Director or his or her designee,
Health Officer or his/her designee, the Police department or his/her
designee.
A. A person and/or tobacco retailer who violates the provisions of this
article, including any employee of a retail dealer license under P.L.
1948, c.65 (N.J.S.A. 54.40A-1 et seq.) who actually sells or otherwise
furnishes either directly or indirectly tobacco, nicotine, nicotine
delivery products, smoking devices, electronic smoking devices or any
matter that can be smoked to anyone under 21 years of age, shall be
liable to a civil penalty of not less than $250 for the first violation, not
less than $500 for the second violation, and not less than $1,000 for the
third and each subsequent violation. Complaint shall be made in the
municipal court of the City of Paterson or before other judicial officer
having authority under the laws of the state of New Jersey.
B. It shall constitute a separate violation for:
§ 421-7 PATERSON CODE § 421-9
417:808
(1) Each direct or indirect sale, furnishing or giving of tobacco,
tobacco products, nicotine, smoking devices, electronic smoking
devices or nicotine delivery products, or liquids used in any and all
such products or devices, or any other matters that can be smoked
or vaporized to any anyone under the age of 21;
(2) Each day the required sign is not posted;
(3) Each day a self-service display or tobacco vending machine is
located in a facility where anyone under 21 years of age is allowed;
and
(4) Each incident of failure to require identification.
C. In addition to the penalties set forth in § 421-8 above, the Paterson
Board of Health may suspend the retail food establishment license of
any tobacco retailer or person convicted of violation of this article, for a
period of not more than three days, pursuant to the authority of the
Board of Health to license and regulate food establishments as provided
by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(c).
§ 421-9 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 421-9
417:809
Chapter 427
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing-property maintenance — See Ch.
271.
Housing standards — See Ch. 275.
Littering — See Ch. 313.
Nuisances — See Ch. 341.
Rodent control — See Ch. 385.
Slaughterhouses — See Ch. 417.
§ 421-9 PATERSON CODE § 421-9
417:810
ARTICLE I
Abandoned Mattresses
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 13, Art. 1, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 427-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MATTRESS — Any quilted pad, mattress, mattress pad, bunk quilt or
cushion, stuffed or filled with wool, hair or other soft material except
feathers, to be used on a couch or other bed for sleeping or reclining
purposes.
§ 427-2. Prohibited acts.
No person shall:
§ 427-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
A. Collect for the purpose of reusing in any manner whatsoever any
mattress which has been abandoned by the owner thereof on any public
street, yard, house or lot in the City or on any of the garbage dumps
maintained or conducted by the City.
B. Manufacture any mattresses in the City, any part of which shall be made
up of any abandoned mattress as specified in this section.
C. Bring into the City for reuse or for remanufacture any mattress or any
part thereof which shall have been abandoned in a manner set forth in
Subsection A of this section.
§ 427-1 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-3
417:811

ARTICLE II
Garbage and Refuse Removal and Disposal
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 13, Art. 6, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 427-4. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — The residue from the burning of coal or other fuel, and shall
include accumulations of dirt and such other noncombustible materials not
included in refuse or garbage.
GARBAGE — Includes offal, kitchen wastes, refuse of animal or vegetable
matter, carrion, entrails of chickens, animals or fish and matter of a similar
nature.
REFUSE or RUBBISH — Includes combustible debris, paper, cardboard,
rags, mattresses, discarded wearing apparel, furniture, carpets, rubber,
grass cuttings, plant trimmings, leaves, bottles, broken glass, crockery and
tin cans. It shall not include scrap metal, earth, sand, bricks, stone, plaster
or debris of a similar substance that accumulates incidental to building
construction, nor shall it include trade wastes.
§ 427-5. Placement of receptacle for collection; removal; violation;
complaint and summons. [Amended 4-1-1980 by Ord. No. 80-018]
A. All garbage, refuse or rubbish, waste, empty boxes, containers, cartons
or papers to be collected by the City or its subcontractors shall be
placed near the curbline so as to be easily collected from the roadway,
but not so near the roadway as to project thereon or as to interfere with
persons or vehicles lawfully using the roadway.
B. No material intended for removal or the receptacle containing the same
shall be placed or allowed to be placed on the sidewalk for collection
prior to 6:00 p.m. local prevailing time of the day before such materials
are to be collected in that particular district.
C. All empty receptacles shall be removed following the collection so as
not to remain at or near the curbline more than a reasonable and
necessary period of time.
D. Each day during any portion of which such violation occurs will
constitute a separate offense.
E. Whenever evidence has been obtained or received establishing that a
violation of this article has been committed, the Director of the
Department of Public Works or any inspector working under his
supervision shall issue a warning notice to the owner or tenant of the
property or the agent of such owner. In the event that said owner,
tenant or agent does not comply with this notice, the Director of the
§ 427-4 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-5
417:813
§ 427-6. Receptacle requirements.
Department of Public Works or any inspector under his supervision
shall sign a complaint and issue a summons. Such summons shall be
served in person or by mail upon the tenant or upon the individual
owner having an interest in the property or a managing or general
agent of the individual employed in the management of such real
property according to the Rules set forth in N.J.R. 4:4-4.
F. For the purpose of prosecution of this article, proof that the receptacle
or receptacles were placed on or in front of a particular property in
violation of this article, together with proof that the defendant named in
the complaint was at the time of such violation the owner of said
premises, shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the owner
was the person who committed the violation of this article. Said
presumption may be rebutted by substantial evidence on the part of the
owner.
A. Receptacles generally. Ashes, garbage, refuse or rubbish shall be
placed and stored in suitable receptacles or containers pending
removal. Receptacles shall be of such shape and size so that the
contents can be readily discharged from them; provided, however, that
disposable containers of plastic or such other material shall be
permitted. The combined weight from any rigid refuse container and its
contents shall not exceed 70 pounds. Liquid wastes shall not be placed
in containers of any kind. Such disposable containers must be properly
sealed.
B. Ashes. Containers for ashes shall be of metal or plastic of sturdy
construction. Hot cinders or ashes or smoldering embers shall not be
placed in containers of any kind. Receptacles for ashes shall be
provided with covers to prevent the admission of snow and rain and the
subsequent freezing of the contents.
C. Garbage or mixed contents. Containers for garbage or a combined
mixture of garbage and ashes or refuse or rubbish shall be of metal or
plastic, watertight and fitted with handles and a substantial tight-fitting
metal or plastic cover, provided that disposable containers of plastic
containers must be properly sealed. Garbage or mixed contents must be
placed in sealed plastic bags and then placed in containers as described
above with a substantial tight-fitting metal or plastic cover. [Amended
6-24-2008 by Ord. No. 08-023]
D. Refuse or rubbish. Containers for refuse or rubbish may be of wood,
metal or plastic, or if a rigid container is not desired, large burlap,
canvas, plastic or similar cloth bags may be used. Such disposable
containers must be properly sealed. Covers for rigid containers shall be
provided to prevent scattering of contents by the wind and to prevent
the breeding of flies and other insects.
§ 427-5 PATERSON CODE § 427-6
417:814
§ 427-7. Scattering of refuse.
No person shall throw, disperse or permit the throwing or dispersal of any
refuse, garbage, refuse or waste upon any lot, street, sidewalk or place
other than as provided by this article.
§ 427-8. Disturbance of refuse by unauthorized persons.
No person shall remove or disturb any garbage, ashes, rubbish, waste,
containers, empty boxes, cartons, wrappings and papers placed out for
collection unless he is the owner thereof or has authority from the owner or
of the City.
§ 427-9. Manner of collection and transportation; vehicle
requirements.
E. Empty boxes and wrappings. All empty boxes, cartons and wrappings
shall be flattened down and securely fastened or tied together so as to
require no unnecessary space in the vehicle collecting the same; and all
papers shall be securely tied so as to prevent the scattering thereof.
F. Maintenance; condemned tags; safe handling. A sufficient number of
containers for the refuse accumulating between collection days shall be
provided by every householder, storekeeper, shopkeeper, market,
restaurant, hotel or other place of business served by the City. All refuse
containers shall be maintained in good condition by the owners thereof
and promptly replaced when no longer fit for use. Containers which
have been marked with a condemned tag by the Department of Public
Works will be taken away by the collectors if used after they have been
tagged. No rigid containers shall be filled above a point two inches
below the top. When the rubbish to be removed exceeds in volume the
capacities of the receptacles regularly employed, it shall be either
wrapped in bundles and securely tied or, as in the case of discarded
furniture, broken, reduced in volume and bundled so as to permit safe
and speedy handling. The greatest dimension of such bulky articles
shall not be more than three feet.
G. No restaurant, hotel, storekeeper, shopkeeper, market or other place of
business served by the City shall allow, permit or suffer the placement
of more than 20 receptacles or other containers utilized for the disposal
of garbage and refuse to be placed near the curbline as required by
§ 427-5A on any day when garbage and refuse is scheduled for removal
by the City or its subcontractors. [Amended 8-6-1985 by Ord. No.
85-071]
A. Every collector shall collect and transport all ashes, refuse and garbage
by such means and in such manner so that none of such material, solid
or liquid, shall escape and drop upon the ground and that all reasonably
avoidable noise incident to the collection and transportation of such
material shall be prevented.
§ 427-6 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-9
417:815
§ 427-10. Supervision of collectors.
All collectors shall be subject to the reasonable and appropriate supervision
of the Sanitation Division or any other City employee designated by the
Director of the Department of Public Works to ensure compliance with
this article and rules and regulations approved by the Council, which
designation and approval may be made by resolution.
§ 427-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-27-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-038; 11-9-1988 by Ord. No. 88-038; 4-24-1990 by Ord. No.
90-013; 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068; 2-8-2005 by Ord. No.
05-013]
B. All vehicles used for said collection must be maintained in good working
order and in a clean and sanitary condition. Said vehicles must be
liquidproof and completely covered with a heavy covering during
transportation of collected material from the place of collection to the
place of disposal.
C. Any collected material which drops from collection containers or from
vehicles either during loading or transporting shall be gathered and
cleaned up immediately. Failure to comply with this requirement will be
considered a violation of this article.
D. All ashes, garbage and refuse which a collector under this article
undertakes to collect shall be collected with all reasonable speed and
efficiency, and all matter so collected shall be transported to the
dumping place and disposed of in the same vehicle in which collected
and on the same day as collected. No part of the collected contents of
one vehicle shall be transferred to another vehicle within the limits of
the City.
E. Collectors under this article shall not place receptacles containing
collected material along the curb awaiting arrival of collection trucks.
The collected material must be carried directly from the premises
where collected to the truck and dumped into the truck, and the empty
receptacles shall be immediately returned to their proper places.
A. Any person who violates § 427-7 shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,250, by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of
community service for not more than 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
B. Any person who violates any other provision of this article, except as
provided below, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $1,250, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or
by period of community service for not more than 90 days, or any
combination thereof, except that violations of § 427-5 are subject to
punishment by payment of fines in the amount of $50. Fines for
violation of § 427-5 are payable at the Violations Bureau without a court
§ 427-9 PATERSON CODE § 427-11
417:816
appearance. Costs of court of $30 will be imposed, consistent with New
Jersey Court Rule 7:11-4, for all such payments. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
§ 427-11 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-11
417:817

ARTICLE III
Fats, Bones and Meat Refuse
[Adopted 12-27-1988 as Ord. No. 88-046 (Ch. 13, Art. 32, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson)]
§ 427-12. License required.
No person or entity shall engage in the business of collecting fats, bones or
meat refuse in the City without having first secured a license therefor from
the City Division of Health.
§ 427-13. Application for license; fee; term; license not transferable
or assignable.
§ 427-14. Deposit, assortment or reassortment after collection.
§ 427-15. Covered vehicles required; certificate of approval.
All fats, bones or meat refuse collected shall be placed in protected, covered
vehicles, which shall first be submitted to the Division of Health for its
inspection and approval, and a certificate of approval issued by the Division
of Health.
A. Before any such license may be granted, an application shall be made to
the Division of Health by the entity seeking such license. The
application shall be signed personally by the applicant or, if a
corporation, by its authorized agent. The application shall state the
current post office address of such party, the name under which and the
place where the collection of fats, bones or meat refuse business is to
be conducted and any other information which the Division of Health
may require in said application.
B. The annual fee for a license issued under this article shall be $50.
[Amended 12-16-2003 by Ord. No. 03-091]
C. Each license required by the provisions of this article shall expire on
December 31 in each year unless sooner forfeited or revoked and shall
be renewed annually.
D. No license shall be assigned or transferred to another party or location.
A. In no case shall any collected fats, bones or meat refuse be left or
deposited at any place within the limits of the City for any purpose
whatsoever.
B. No fats, bones or meat refuse shall be assorted at any time or place
other than the place from which they are collected.
C. No reassortment thereafter shall take place on the streets or anywhere
else within the limits of the City.
§ 427-12 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-16
417:819
§ 427-16. Denial of license application; suspension or revocation of
license; notice; hearing.
§ 427-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person or entity who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days or by providing community
services for a period not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof. A
A. An application for a license to collect fats, bones or meat refuse may be
denied by the Health Officer for noncompliance with the requirements
of this article, for fraud or misrepresentation in making application for
such license or for other good cause shown in the discretion of the
Health Officer.
B. Every license issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or
suspended by the Health Officer for violation of any provision of this
article or violation of any ordinance of the City or of any state or federal
law applicable thereto or for other good cause shown in the discretion
of the Health Officer.
C. Any such denial of a license application or suspension or revocation of a
license must be preceded by notice of the licensee or applicant, as the
case may be, of such contemplated action. The licensee or applicant
shall be granted a hearing by the Health Officer. Notice of any such
contemplated action must be given to the applicant or licensee at least
five days prior to its effective date. Such notice must be either served
personally on the party to be notified or by mailing such notice to the
business address appearing on said license or application. Such notice
shall contain a brief statement as to the grounds to be relied upon for
revolving or suspending or denying the application for such license and
shall advise the party so notified to his right to a hearing before the
Health Officer.
D. Such request for hearing must be in writing and made to the Health
Officer within five days of service of notice upon such party. Notice of
time and place of such hearing will be served upon such party in the
same manner as the notice of contemplated action provided in
Subsection C above and at least three days prior to the date set for such
hearing. At the hearing before the Health Officer, the aggrieved party
shall have an opportunity to answer and may thereafter be heard. Upon
due consideration and deliberation by the Health Officer, the
contemplated action against the aggrieved party may be dismissed, or if
the Health Officer concludes that the charges have been substantiated,
he may deny the license application or revoke or suspend the license.
Any such denial of a license application, revocation or suspension of
such a license may be rescinded by the Health Officer upon the
correction of the basis for such adverse action to the satisfaction of the
Health Officer.
§ 427-16 PATERSON CODE § 427-17
417:820
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
§ 427-17 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-17
417:821

ARTICLE IV
Recycling
[Adopted 8-29-1989 as Ord. No. 89-038A (Ch. 13, Art. 31, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson)]
§ 427-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM BEVERAGE CAN — A container entirely of aluminum and used
solely for the packaging of beverages.
AUTOMOTIVE BATTERIES — Batteries from automobiles and trucks, but
does not include household batteries.[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No.
92-051]
BRUSH — Branches, woody plants and other like vegetative
material.[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Any private
establishment, including:
COMPOSTING — A process by which organic materials are turned into
humus (a fertilizing substance similar to topsoil).
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS — Concrete, brick, block,
asphalt, asphalt-based roofing scrap and tree stumps/trunks.[Added
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — A cardboard container and used primarily
for packaging and transporting nonfood products.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials required to be
separated from solid waste under this article for the purpose of recycling.
DWELLING UNIT — A one-, two- or multifamily home, apartment,
condominium or cooperative.
GLASS CONTAINER — Bottles and jars made entirely of glass, devoid of
metal caps and rings, and used in the storage of food and beverages. This
term does not include blue glass, flat glass commonly known as "window
glass," lightbulbs and fixtures.
GRASS — All grass clippings.[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
A. Manufacturing, retailing and service establishments.
Establishments where food and/or alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage
are sold for consumption on or off premises.
B.
C. Food distribution and processing establishment.
Professional and nonprofit establishments conducting any type of
business or activity within the City.
D.
§ 427-18 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-18
417:823
HAZARDOUS WASTE — All waste defined as hazardous waste by N.J.S.A.
13:1E-38 and N.J.S.A. 13:1E-51 and N.J.A.C. 7:26-8.1 et seq. Used motor
and/or fuel oils are considered "hazardous waste."
HIGH-GRADE PAPER — White computer printout paper, white bond paper
and white typing paper.
LEAVES — Foliage from plants and trees only.
METAL — Cans, other than pure aluminum, consisting entirely of steel, tin
or bimetal and used in the storage of food and beverages.
MIXED PAPER — Any combination of newspaper, high-grade paper and
nonwhite paper. "Mixed paper" also include magazines, junk mail and
unsoiled scrap.[Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
NEWSPAPER — Paper commonly referred to as "newsprint" and distributed
at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having printed thereon news
and opinions and containing advertisements and other matters of public
interest. The term "newspaper" does not include magazines or other
periodicals and any other paper products.
OWNER — Any person who has legal title to any dwelling unit or any
building utilized as a commercial and industrial establishment or a public or
private institution, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof;
or who has equitable title and is either in actual possession or collects rents
therefrom; or who, as executor, executrix, trustee, guardian or receiver of
the estate of the owner or as mortgagee or as vendee in possession either
by virtue of a court order or by agreement or voluntary surrender of the
premises by the person holding the legal title or as collector of rents, has
charge, care or control of any dwelling unit or commercial or industrial
establishment or public or private institution. Any person who is a lessee or
assignee subletting or assigning any part or all of any dwelling or building
shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises sublet or
assigned, and any person who is designated by the owner and who agrees
to be in charge of the premises and who is registered with the Division of
Sanitation shall be considered to have joint responsibility with the owner
for any violation of this article.
PERSON — Any natural person, profit or nonprofit corporation, municipal
entity or authority, partnership, condominium association or other such
organization.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS AND FILM — Containers such as polyethylene
terephthalate (PET), high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and polyvinyl
chloride (PVC).[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
PLASTICS — All forms of soft and hard plastic used for any purpose
whatsoever. "Plastics" also includes HDPE and PET.[Amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 92-051]
§ 427-18 PATERSON CODE § 427-18
417:824
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS —
RECYCLING — The process by which designated materials, which would
otherwise become solid waste, are separated, collected, processed and
returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
SCRAP METAL — [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
SOLID WASTE — All garbage and rubbish normally placed at the curb by
the residents of the City for regular twice-weekly municipal collection.
TIN AND BIMETAL CANS — All metal and containers other than
aluminum.[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
TIRES — All truck or passenger auto tires that are retreaded,
remanufactured or recapped.[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
USED MOTOR OIL — All oil from internal-combustion engines or
transmissions.[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
WHITE GOODS — All large appliances such as refrigerators, stoves,
dishwashers, washers, dryers, boilers, hot-water heaters, freezers and air
conditioners.[Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, hedge trimmings, twigs, sticks, branches
or shrubbery.
§ 427-19. Recyclable materials designated. [Amended 10-13-1992
by Ord. No. 92-051]
The following are designated as recyclable materials for premises in the
City of Paterson:
Municipal, county and state government facilities, including but not
limited to the Paterson Housing Authority and the Paterson Parking
Authority.
A.
B. Religious, educational and health-care facilities.
Facilities occupied by private civic organizations and nonprofit
organizations.
C.
FERROUS SCRAP METAL — All metal scraps made of steel or cast
iron, such as steel bridge railings and recycled and reconditioned steel
drums.
A.
NONFERROUS SCRAP METAL — All metals not steel or iron, such as
aluminum, brass, copper or lead.
B.
A. Residential: newspaper, glass, food and beverage containers, aluminum
beverage containers, tin and bimetal cans, plastic containers,
corrugated cardboard, mixed paper, white goods, ferrous and
nonferrous scrap metals, construction and demolition debris, tires,
used motor oil, automotive batteries, leaves, brush and grass.
§ 427-18 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-19
417:825
§ 427-20. Recycling plan required; updates.
The owner, landlord, tenant council, condominium association or
management company responsible for any development of more than four
dwelling units shall submit a recycling plan which incorporates the state
recycling plan goals. Said recycling plans are also required of such
commercial, industrial establishments and public and private institutions as
are designated by regulation. Said plans shall be submitted no later than
November 15, 1989, to the Paterson Recycling Coordinator. Approved plans
shall be updated every three years.
§ 427-21. Recycling of leaves, grass clippings, brush and tree limbs,
newspapers, glass and metal containers and aluminum beverage
cans; oil reclamation; and tire recycling.
B. Commercial: newspaper, glass, food and beverage containers,
aluminum beverage containers, tin and bimetal cans, high-grade paper,
mixed paper, corrugated cardboard, plastic containers, ferrous and
nonferrous scrap, construction and demolition debris, tires, used motor
oil, automotive batteries, leaves, brush and grass. Restaurants and
taverns shall include all of the above items and food waste.
C. Institutional: newspaper, glass, food and beverage containers,
aluminum beverage containers, tin and bimetal cans, high-grade paper,
mixed paper, corrugated cardboard, plastic containers and film, ferrous
and nonferrous scrap metal, construction and demolition debris, tires,
used motor oil, automotive batteries, leaves, brush and grass.
A. All owners, lessees or occupants of dwelling units, commercial and
industrial establishments and public and private institutions shall
dispose of solid waste and separate designated recyclable materials in
accordance with this section.
(1) Leaves, grass clippings, brush and tree limbs. Leaves, grass
clippings, brush and tree limbs shall be recycled by composting on
the property of the owner, lessee or occupant or by placing them at
the curbside in accordance with the provisions of Articles V and VI
of this chapter. [Amended 2-24-2004 by Ord. No. 04-016;
11-9-2005 by Ord. No. 05-077]
(a) Leaves, grass clippings and minimal brush placed at curbside
shall be contained in either clear plastic or biodegradable
bags. The bags shall be intact and not torn by their contents.
(b) Bulky brush and tree limbs placed at curbside shall be cut and
tied. Each separate tied unit for collection shall not exceed 50
pounds.
(2) Newspapers.
(a) Newspaper shall be tied securely in bundles with twine, rope,
cord or such other binding or shall be securely placed in paper
§ 427-19 PATERSON CODE § 427-21
417:826
bags or boxes to facilitate handling and ensure that bundles
will not be windblown or distributed onto the public streets. A
bundle shall not exceed 50 pounds.
(b) Bundles may not be placed in plastic bags.
(c) Bundles shall be placed at curbside for collection not earlier
than 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding those days designated for
collection in accordance with applicable regulations.
(3) Glass and metal containers.
(a) Glass and metal containers shall be rinsed clean of all residue.
Glass containers will have all caps and rings removed
therefrom. Metal containers will have all paper and/or plastic
labels removed.
(b) Glass and metal containers shall be placed in a container of not
more than thirty-five-gallon capacity. Glass may not be broken
for the purpose of filling any container, but accidentally broken
glass will be accepted.
(c) Containers shall be placed for collection at curbside not earlier
than 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding those days designated for
collection in accordance with applicable regulations.
(4) Aluminum beverage cans.
(a) Aluminum beverage cans shall be placed in containers having a
capacity of not more than 35 gallons.
(b) Containers shall be placed for collection at curbside not earlier
than 6:00 p.m. on the day preceding those days designated for
collection in accordance with applicable regulations.
(5) Oil reclamation.
(a) Service stations and oil retailers shall dispose of used oils and
any other hazardous waste through a Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy (DEPE) licensed
hazardous waste hauler. Documentation of any such
transaction shall be submitted 20 days after each quarter to
the Recycling Coordinator.
(b) Persons shall dispose of used oils and other hazardous waste
through a service station or retailer or in another fashion
acceptable to the DEPE. Service stations and retailers who
service motor vehicles shall accept used oil from the general
public. Any person may bring up to five gallons at a time to a
retailer or service station.
(c) A refusal by a service station or retailer who services motor
vehicles to accept up to five gallons of motor oil from the
§ 427-21 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-21
417:827
§ 427-22. Recyclables become City property; unauthorized
collection.
general public will result in a fine not to exceed $l,000,
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days in jail or by a period
of community service for a period not to exceed 90 days, or
any combination thereof. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
(6) Tire recycling. [Added 2-24-2004 by Ord. No. 04-015]
(a) Tire shops located within the City of Paterson may have their
used tires picked up by the City of Paterson for recycling in
accordance with the current recycling schedule, at a rate of
$1.00 per rimless passenger tire, $5 per passenger tire with
rim and $5 per truck tire, whether rimless or not.
(b) Paterson residents may bring up to four rimless passenger
tires to the City yard once a year at no charge.
(c) Non-Paterson residents may bring their tires to the City yard at
a rate of $2 per rimless passenger tire, $10 per passenger tire
with rim and $10 per truck tires, whether rimless or not.
(d) Paterson residents and tire shops located within the City of
Paterson that request an additional or special pickup will be
charged an additional $25 per trip.
B. The above term "curbside" shall be deemed to mean some convenient
location outside of the building proper, between the curb and sidewalk,
or if there is no space between the curb and sidewalk, then not in a
manner to block pedestrian traffic, where such material will be easily
accessible to the collector.
C. In dwelling units containing three family units or fewer, the receptacles
for designated recyclable materials shall be purchased and maintained,
in the absence of a contract, by the tenants. In dwelling units of more
than three family units, the receptacles for designated recyclable
materials shall be purchased and maintained, in the absence of a
contract, by the landlord.
A. From the time of placement at collection sites by any person of
recyclables for collection by the City in accordance with the terms
hereof, such recyclables shall be and become the property of the City or
its authorized agent.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for any person unauthorized by the
City to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such
recyclables during the twenty-four-hour period commencing at 6:00
p.m. on any day preceding a day designated for collection under the
rules promulgated by the Department of Public Works of the City in
accordance with the terms hereof. Any and each such collection in
§ 427-21 PATERSON CODE § 427-22
417:828
§ 427-23. Promulgation of regulations.
The Department of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to
establish and promulgate reasonable regulations as to the manner, days and
times for the collection of recyclables in accordance with the terms hereof.
Said regulations will be effective upon adoption by the Municipal Council,
which shall approve the same by resolution. Upon adoption, the regulation
shall be published once in the official newspaper of the City.
§ 427-24. Designation of collection days and sites; notice;
placement of recycling receptacles.
§ 427-25. Verification of private recycling tonnage; waste survey.
violation hereof from one or more residences, commercial and
industrial establishments or public or private institutions during said
twenty-four-hour period shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
A. The Recycling Coordinator of the City of Paterson shall designate the
days and sites for the collection of designated recyclable materials.
B. Notice of the designated collection days and collection sites shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation for a continuous period
of not less than seven days beginning at least 15 days before the first
scheduled collection date. Notice may also be given by mailing flyers or
newsletters to each dwelling unit, public or private institution and
commercial and industrial establishment within the City of Paterson.
C. All receptacles placed for the purpose of recycling shall be placed in
accordance with the same requirements for the placement of solid
waste receptacles as set forth in Article II of this chapter, except that
they shall be placed according to the recycling schedule promulgated
by the City.
A. Any person participating in a recycling program within the City of
Paterson not operated by the City of Paterson shall submit quarterly
verification of the tonnage of materials recycled, as well as the names of
commercial and industrial establishments and public and private
institutions where recyclable materials are picked up or received.
B. The quarterly verification shall be submitted to the Recycling
Coordinator in accordance with the below schedule: [Amended
10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
Reporting Period Due Date
January 1 to March 31 April 8
April 1 to June 30 July 8
July 1 to September 30 October 8
October 1 to December 31 January 8
§ 427-22 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-25
417:829
§ 427-26. Enforcement. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051;
11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 10-078]
Sworn officers of the Division of Police, the Director of the Department of
Public Works and/or his designees, the Director of the Department of Health
and Human Services and/or his designee, the Recycling Coordinator and/or
designee and the Passaic County Health Department and/or its designee are
authorized to enforce this article and amendments thereto.
§ 427-27. Violations and penalties; discontinuance of service; grace
period.
§ 427-28. Collectors to comply with other laws.
Each person engaged in the collection or recycling of recyclable materials
shall comply with all City, county, state and federal laws.
C. Self-audit waste survey. [Added 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051]
(1) Each commercial and industrial establishment shall perform a selfaudit
waste survey in the following phased-in manner:
(a) Businesses with more than 500 employees: immediately.
(b) Businesses with more than 250 employees: by 1993.
(c) Businesses with more than 100 employees: by 1994.
(d) Businesses with more than 50 employees: by 1995.
(2) Waste reduction plans shall be submitted to the County Recycling
Coordinator and also to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
A. If any person fails to comply with any provision of this article requiring
separation of designated recyclable materials, his or her solid waste
shall be marked as not properly separated, and said person shall
remove the same from the street within 12 hours and it shall not be
placed for pickup until the next designated collection day.
B. Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this article or any
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be subject to
punishment by a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 per
offense, a jail sentence not to exceed 90 days or be required to perform
community service for a period not to exceed 90 days, or any
combination thereof. [Amended 10-13-1992 by Ord. No. 92-051;
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
C. After three violations of this article, the City shall have the right to
terminate regular solid waste collection until the time of compliance, so
long as said cessation of service does not result in a health emergency.
D. No penalty shall be assessed for violations of this article which occur
prior to April 30, 1990. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 89-069]
§ 427-25 PATERSON CODE § 427-29
417:830
§ 427-29. Annual certification of compliance. [Added 10-13-1992 by
Ord. No. 92-051]
The County Recycling Coordinator shall receive documentation indicating
compliance with yearly municipal recycling certification by April 15 of
each year for information on the previous calendar year's activities for
certification purposes.
§ 427-29 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-29
417:831

ARTICLE V
Containerization Yard Waste
[Adopted 11-9-2005 by Ord. No. 05-073170]
§ 427-30. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste in the City of Paterson, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 427-31. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 427-32. Prohibited conduct.
Except as set forth in Article VI of this chapter, the owner or occupant of any
property, or any employee or contractor of such owner or occupant engaged
to provide lawn care or landscaping services, shall not sweep, rake, blow
or otherwise place yard waste, unless the yard waste is containerized, in
the street. If yard waste that is not containerized is placed in the street, the
party responsible for placement of yard waste must remove the yard waste
from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this article.
§ 427-33. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Department of Public
Works.
170. Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 151, but was redesignated as
Ch. 427, Art V, to maintain the organizational style of the Code.
§ 427-30 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-34
417:833
§ 427-34. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
article, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,250.
§ 427-35. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
§ 427-36. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
§ 427-34 PATERSON CODE § 427-36
417:834
ARTICLE VI
Yard Waste Collection Program
[Adopted 11-9-2005 by Ord. No. 05-077171]
§ 427-37. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the City of Paterson so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 427-38. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel as prescribed by the City of Paterson Recycling
Ordinance,172 such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or blowing out
into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parking, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway,
and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Leaves and grass clippings.
§ 427-39. Placement of yard waste for collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this article. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
article.
171. Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as Ch. 150, but was redesignated as
Ch. 427, Art. VI, to maintain the organizational style of the Code.
172. Editor's Note: See Art. IV, Recycling, of this chapter.
§ 427-37 SLAUGHTERHOUSES § 427-40
417:835
§ 427-40. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Department of Public
Works.
§ 427-41. Violations and penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this article
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,250.
§ 427-42. Severability.
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this article to be
unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause or reason shall not affect
any other portion of this article.
§ 427-43. When effective.
This article shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and
any publication as may be required by law.
§ 427-40 PATERSON CODE § 427-43
417:836
Chapter 431
SPITTING
§ 431-1. Prohibited acts.
No person shall spit:
§ 431-2. Right of access for enforcement.
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the Health
Officer, the sanitary inspectors and the authorized employees of the Health
Division and any police officer shall have full and free access and right
of ingress and egress to and from all places referred to in the preceding
section of this chapter.
§ 431-3. Interference with enforcing officer.
Any person who shall obstruct or in any way interfere with the Health
Officer, the sanitary inspectors or other employees of the Health Division
or with any police officer in the performance of any of his duties under this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
§ 431-4. Violations and penalties.173
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
A. Upon the sidewalk of any public street or upon any part of the interior
or exterior of any public building or public conveyance.
B. Upon the floor of any building used in common by the tenants thereof.
C. Upon the floor of any hall or office in any hotel, motel or lodging house
used in common.
D. Upon the floor of any theater, store, factory or any other building or
premises which is used as a place of public amusement or public
accommodation or otherwise used in common by the public.
E. Upon the floor of any railroad car, bus or other public conveyance.
F. Upon the platform, stairs or floor of any depot or station of any railroad
or other common carrier.
G. Into the street from the cars, stairs or platforms of such railroad or
other common carrier in the city.
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 427-43 SPITTING § 431-4
431:837
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 433
STORMWATER CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Feeding of wildlife — See Ch. 121, Art. VIII.
Pet waste — See Ch. 121, Art. IX.
Land subdivision — See Ch. 297.
Disposal of waste into storm sewers — See Ch.
407, Art. IV.
Illicit connections to storm sewers — See Ch.
407, Art. V.
Containerization of yard waste — See Ch. 427,
Art. V.
Yard waste collection program — See Ch. 427,
Art. VI.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 483.
§ 433-1. Scope and purpose.
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low-impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature and anticipated quantity
or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater management
BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established performance
standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for major
development, as defined in § 433-2.
C. Applicability.
(1) This chapter shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the residential site improvement standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
§ 431-4 PATERSON CODE § 433-1
431:838
§ 433-2. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the stormwater management rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA centers, CAFRA cores and CAFRA nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) This chapter shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the City of Paterson.
D. Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this chapter are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act
or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. This chapter
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A 58:16A-55.5,
if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 433-1 SPITTING § 433-2
431:839
DESIGNATED CENTER — A state development and redevelopment plan
center as designated by the State Planning Commission, such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but are
not necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, "development"
means any activity that requires a state permit; any activity reviewed by the
County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agricultural Development
Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not exempted by
the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater, sediments
or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody or to a
particular point along a receiving waterbody.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and conjunction with the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREA — An area or feature which is of
significant environmental value, including but not limited to, stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and wellhead protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land. "Disturbance" for the purpose of this
rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement
of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, township, or village.
§ 433-2 PATERSON CODE § 433-2
431:840
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the City of Paterson or other public
body and that is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer
systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.[Added
10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-072]
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission,
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the City of Paterson or political subdivision of this state subject
to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance [except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as
amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)], thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the state or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Any waste container that a person controls,
whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash cans,
garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.[Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No.
17-072]
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
§ 433-2 SPITTING § 433-2
431:841
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — The geographic application of the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies, and
the official map of these goals and policies.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.[Added 10-3-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-072]
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal nonstormwater discharges into
stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to state resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), designated centers, cores or nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA centers, cores or nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
§ 433-2 PATERSON CODE § 433-2
431:842
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as "hydrophytic vegetation."
§ 433-3. General design and performance standards.
Design and performance standards for stormwater management measures.
A. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality standards in
§ 433-4. To the maximum extent practicable, these standards shall be
met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater management strategies
into the design. If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these
standards, structural stormwater management measures necessary to
meet these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
B. The standards in this chapter apply only to new major development and
are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on water
quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and maintain
groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new major
development to the extent that alternative design and performance
standards are applicable under a regional stormwater management
plan or water quality management plan adopted in accordance with
Department rules.
C. Storm drain inlets, identified in § 433-11 below, shall comply with the
following standards to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this subsection, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions, see Subsection C(3)
below. [Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No. 17-072]
(1) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
(a) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
§ 433-2 SPITTING § 433-3
431:843
§ 433-4. Requirements for major development.
(b) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inch across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grates (non-curb-opening) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench
grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of
ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns,
fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(2) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches
across the smallest dimension.
(3) This standard does not apply:
(a) Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards;
(b) Where the flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of
pipe netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch
basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery
of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through
one of the following:
[1] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply to outfall netting
facilities); or
[2] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
(c) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
(d) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 433-10.
§ 433-3 PATERSON CODE § 433-4
431:844
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department' Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G.
(1) The construction of an underground utility line, provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
(2) The construction of an aboveground utility line, provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
(3) The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
(1) The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
(2) The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
(3) The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
(4) The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D(3) above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections F and G that were not achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies.
(1) To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsection F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
§ 433-4 SPITTING § 433-4
431:845
management strategies set forth in this subsection into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental,
or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Subsection E(2) below into
the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
(2) Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss.
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces.
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation.
(d) Minimize the decrease in the time of concentration from
preconstruction to postconstruction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed.
(e) Minimize land disturbance, including clearing and grading.
(f) Minimize soil compaction.
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides.
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas.
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
§ 433-4 PATERSON CODE § 433-4
431:846
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
(3) Site design features identified under Subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see Subsection E(3)(c) below.
(a) Use of grates.
[1] Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a
storm drain or surface water body under that grate:
[a] The New Jersey Department of Transportation
(NJDOT) bicycle safe grate, which is described in
Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle Compatible
Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
[b] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches,
or is no greater than 0.5 inch across the smallest
dimension.
[2] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than
2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
§ 433-4 SPITTING § 433-4
431:847
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end-of-pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (This option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
(4) Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
(5) Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 433-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion control, groundwater recharge and runoff quantity standards.
(1) This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
§ 433-4 PATERSON CODE § 433-4
431:848
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at § 433-5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to postconstruction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the urban redevelopment area, or to
projects subject to Subsection F(1)(b)[3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than reportable
quantities as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to source material.
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials, intermediate products, final products,
waste materials, by-products, industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
§ 433-4 SPITTING § 433-4
431:849
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at § 433-5, complete one of the
following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, postconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
postconstruction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten-, and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
postconstruction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with Subsection F(1)(c)[1], [2] and
[3] above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
§ 433-4 PATERSON CODE § 433-4
431:850
(2) Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development in § 433-2 shall be submitted to the
appropriate Soil Conservation District for review and approval in
accordance with the requirements of this section and any
applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for stormwater
runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of this
section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater runoff quality standards.
(1) Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
postconstruction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in stormwater
runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the developed site,
expressed as an annual average. Stormwater management
measures shall only be required for water quality control if an
additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being proposed on a
development site. The requirement to reduce TSS does not apply to
any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated under a numeric
effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New Jersey Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in
a discharge specifically exempt under a NJPDES permit from this
requirement. The water quality design storm is 1.25 inches of
rainfall in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into
account the distribution of rain from the water quality design
storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of
runoff may take into account the implementation of nonstructural
and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
§ 433-4 SPITTING § 433-4
431:851
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
(2) For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in § 433-7, or found on the Department's Web
site at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other sources
of technical guidance are listed in § 433-7. TSS reduction shall be
calculated based on the removal rates for the BMPs in Table 2
below. Alternative removal rates and methods of calculating
removal rates may be used if the design engineer provides
documentation demonstrating the capability of these alternative
rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any approved
alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate shall be
provided to the Department at the following address: Division of
Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625-0418.
(3) If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
eighty-percent TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize
the following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs.
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP.
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP.
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 90%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 433-6C
§ 433-4 PATERSON CODE § 433-4
431:852
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
(4) If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the eighty-percent
TSS removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the
runoff from the subareas converge on site, in which case the
removal rate can be demonstrated through a calculation using a
weighted average.
(5) Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the postconstruction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
(6) Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in § 433-7.
(7) In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
(8) Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three-hundred-foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
§ 433-4 SPITTING § 433-4
431:853
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection G(8)(a)[1]
above shall only be allowed where previous development
or disturbance has occurred (for example, active
agricultural use, parking area or maintained lawn area).
The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable. In no case shall the remaining special water
resource protection area be reduced to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the top of bank of the
waterway or center line of the waterway where the bank is
undefined. All encroachments proposed under this
subsection shall be subject to review and approval by the
Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey, established under
the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et
seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance with the
requirements of the above standards may be placed within the
special water resource protection area, provided that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a ninety-five-percent TSS
postconstruction removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
§ 433-4 PATERSON CODE § 433-4
431:854
§ 433-5. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge.
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to Subsection
G(8) shall maintain or enhance the current functional value
and overall condition of the special water resource protection
area as defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall
a stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
special water resource protection area to less than 150 feet as
measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
(e) Subsection G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
(1) The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
(2) For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
§ 433-4 SPITTING § 433-5
431:855
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A(1)(a) and the Rational
and Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A(1)(b). A runoff
coefficient or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing
condition may be used on all or a portion of the site if the design
engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition has existed on the
site or portion of the site for at least five years without interruption
prior to the time of application. If more than one land cover has
existed on the site during the five years immediately prior to the
time of application, the land cover with the lowest runoff potential
shall be used for the computations. In addition, there is the
presumption that the site is in good hydrologic condition (if the
land use type is pasture, lawn, or park), with good cover (if the
land use type is woods), or with good hydrologic condition and
conservation treatment (if the land use type is cultivation).
(3) In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
(4) In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of previous and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
(5) If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
(1) The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
§ 433-5 PATERSON CODE § 433-6
431:856
§ 433-6. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
(1) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands, flood-prone
areas, slopes, depth to seasonal high water table, soil type,
permeability and texture, drainage area and drainage patterns, and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
(2) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 433-8D.
(3) Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the residential site improvement standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
5:21-7.4, and 5:21-7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
(4) At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
(5) Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
§ 433-8.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized, provided the
design engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its
design will accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater
recharge and water quality design and performance standards
established by § 433-4 of this chapter.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of § 433-4 of this chapter, provided the pollutant removal rates are
verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced Technology and
certified by the Department.
§ 433-6 SPITTING § 433-7
431:857
§ 433-7. Sources for technical guidance.
§ 433-8. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed, in Subsection A(1) and (2) below, which
are available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
(1) Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures, such as bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
(2) The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
(1) The Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey
promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; (609) 292-5540;
(2) The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732) 932-9306; and
(3) The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This section sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This section applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for trash racks, overflow grates and escape provisions.
(1) A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
§ 433-7 PATERSON CODE § 433-8
431:858
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than
six-inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per feet
square.
(2) An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 pounds per feet
square.
(3) For purposes of this Subsection B(3), "escape provisions" means
the permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other
features that provide easily accessible means of egress from
stormwater management basins. Stormwater management basins
shall include escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C, a freestanding outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
§ 433-8 SPITTING § 433-8
431:859
§ 433-9. Requirements for site development stormwater plan.
See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or exemption from safety standards.
(1) A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of safety ledges in a new stormwater management basin.
A. Submission of site development stormwater plan.
(1) Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this chapter, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 433-8 PATERSON CODE § 433-9
431:860
(3) The applicant shall submit three copies of the materials listed in
the checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance
with Subsection C of this chapter.
B. Site development stormwater plan approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this chapter.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
(1) Topographic base map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, previous or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
(2) Environmental site analysis: a written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
(3) Project description and site plan(s): a map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
(4) Land use planning and source control plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of §§ 433-3
§ 433-9 SPITTING § 433-9
431:861
§ 433-10. Maintenance and repair.
through 433-6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to
describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective
of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
(5) Stormwater management facilities map. The following information,
illustrated on a map of the same scale as the topographic base map,
shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
(6) Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for
the design storms specified in § 433-4 of this chapter.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depend on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
(7) Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of § 433-10.
(8) Waiver from submission requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this chapter may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection C(1) through (6) of this chapter
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
§ 433-9 PATERSON CODE § 433-10
431:862
A. Applicability.
(1) Projects subject to review as in § 433-1C of this chapter shall
comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General maintenance.
(1) The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
(2) The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
(3) Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
(4) If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection B(7) below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
(5) Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
(6) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance related work orders.
§ 433-10 SPITTING § 433-10
431:863
§ 433-11. Prohibited conduct. [Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No.
17-072174]
(7) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
(8) The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B(2) above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection B(6) and (7)
above.
(9) The requirements of Subsection B(3) and (4) do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
(10) In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
C. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with
one single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing
(excluding the repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top
coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot
bitumen), reconstructing or altering of any surface that is in direct
contact with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the
storm drain inlet either:
(1) Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
174. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 433-11,
Violations and penalties, as § 433-13.
§ 433-10 PATERSON CODE § 433-11
431:864
§ 433-12. Exceptions to prohibitions. [Added 10-3-2017 by Ord. No.
17-072]
The following containers are exempt from the requirements that are listed
in § 433-11:
§ 433-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-3-2017 by Ord. No.
17-072]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.
Chapter 435
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Block parties — See Ch. 137.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 149.
Safeguarding unsafe places abutting
streets — See Ch. 157, Art. III.
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 165.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Food vending vehicles — See Ch. 243.
Handicapped parking policy — See Ch. 259.
Parades and processions — See Ch. 355.
Sewers — See Ch. 407.
Public telephones — See Ch. 452.
Traffic signalization system — See Ch. 455.
(2) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standards in § 433-3 above
prior to the completion of the project.
B. Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
C. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate storm system(s) operated by the City of Paterson.
A. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
B. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
C. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
D. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJDES permit.
E. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods) placed curbside for pickup.
§ 433-11 SPITTING § 433-13
431:865

ARTICLE I
Hoisting Materials Over Public Thoroughfares
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 9, Art. 8, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 435-1. License required for hoisting and lowering materials over
streets.
No person shall engage in the business of hoisting and lowering material
over any street or public thoroughfare in the City without first securing a
license, granted by the Council and issued by the City Clerk, to carry on
such business.
§ 435-2. License fee; term.
§ 435-3. Liability insurance.
Before the issuance of any license under this article, the applicant shall
produce before the City Clerk a public liability insurance policy or
certificate thereof, with premium prepaid, in the amount of $5,000 for one
person and $10,000 for one accident, to indemnify any person injured by
the licensee or his agent conducting such licensed business while on any
public thoroughfare in the City. Such insurance policy or certificate thereof
shall be filed with the City Clerk. The licensee shall, during the term of the
license, maintain said policy in full force and effect.
§ 435-4. Issuance of license and plates; display of plates; charge for
additional plates.
When the Council has granted the license, the City Clerk shall, upon receipt
of the annual fee, issue the license and one metal plate bearing the license
number and the expiration date thereof. The plate shall be affixed in a
conspicuous part of any vehicle used by the licensee in the conduct of the
licensed business. The charge for additional metal plates shall be $2 each.
§ 435-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No.
95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
A. The fee for a license issued under this article shall be $5 for the yearly
term of the license or any part thereof.
B. The term of the license issued under this article shall be for one year
commencing on May 1. All such licenses shall expire on the 30th day of
April of each year.
§ 435-1 SPITTING § 435-5
431:867

ARTICLE II
Construction, Repair and Maintenance
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 23, Art. 2, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 435-6. Abutting owners to pave and maintain sidewalks.
[Amended 11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-095]
It is hereby made the duty of the respective owners of land fronting or
abutting upon the line of the streets of the City, except as provided in
§ 435-10, hereinafter designated in this article, or portions of said streets,
to:
§ 435-7. Opening or tunneling beneath sidewalks without permit
prohibited.
No person shall open, tear up or tunnel beneath any sidewalk within the
City for any purpose whatsoever without first obtaining a permit to do so
issued by the Streets Division Superintendent.
§ 435-8. Permit required to pave or repair sidewalks.
Any person desiring to pave or repair any sidewalk shall obtain a permit
from the Streets Division Superintendent and shall notify said Streets
Division Superintendent at least 24 hours in advance of construction
operations so that City inspection may be made.
§ 435-9. Permit fee. [Amended 6-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-033;
11-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-058]
The permit fee to lay sidewalks, curbs, gutters and driveways in the City
shall be $25 for each 25 feet of frontage or part thereof.
§ 435-10. Abutting owners to bear cost of paving and repair;
exception; conformity with City specifications. [Amended
11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-095; 9-5-1995 by Ord. No. 95-052;
1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 13-004]
A. Pave, maintain and keep in repair the sidewalks in front of or abutting
upon their respective lands in the manner provided in this article.
B. Replace immediately any flag or concrete walk that may become
broken.
A. The full cost of the paving of said sidewalks shall be borne by the
abutting property owner except under the following circumstances:
(1) Said work is done by a nonprofit housing corporation or a private
for-profit corporation assisted by the State of New Jersey or a
federal agency and the work is performed in connection with the
construction of owner-occupied low- or moderate-income housing,
§ 435-6 SPITTING § 435-10
431:869
§ 435-11. Type of sidewalk pavement.
§ 435-12. Areas adjacent to trees to be unpaved.
In connection with the paving of any sidewalk, there shall be provided
adjacent to living trees an unpaved sidewalk area 2 1/2 feet wide and of a
length approved by the Streets Division Superintendent.
§ 435-13. Surfaces of sidewalk doors and fixtures.
All sidewalk doors, covers and fixtures and all parts thereof shall be set
flush with the surface of the sidewalk, and all metal surfaces built into or
placed on any sidewalk shall have an approved roughened surface.
in which event, if authorized by City resolution, the cost of the
work may be assumed, in part or in whole, by the Department of
Community Development.
(2) Said work is done under the auspices of and funding is provided by
the Neighborhood Preservation Program.
B. Materials furnished and the workmanship performed in the
construction of all sidewalks shall be in strict conformity to the
standard specifications for sidewalk construction adopted by the
Department of Public Works and current at the time of construction,
said standard specifications being on file at the office of the Department
of Public Works.
A. All sidewalks within the City shall be paved with bluestone or concrete
flagging to a width of at least five feet except that the sidewalks on all
streets and avenues within the following described district shall be
paved to the full width of the sidewalk: Beginning at the intersection of
Spruce Street and Grand Street and running thence along Grand Street
to Essex Street, thence along Essex Street to Straight Street, thence
along Straight Street to the Passaic River, thence southwesterly along
the south bank of said river to the upper raceway, thence southwesterly
along the upper raceway to the end thereof, thence southerly at right
angles to said raceway to Barbour Street, thence along Barbour Street
to Spruce Street, thence along Spruce Street to Grand Street and place
of beginning, including both sides of streets and avenues above named
and in addition thereto the following streets and avenues, namely Main
Street from Grand Street to Mary Street; Market Street from Straight
Street to N.Y.S. & W. Railroad; North Main Street from Temple Street to
East Main Street; West Broadway from West Broadway Bridge to Union
Avenue.
B. No sidewalk shall be paved or repaired partly with bluestone flagging
and partly with concrete flagging; provided, however, that where
driveways cross any sidewalk, such sidewalk shall be paved with
reinforced concrete of the character stipulated in the standard
specifications referred to in § 435-10B.
§ 435-10 PATERSON CODE § 435-14
431:870
§ 435-14. Guarding of sidewalks below grade.
Whenever abutting land exists below the grade of the sidewalk, a
substantial guardrail or fence shall be erected and maintained by the
abutting property owner, of such height and length as may be approved by
the Streets Division Superintendent.
§ 435-15. Notice to pave or repair; contents; service.
Whenever the Department of Public Works shall determine that any
sidewalk, driveway apron or curb requires paving or repairs, the
Department shall cause notice thereof, signed by the Superintendent, to
be served upon the owner of the abutting land, directing him to do the
work within 30 days after service of the notice. In addition, the notice
shall specify in sufficient detail the character of the paving or repair to be
made; set forth a description of the property affected sufficiently definite
to identify it; give opportunity to the owner to be heard within said thirtyday
period and to offer satisfactory reason why such work should not be
done. The service of notice and proof of service thereof shall be made in
accordance with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:65-3 to 40:65-5.
§ 435-16. Work done at expense of owner; account of cost;
assessment.
A. If the owner of the abutting land has failed to pave or repair within 30
days after service of the notice to do so, described in § 435-15, and has
failed to show good and sufficient reasons why such work should not be
done, the Department of Public Works may have the work done at the
cost and expense of the owner. The Streets Division Superintendent
shall keep an accurate account of the cost thereof. If the cost or any
part thereof is to be assessed upon the several properties fronting on
the improvement, he shall assess such costs on them in proportion to
the respective frontages thereon and shall file a report thereof, under
oath, with the City Clerk and a duplicate thereof with the Finance
Director. The Finance Director, after notice to the owner at the time and
place for examination of the report, shall examine such report and, if
properly made, confirm and file it with the Revenue Collections
Director. Such assessments shall bear interest from the date set at the
time of confirmation at the rate specified for delinquent real estate
taxes and shall be and become a lien on the real estate assessed.
B. The notice to the owner of the time and place of the examination of the
report referred to in Subsection A of this section shall be served in the
same manner as is required for service of notices before confirmation
by the Department of Finance of assessments for benefit for local
improvements, but failure to give any such notice shall not invalidate
the proceedings.
§ 435-14 SPITTING § 435-17
431:871
§ 435-17. Abutting owner to construct curbs at own cost; exception.
[Amended 11-12-1985 by Ord. No. 85-094A; 6-14-1988 by Ord. No.
88-017; 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 13-004]
§ 435-18. Permit for curb construction required; contents.
§ 435-19. Notice of commencement of construction; inspection
prior to work.
The holder of a permit to construct a curb shall notify the Streets Division
Superintendent at least 24 hours in advance of construction operations so
that an inspection may be made by the City.
§ 435-20. Curb construction in conformity with City specifications;
work done by City upon failure of owner.
A. The abutting property owner on all streets in the City shall be
responsible for the construction, maintenance and repair of curbs in
front of his land, except as provided in Subsection B below.
B. The full cost of the construction, maintenance or repair of the curbs
shall be borne by the abutting property owner except where said work
is done by a nonprofit housing corporation or a private for-profit
corporation assisted by the State of New Jersey or a federal agency and
the work is performed in connection with the construction of owneroccupied
low- or moderate-income housing, in which event, if
authorized by City Council resolution, the cost of the work may be
assumed, in part or in whole, by the Department of Community
Development.
A. No curb shall be constructed without a permit having first been
obtained from the Streets Division Superintendent.
B. The permit shall specify the type of material to be used in the
construction of said curb in order that the work to be done in each
locality may be uniform.
A. The materials furnished and the workmanship performed in
construction of the curbs shall be in strict conformity with the standard
specifications for curbs furnished by the City Engineer current at the
time of construction, on file in the office of the Streets Division
Superintendent.
B. In case any landowner within the City fails to construct a curb abutting
his land in the manner provided in Subsection A of this section within
30 days after the service by the Streets Division Superintendent or his
designee of a notice in the form and manner required by law (N.J.S.A.
40:65-2 et seq.), the Director of Public Works may cause the curb to be
constructed and the cost and expense thereof shall be assessed against
the property so improved, as provided by the aforesaid statute.
§ 435-17 PATERSON CODE § 435-21
431:872
§ 435-21. Width of sidewalks.
When any street in the City shall be opened to its full width, each sidewalk
belonging to such street shall be 1/5 of the entire width of such street.
§ 435-22. Grading of streets to full width.
When any street is ordered to be graded, it shall be graded to its full width,
including sidewalks, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance authorizing
such grading.
§ 435-23. Grading of center or crown of streets.
The grade of the center or crown of streets in the City shall be according to
details on file in the City Engineer's office.
§ 435-24. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not
more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
§ 435-21 SPITTING § 435-24
431:873

ARTICLE III
Street Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 23, Art. 3, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 435-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
DEPOSIT — Any cash deposit or other security provided in accordance with
this article.[Added 10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-076]
ENGINEER — The City Engineer or his authorized deputy, representative or
inspector.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance which calls for immediate
action.
EXCAVATION — The removal from a place of all materials including but not
limited to earth, sand, silt, clay, rock, topsoil, boggy waste, rubbish, ashes,
cinders, and organics such as peaty or humus materials regardless of depth
to water encountered.[Added 10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-076]
PERMIT — Permission to perform an excavation as it has been approved,
amended, or renewed by the City.[Added 10-13-2015 by Ord. No.
15-076]
PERMITTEE — Any applicant who has been issued a permit and has agreed
to fulfill all the terms of this article.[Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord. No.
15-076]
STREET — The improved portion of the right-of-way of any public street,
public highway, public way, public road or public easement within the
City, including that portion of the right-of-way improved with curbs and
sidewalks.[Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-076]
§ 435-26. Permit required for street openings; exception. [Amended
10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-076]
No person shall make any tunnel, opening or excavation of any kind in or
under the surface of any street without first securing a permit from the City
for each separate undertaking except as provided in § 435-27 of this article.
§ 435-27. Emergency circumstances; retroactive permit; City's
remedial work; penalty.
A. Any person maintaining pipes, lines or underground conduits in or
under the surface of any street by virtue of any law, ordinance or
franchise may proceed with an excavation or opening without a permit
when emergency circumstances demand the work be done immediately
§ 435-25 SPITTING § 435-27
431:875
§ 435-28. Duties and responsibilities of applicants; application fee;
disclaimer.
Every person applying for a permit shall:
§ 435-29. Contents of permit application.
The application for a permit shall contain:
§ 435-30. Engineer's action on application.
and the permit could not reasonably and practically have been obtained
beforehand.
B. Such person, however, shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first
regular business day on which the office of the City Engineer is open for
business, and said permit shall be retroactive to the date when the work
was begun. All other requirements of this article must be complied
with.
C. If any such emergency condition shall not be immediately attended to
by the owner or person responsible for such facility, the Engineer, after
such notice as he shall deem necessary under the circumstances of the
particular case, shall proceed to do the same on the basis of cost plus
15% to such person.
A. Pay a nonrefundable application fee of $10 upon receiving an
application form from the Engineer.
B. Present a properly completed application form to the Engineer's office.
C. Agree to save the City, its officers, employees and agents from any and
all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be claimed to
accrue by reason of said work to be done in said application. The
acceptance of any permit under this article shall constitute such
agreement by the applicant whether the same is expressed or not.
A. An agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be done in
full compliance with the ordinances of the City and the laws of the State
of New Jersey in relation thereto.
B. Two copies, when required by the Engineer, of plans showing the extent
of the proposed excavation work, the dimensions and elevations of both
the existing ground prior to said excavation and of proposed excavated
surfaces, the location of the excavation work and such other
information as may be prescribed by the Engineer.
A. The Engineer, upon receipt of the properly completed application, shall
determine the amount of the application fee to be made by the
applicant; provided, however, that it shall never be less than $10. Such
fees shall be submitted to the City at the time the application is applied
for. The purpose of the application fee is to reimburse the City for the
§ 435-27 PATERSON CODE § 435-30
431:876
§ 435-31. Duties and responsibilities of permittees; fees.
Every person obtaining a permit shall:
cost of any work and materials furnished by it in connection with the
work authorized by the permit.
B. The Engineer will have a minimum of three working days to review the
application and after reviewing said application form will approve or
deny a street opening permit.
C. When the Engineer denies an application, he will so advise the
applicant, in writing, and explain the reason or reasons the permit is
denied.
D. When the Engineer approves an application, he will advise the
applicant as to the correct fees, as shown in § 435-31 herein, applicable
to the particular street or right-of-way stated in said application. He
shall at this time advise the applicant of the amount of liability
insurance and performance and/or maintenance bond necessary to
cover work proposed in said application.
E. The Engineer will also state the probable inspection costs that may be
incurred and advise the applicant of such costs.
F. Once the applicant meets all requirements stated by the Engineer, the
Engineer will grant the permit.
A. Pay a permit fee for the issuance of an excavation permit which shall be
in addition to all other fees for permits or charges relative to any
proposed construction work. The minimum excavation permit fee shall
be in an amount varying with the type, amount and age of the surface to
be opened, dug or excavated under the permit issued, as follows:
[Amended 6-9-1999 by Ord. No. 99-032]
(1) On roadways constructed, reconstructed or resurfaced within two
years prior to the issuance of the excavation permit, $500, in
addition to any inspection costs related to the proposed opening.
(2) On all other roadways, $100, in addition to any inspection costs
related to the proposed opening.
(3) On sidewalk areas, $50, in addition to any inspection costs related
to the proposed opening.
B. Pay an inspection fee based on the cost of inspection, plus 15%.
C. Make a deposit as required by § 435-37 of this article.
D. Furnish a certificate of insurance as required by § 435-38 of this article.
E. Provide a faithful performance bond as required by § 435-39 of this
article.
§ 435-30 SPITTING § 435-31
431:877
§ 435-32. Maximum fee to property owner.
The permit and inspection fees to a residential property owner residing in
the dwelling being served by the street opening shall not exceed a total of
$200.
§ 435-33. Permit conditions applicable at Engineer's discretion.
In granting any permit under this article, the Engineer may attach such
other conditions thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent danger
to public or private property or to prevent the operation from being
conducted in a manner hazardous to life or property or in a manner likely to
create a nuisance. Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to:
§ 435-34. Deposit; form; approval. [Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-076]
The deposit may be in the form of cash or certified treasurer's check or
surety bond made payable to the City and meeting the approval of the
Engineer. The surety bond must be written by a reputable surety company
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, and the bond shall be
conditioned upon the payment of all charges required in this article. The
aforementioned bond must be approved by the City Law Director as to form.
The Engineer shall have the right to require the submission of the deposit
in any of the above specified forms.
F. Submit, when required by the Engineer, a list of owners and tenants of
all property abutting the area where the work authorized by the permit
is to be performed.
G. Present evidence that all materials, labor and/or equipment which are
needed to complete such undertaking as authorized by the permit are
available.
H. Keep the original copy of the permit at all times while such work is in
progress and show such permit upon demand to any authorized
representative of the City.
A. Limitations on the period of the year in which the work may be
performed.
B. Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment.
C. Designation of routes upon which material may be transported.
D. The place and manner of disposal of excavated materials.
E. Requirements as to the laying of dust, cleaning of streets, the
prevention of noises and other results offensive or injurious to the
neighborhood, the general public or any portion thereof.
F. Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
§ 435-31 PATERSON CODE § 435-35
431:878
§ 435-35. Insufficient deposit.
If the deposit made is less than sufficient to pay all fees and costs, the
permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the City an amount equal to the
deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such deficiency upon
demand, the City may recover the same by action in any court of competent
jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, additional permits shall not
be issued to such permittee.
§ 435-36. Negotiated contribution for damage to adjacent surfaces.
Where trenches are to be opened parallel to the street or where a number
of cross trenches are to be laid in close proximity to one another by
the permittee or where the equipment used may damage adjacent paved
surfaces, it shall be the prerogative of the Engineer to require a negotiated
contribution from the permittee for the resurfacing in place of patching of
such streets if the total area of the proposed patch or probable damaged
area exceeds 15% of the total pavement surfacing between curb faces or
between concrete or stone gutter edges in any block. Such negotiations
shall be carried on and contributions agreed upon prior to issuance of a
permit.
§ 435-37. Yearly deposit.
Whenever any public utility or municipal authority maintaining
underground facilities shall contemplate more than one street opening or
excavation per calendar year, it may post a surety bond for the calendar
year or part thereof to cover the estimated fees and cost of any and all work.
Said bond must be written by a reputable surety company licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey, and the bond shall be conditioned upon
the payment of all charges estimated to be required by this article during
the term of the bond. Such bond must be approved by the City Law Director
as to form.
§ 435-38. Liability insurance; requirements; amount; waiver.
A. The certificate of insurance required of the applicant under § 435-31 of
this article shall indicate that he is insured against claims for damages
for personal injury as well as against claims for property damages
which may arise from or out of the performance of the work, whether
such performance is by himself, his subcontractor or anyone directly or
indirectly employed by him. Such insurance shall include protection
against liability arising from completed operations and shall provide
complete third-party coverage for the City.
B. The amount of such insurance shall be prescribed by the Engineer in
accordance with the nature of the risks involved; provided, however,
that the liability insurance for bodily injury in effect shall be in an
amount not less than $100,000 for each person and $300,000 for each
accident and for property damages an amount not less than $50,000.
§ 435-35 SPITTING § 435-38
431:879
§ 435-39. Faithful performance bond; requirements; amount;
coverage for more than one permit in a year.
§ 435-40. Terms of bond; effective dates.
The terms of each bond posted shall begin upon the date of the posting
thereof and shall end upon the receipt by the permittee of a certificate of
final inspection from the Engineer.
§ 435-41. Notice to adjoining property owners and tenants.
If, in the opinion of the Engineer, the work to be undertaken by the
permittee is such that it will affect the use of properties abutting or
adjoining the project, he shall require the permittee to submit a list of the
names and addresses of the owner and/or tenants of such properties. Upon
receipt of such list, the City shall notify the affected property owners or
tenants of the proposed work to be done.
§ 435-42. Notice to Police and Fire Divisions; traffic directors
required.
C. Failure of the applicant to file such certificate shall be grounds for
denying a permit.
D. City departments, franchised public utilities and other governmental
agencies may be relieved of the obligation of submitting such a
certificate if they do the work contemplated under the permit with their
own personnel or with a contractor insured as required; however, such
waiver shall not release any such organization from any and all liability
under any of the obligations provided herein.
A. Each applicant, upon the receipt of a permit, shall provide the City with
a surety bond to guarantee the faithful performance of work authorized
by a permit granted pursuant to this article.
B. The amount of the bond shall be 100% of the estimated cost of restoring
the opening. However, in no event shall the bond furnished be in an
amount less than $1,000.
C. If the permittee contemplates requesting more than one permit per
year as required by this article, the Engineer may require the permittee
to furnish one bond as above in such amount as the Engineer deems
necessary. Said bond must be written by a reputable surety company
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey and must be
approved by the City Law Director as to form.
A. The Engineer shall notify, in writing, the City Police and Fire Divisions
of any street opening or excavation permit he grants which affects the
flow of traffic in streets and alleys within the City. Such notification
shall state the nature of the work to be done and the location of such
project. He shall also notify the Police and Fire Divisions when any
§ 435-38 PATERSON CODE § 435-42
431:880
§ 435-43. Notice to Engineer of commencement of work.
The Engineer must be notified by the permittee, not more than 48 hours
or less than 24 hours prior to the beginning of work, of the date and
approximate time at which work will be begun.
§ 435-44. Engineer's presence or permission to proceed required.
No work shall be performed by the permittee unless the Engineer shall be
present or permission has been given by the Engineer to proceed in his
absence.
§ 435-45. Engineer's daily inspections; inspectors.
§ 435-46. Permit not required of City.
Street opening permits will not be required for any contracts proposed by
the City. All guaranties are provided for within plans and/or specifications
so provided by the City.
§ 435-47. Street opening limited; additional work; sufficiency of
bond.
§ 435-48. Time for commencement of work; automatic termination
of permit; renewal of terminated permit.
openings or excavations have been closed, permitting traffic to flow
thereon.
B. The permittee shall in all cases be responsible for and required to have
traffic directors to maintain traffic with regards to safety and flow.
A. The Engineer or his authorized agents shall make daily inspections of
all work authorized by permits issued pursuant to this article.
B. The Engineer is empowered to employ an inspector if the Engineer is of
the opinion that the work to be performed pursuant to a permit
authorized by this article is such that an inspector is necessary to
ensure compliance with the various provisions of this article.
A. No person to whom a permit has been granted under the provisions of
this article shall perform any of the work authorized by such permit in
any amount or quantity greater than that specified in the permit, except
that, upon the approval by the Engineer and payment of the additional
fee, additional work may be done under the provisions of the permit in
an amount not greater than 10% of the amount specified in the permit.
B. Any deposit and bond posted in connection with the original permit
shall be deemed to cover any such additional work as may be approved
pursuant to this section within the limit mentioned herein.
§ 435-42 SPITTING § 435-48
431:881
§ 435-49. Permits nontransferable.
Permits issued under this article are not transferable from one person to
another, and the work shall be carried out only at the location specifically
designated in the permit.
§ 435-50. Expiration of permit; extension.
§ 435-51. Permit subject to rights of street use.
Every permit issued hereunder shall be granted subject to the right of the
City or any other person entitled thereto to use the street for any purpose
for which such street may lawfully be used.
§ 435-52. Revocation of permit.
Any permit issued under this article may be revoked by the Engineer after
notice for:
§ 435-53. Notice of revocation of permit; delivery.
A. Work for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this article shall
commence within 30 days after the issuance of the permit therefor.
B. If not so commenced, the permit shall be automatically terminated and
the permit fee, inspection fee and any cash deposit shall be refunded to
the permittee, with the exception of the ten-dollar application fee.
C. Permits thus terminated may be renewed upon the payment of an
additional application fee and the required permit and inspection fees
as determined by the Engineer and defined within this article.
A. Every permit issued hereunder shall expire at the end of the period of
time specified in the permit.
B. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work within the
specified time, he shall, prior to expiration of the permit, present, in
writing, to the Engineer a request for an extension of time, setting forth
therein the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the opinion of the
Engineer, such an extension is necessary, the permittee may be granted
additional time for the completion of the work.
A. Violation of any condition of the permit.
B. Violation of any provision of this article or any other applicable
ordinance or law relating to the work.
C. The existence of any condition or the doing of any work constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or property of others.
A. Written notice of such violation shall be served upon the person to
whom the permit was granted or his agent or employee engaged in the
§ 435-48 PATERSON CODE § 435-53
431:882
§ 435-54. Permittee's duties upon receipt of notice of revocation.
Upon receiving notice of revocation of permit, the permittee is immediately
to suspend all work originally covered by the permit and will proceed with
backfill and repair of the opening. Failure to properly backfill and repair will
result in the City's utilizing either the deposit or performance bond to effect
proper repairs.
§ 435-55. Restrictions on amount of street to be opened; work not
to interfere with utility lines or connections.
§ 435-56. Permittee's duties regarding utility facilities.
work. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the reasons for
revoking such permit.
B. Such notice may be given, whether by personal delivery thereof to the
person to be notified or by United States mail, addressed to such person
to be notified.
A. No openings or excavations in any street shall extend beyond the center
line of the street until the surface of the street is restored to a condition
safe and convenient for travel.
B. Unless authorized by the Engineer, no more than 250 feet measured
longitudinally shall be opened in any street at any one time until the
surface of the street is restored to a condition safe and convenient for
travel.
C. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with
any utility lines or connections or other underground facilities unless
permission of the proper authorities in connection with such facilities
shall have been obtained.
A. The permittee shall expose all utility facilities, including sewers, storm
drains, gas mains, water mains, telephone and electrical conduits, and
other utility obstructions sufficiently ahead of trench excavation work
to avoid damage to those facilities and to permit their relocation if
necessary.
B. Where a pipe drain, pipe culvert or other structure or facility is
encountered, it shall be replaced, restored, straightened or protected
by the permittee.
C. If, in the process of his work, the permittee damages any public or
private utility property, the utility may make the necessary repairs and
file a claim against the permittee with the City for the cost thereof. If
the claim is not paid promptly by the permittee, the amount may be
withheld by the Engineer from the deposit or charged against the
permittee's performance bond.
§ 435-53 SPITTING § 435-56
431:883
§ 435-57. Removal of monuments and survey marks; replacement.
Any monument of granite, concrete, iron, steel, brass or other lasting
material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines of any street
or property subdivision or a precise survey reference point or a permanent
survey bench mark within the City shall not be removed or disturbed or
caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining permission, in
writing, from the Engineer to do so. Permission shall be granted only upon
the condition that the permittee shall pay all expenses incidental to proper
replacement of such monument, survey reference point or bench mark.
§ 435-58. Interference with drainage system.
If any work performed under the permit interferes with the established
drainage system of any street, provisions shall be made by the permittee to
provide proper drainage to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
§ 435-59. Deposit of material not to create public nuisance.
When any earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other excavated material is
caused to be deposited upon or to roll, flow or wash upon any street so as
to create a nuisance or endanger life or property, the person responsible
therefor shall cause the same to be removed immediately from the street
upon notification to do so by the Engineer. In the event that it is not removed
within eight hours after notification, the Engineer shall cause such removal
and the cost of such removal shall be paid by the permittee or deducted
from his deposit.
§ 435-60. Safety devices.
D. The contractor shall provide, operate, and maintain satisfactory
facilities and equipment including well pints, cofferdams, if necessary,
with which to contain, collect, and pump all water entering excavations
or other parts of the work to suitable places for disposal. All excavations
shall be kept free of water. Groundwater shall be lowered in advance of
excavation and maintained at a level at least two feet below the bottom
of the excavation at all times until the work therein is completed.
[Added 10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-076]
A. To protect the public, every permittee shall place around the project
such barriers, barricades, lights, warning flags and danger signs as
shall be determined by the Engineer.
B. All safety requirements and precautionary measures prescribed by the
Engineer shall be based upon and in conformance with, where
applicable, the requirements set forth in New Jersey Department of
Transportation publication Standard Specifications for Roads and
Bridges, including all amendments (latest edition). Copies of this
publication are available in the office of the Engineer for inspection by
any permittee.
§ 435-56 PATERSON CODE § 435-60
431:884
§ 435-61. Vehicle and pedestrian crossings; use of steel plates.
§ 435-62. Driveway and fire hydrant access.
Access to private driveways shall be provided except during working hours
when construction operations prohibit provision of such access. Free access
must be provided at all times to fire hydrants.
§ 435-63. Excavation requirements. [Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-076]
C. Whenever any person fails to provide or maintain the safety devices
required by the Engineer, such device shall be installed and maintained
by the City. The amount of the cost incurred shall be paid by the
permittee or deducted from his deposit.
D. No unauthorized person shall willfully move, remove, injure, destroy or
extinguish any barrier, warning light, sign or notice erected, placed or
posted in accordance with the provisions of this article.
A. While work is in progress and while workmen are on the site, every
permittee shall maintain safe crossing for vehicle traffic at all street
intersections and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more
than 300 feet.
B. Two lanes of traffic shall be held open at all intersections, where
possible, by the removal of dirt and the use of covering steel plates.
While work is in progress and workmen are not on the site, all
excavations, whether at intersections or elsewhere, shall be covered by
steel plates. All plates must lie firmly secured and, when necessary and
practical, embedded in bituminous material so as to withstand the
normal flow of traffic on the street.
C. When the size and character of the excavation make it impractical to
use steel plates, the permittee shall so advise the Engineer at the time
when he applies for his permit and shall not proceed with the work until
he obtains the Engineer's consent not to use steel plates.
A. Excavations made adjacent to or in proximity of existing structures
shall be made with special care and in such a manner as not to damage
the structures or disturb the supporting backfill and foundation of such
structures.
B. Excavated material shall be placed in a manner that will not obstruct
the work nor endanger the workers or the public, or obstruct sidewalks,
driveways, roadways, or other structures. Placement of excavated
material shall be done in compliance with OSHA, federal, state, and
local regulations.
C. The limits of excavations, including trenches, shall be adequately
sheeted and braced so as to not only provide safe protection to workers,
but also to prevent damage to adjacent structures from slippage,
§ 435-60 SPITTING § 435-63
431:885
§ 435-64. Trenches; requirements. [Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-076]
shifting, and settling of earth outside of the excavation lines, to
maintain stability of soil outside of excavation lines, and other
purposes, such as for maintaining proper control of operations and
full dimensions of structure work. Sheeting and bracing shall be of
sufficient dimensions and strengths necessary to attain proper restraint
and temporary stability as the work progresses.
D. Wherever necessary, in the opinion of the Engineer, in order to expedite
the flow of traffic or to abate a dirt or dust nuisance, toe boards or bins
will be required to prevent the spreading of excavated material into
traffic lanes; temporary wooden plank walks shall be installed where
the excavated area is muddy and causes inconvenience to pedestrians.
E. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without
using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the permittee or his agent shall
keep a passageway at least 1/2 the sidewalk width open along such
sidewalk line.
A. Trench preparation shall proceed in advance of pipe installation only as
far as approved by the City.
B. Whenever it is necessary to break through existing pavement for
excavation purposes and where trenches are to be four feet or over in
depth, the pavement in the base shall be removed to at least one foot
beyond the outer limits of the subgrade that is to be distributed in order
to prevent settlement, and a one-foot shoulder of undisturbed material
shall be provided in each side of the excavated trench. The face of the
remaining pavement shall be approximately vertical.
C. Roadways may have a concrete subbase, which may be removed as may
be required to complete the work.
D. In general, the width of pipe trenches shall not be wider than the
outside diameter of the pipe barrel plus two feet unless otherwise
approved.
E. The maximum length of trench opening at any given time shall not
exceed 100 feet. Trenches shall be closed at the end of the day.
F. A power-driven concrete saw shall be used so as to permit complete
breakage of concrete pavement without ragged edges.
G. Asphalt paving shall be scored or otherwise cut in a straight line.
H. No pile driver may be used in breaking up the pavement.
I. Discharge from any trench-dewatering pumps shall be filtered and
conducted to natural drainage channels, storm sewers, or as directed
by the City or applicable regulatory agencies.
§ 435-63 PATERSON CODE § 435-64
431:886
§ 435-65. Tunneling.
No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the Engineer
and permission therefor endorsed upon the permit. The backfilling of a
tunnel excavation shall be made only in the presence of the Engineer and
shall be done only in a method approved by him.
§ 435-66. Restoration of street surfaces. [Amended 10-13-2015 by
Ord. No. 15-076; 2-28-2017 by Ord. No. 17-005]
The work of restoration to be carried out by the permittee, including both
paving surface and paving base, shall be performed as follows:
J. Filling and backfilling of areas or trenches shall be done in uniformly
spread layers of not more than six inches loose depth and compacted by
rolling or machine tamping to the designated density. Such compaction
shall be done by rolling, rerolling, and cross rolling.
A. The contractor shall restore, rebuild or reconstruct all structures or
other objects removed or damaged during the performance of the work,
including any opening or excavation. The surface shall be restored to
the same condition as it was before the opening, and such restoration
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the City or
specifications of the Department of Transportation of the State of New
Jersey, which specifications are hereby adopted as specifications of the
City, for restoration of surfaces of public streets in the City.
B. As restored, the surface shall conform to the part of the street
immediately adjoining the opening. Additionally, the following
subsections of this Subsection B are additional requirements in the
event that a road opening is required for installation of a new utility or
the repair of an existing utility or for any other such reason that
requires the disturbance of existing roadway pavement that is three
years or less in age since pavement installation, or if the length of the
excavation exceeds 100 feet.
(1) The road shall be milled and paved the entire width of roadway
curb to curb and 10 feet in both directions of the road opening.
(2) The milled surface shall be no less than two inches deep from
existing grade, a tack coat shall be applied, and pavement shall be
replaced to a compacted condition level with the abutting existing
street surface.
(3) The replacement pavement shall be of like quality of the existing
pavement in accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
(4) The final milling and replacement pavement work shall be
completed within four months of the road opening.
§ 435-64 SPITTING § 435-66
431:887
§ 435-67. Backfilling methods and requirements. [Amended
10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-076]
(5) Until the final milling and replacement pavement work is
completed, the road opening trench shall be backfilled and
temporary pavement installed in accordance with Chapter 435 of
the City Code.
(6) All restoration work shall require the approval of the City Engineer,
and said approval shall be a condition to the release of any bond or
similar deposit.
C. In addition to requirements of Subsection B of this section, in the event
that a road opening is required for installation of a new utility or the
repair of an existing utility or for any other such reason that requires
the disturbance of existing roadway pavement that is three years or less
in age since pavement installation, and the length of the excavation is
less than 100 feet:
(1) The road shall be milled and paved the entire width of roadway
curb to curb and 10 feet in both directions of the road opening.
(2) The milled surface shall be no less than 1.5 inches deep from
existing grade, a tack coat shall be applied, and pavement shall be
replaced to a compacted condition level with the abutting existing
street surface.
(3) The replacement pavement shall be of like quality of the existing
pavement in accordance with the requirements of the New Jersey
Department of Transportation.
(4) The final milling and replacement pavement work shall be
completed within four months of the road opening.
(5) Until the final milling and replacement pavement work is
completed, the road opening trench shall be backfilled and
temporary pavement installed in accordance with Chapter 435 of
the City Code.
(6) The final restoration shall include infrared (IR) or a joint sealer if
deemed appropriate by the engineer.
(7) All restoration work shall require the approval of the City Engineer,
and said approval shall be a condition to the release of any bond or
similar deposit.
A. All pavement cuts, openings and excavations shall be properly made
and backfilled. All backfill and fill shall be approved by the City. Backfill
shall be placed in lifts that are no thicker than necessary to achieve the
specified compaction with the equipment that is being utilized for
compaction. Where ordered by the City, soil compaction and optimum
dry density of backfill and fill, be it imported or native to the site, shall
§ 435-66 PATERSON CODE § 435-67
431:888
be determined in accordance with the most recent revision of ASTM
D-1557 by a geotechnical laboratory, certified by the state. The
geotechnical laboratory results, certified by an engineer that is licensed
in the state is to be submitted to the City for approval.
B. All backfill for trenches and excavations within the City's ROWs shall be
approved imported granular backfill material. Backfill shall be placed
from six inches above the top of pipe to the underside of paving to be
placed.
C. Unsuitable backfill shall consist of excavated material containing
rejected organic matter, boggy, peaty humus or other unsuitable
material such as silt, rubbish, waste, ash, or cinders. Frozen earth and
any stones more than three inches in the largest dimension shall not be
used for backfill or fill.
D. Approved imported granular backfill shall consist of bank run sand and
gravel. Bank run sand and gravel shall consist of hard, sharp, clean
granular material, free of organic matter. The material shall be free of
any considerable amount of flat, laminated, or elongated particles and
shells, silt, clay, limestone, shale, or other deleterious matter. The
material must be capable of compaction to the densities specified or
required. The material shall contain no stones larger than three inches
in their largest dimension, and no more than 10% of the material by
weight shall pass a No. 200 sieve. A particle size analysis of backfill and
fill, be it imported or native to the site, shall be determined in
accordance with the most recent revision of ASTM D-422 by a
geotechnical laboratory, certified by the State of New Jersey. The
geotechnical laboratory result certified by an engineer that is licensed
in the state, is to be submitted to the City for approval.
E. If approved by the City, backfill shall consist of sand and gravel,
approved blast furnace slag, or stone. Subbase material shall be free
from organic or other deleterious materials.
F. Gravel and crushed stone shall consist of hard, sharp, clean material,
shall be free from fines, shells, clay, limestone, shale or other
deleterious matter, and shall be supplied as a mixture of sizes with 5%
to 10% of the material passing a No. 40 sieve and the remainder
ranging in size from 3/8 inch to one inch.
G. Dense graded aggregate and its installation shall be in accordance with
Section 301 of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, NJDOT, 2007 or latest edition.
H. Backfilling in any street opened or excavated pursuant to an excavation
permit issued hereunder shall be compacted to a degree equivalent to
that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug.
I. Backfill shall be placed to a subgrade such that it permits topsoil or
pavement of the required depth to be placed and compacted to finished
grade. As far as practicable, the underlying backfill shall be given time
§ 435-67 SPITTING § 435-67
431:889
to settle through several heavy rains and by artificial wetting before the
new topsoil or pavement is placed.
J. Backfilling up to the first 18 inches above the top of utility pipes or
similar installations shall be done with thin layers. Each layer is to be
tamped by manual or mechanical means. Layers that are power-tamped
shall not exceed four inches in thickness. The same requirements shall
apply to the remainder of the backfilling if tamping is the method used
for backfilling. Backfilling of all pipes of over 24 inches in diameter shall
be carried up to the spring line of the pipe in three-inch layers, with
each layer slightly moistened and not saturated and thoroughly tamped
with suitable mechanical equipment. The backfill around all pipes 24
inches or less in diameter shall be flooded or tamped as specified above
to a depth of 18 inches above the tops of the pipe before any additional
backfilling is placed thereon.
K. Whenever any excavation for the laying of pipe is made through rock,
the pipe shall be laid six inches above the rock bottom of the trench,
and the space under, around and six inches above the pipe shall be
backfilled with clean river sand, noncorrosive soil or one-quarter-inch
minus gravel. Broken pavement, stones and debris shall not be used in
the backfill.
L. The contractor shall provide additional material as required, to
compensate for settlement of backfill and fill.
M. Compaction of soils shall be achieved by the use of suitable methods
and adequate equipment acceptable and approved by the Engineer. The
minimum density to be obtained in compacting soils shall be the
following percentages of "maximum dry density" as defined in ASTM
D-1557, Moisture Density Relations of Soils (Modified Proctor
Compaction Test), Method D:
Location Percentage
Foundation material under slabs
on grade, piping and other
structures
95%
Backfilling of trenches Compaction shall be 95% when
pavement will be placed atop the
backfill and 90% when grass will
be placed atop the backfill
N. Compacted fill and pavement courses not meeting required density
when tested in place shall be replaced or reworked until additional
tests, performed at contractor's expense, indicate compliance with the
City's requirements.
O. Subgrade for all pavements shall be compacted materials placed to the
lines and grades required.
§ 435-67 PATERSON CODE § 435-67
431:890
P. Subbase: dense graded aggregate and its installation shall be in
accordance with Section 301 of the Standards Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction, NJDOT, 2007 or latest edition.
Q. Bituminous materials shall conform to NJDOT Standard Specification
Section 902. Fine aggregate, course aggregate and mineral filler shall
conform to NJDOT Standard Specification Section 901.
R. Binder course shall be hot plant mix placed to the compacted thickness
utilizing paving machinery approved by the owner.
S. Aggregate for binder course shall be composed in such proportions that
the resulting composite blend meets the following as per the NJDOT
Table 901.11-1.
Table 401-1:
Sieve Size Percentage Passing
2" 100%
3/4" 65% to 100%
No 4 40% to 75%
No 50 5% to 30%
No 200 0% to 7%
Bituminous Dense Surface Course (NJDOT Mix I-5):
Aggregates for bituminous dense surface course shall be composed in
such proportions that the resulting composite blend meets the
following as per the NJDOT Table 901.11-1:
Sieve Size Percentage Passing
2" 100%
3/4" 70% to 100%
No 4 30% to 80%
No 50 10% to 35%
No 200 5% to 12%
T. A prime coat shall be applied to any and all layers of aggregate subbase
prior to the placement of asphalt courses. The prime coat shall be
allowed to cure properly prior to asphalt placement. No traffic will be
permitted on aggregate subbases after prime coat has been placed.
Tack coats shall be prepared and applied as specified in Section 904 of
the NJDOT Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction,
2007 or latest edition.
U. All joints and key areas cut for the pavement restoration work shall be
sealed in accordance with Section 914, Joint Materials, of the NJDOT
Standards Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2007 or
latest edition.
§ 435-67 SPITTING § 435-67
431:891
§ 435-68. Diligence required; notice to complete work; completion
of work by City; costs and penalty; Engineer's judgment controlling.
§ 435-69. Engineer's determination of emergency.
If, in his judgment, traffic conditions, the safety or convenience of the
traveling public or the public interest require that the excavation work
be performed as emergency work, the Engineer shall have full power to
order, at the time the permit is granted, that a crew of men and adequate
facilities be employed by the permittee 24 hours a day to the end that such
excavation work may be completed as soon as possible.
V. The contractor shall furnish and apply thermoplastic pavement stripes,
markings, and symbols as necessary to replace disturbed pavement
striping markings, and symbols in accordance with Section 912, Paints,
Coatings, Traffic Stripes and Traffic Markings, of the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 2007 or latest edition.
W. The temporary pavement shall be a layer of bituminous stabilized base
course, six inches thick. Temporary pavement shall be allowed to settle
for a period of not less than three months, but no more than six months,
before final pavement is installed.
X. The final pavement shall be installed by milling two inches from the
temporary pavement and placing the surface course as required.
A. After such excavation or opening is commenced, the work of backfilling
the same shall be prosecuted with due diligence and so as not to
obstruct the street more than is actually necessary.
B. If the work is not so prosecuted or if the work does not, in the judgment
of the Engineer, comply with the terms of this article, he shall so notify
the person named in the permit and shall require such person within
three days after the service of such notice to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of such work or properly to complete the same as the case
may be.
C. If such notice is not complied with, the City shall do such work as may
be necessary to backfill such excavations and to restore the street or
part thereof excavated to the same condition as before such excavation
was made.
D. All expenses incurred by the City shall be recovered from the
permittee's deposit or surety, plus 15%.
E. No further permit shall be granted any person unless and until any
opening or excavation already made by him has met all requirements of
this article.
F. The Engineer shall be the sole judge of proper performance and his
opinion shall be controlling; provided, however, that such decision may
be appealed to the City Council as indicated in § 435-84 of this chapter.
§ 435-67 PATERSON CODE § 435-70
431:892
§ 435-70. Completion of work; notification of Engineer; final
inspection and certificate.
§ 435-71. Refund of deposit.
Upon certification by the permittee that all work authorized by the permit
has been completed and after inspection by the Engineer, the Engineer shall
refund to the permittee his deposit, less all costs incurred by the City in
connection with the permit. However, in no event is the application fee or
inspection fee to be refunded.
§ 435-72. Defects; correction by City; costs and penalty.
A. Upon completion of all work accomplished under the provisions of the
permit, the permittee shall notify the Engineer, in writing, on a form
prescribed by him.
B. A certificate of final inspection shall be issued by the Engineer to the
permittee no sooner than two years after the permanent restoration of
the opening or excavation has been made, provided that the work
authorized by the permit has been performed according to City
specifications.
C. Prior to the issuance of a certificate, the Engineer shall make a final
inspection of the restoration to determine whether City specifications
have been adhered to.
A. In the event that any work performed by or for a permittee shall, in the
opinion of the Engineer, be unsatisfactory and the same shall not be
corrected in accordance with his instructions within the time fixed by
him or in the event that the work for which the permit was granted is
not complete within the time fixed by the Engineer, the City may
proceed to correct such unsatisfactory work or complete any such work
not completed and charge the cost thereof, plus 15%, to the permittee
or his surety. The cost shall include, but not be limited to, any costs that
the Engineer deems expedient and appropriate related to consultants,
equipment, inspection, notification, remediation, repair, restoration, or
any other actual costs incurred by the City or other agencies,
authorities, boards, commissions, or departments of the City that were
made necessary by said excavation. The Engineer's determination as to
the cost of any work done or repairs made shall be final. [Amended
10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-076]
B. If within two years after the restoration of the surface as herein
provided defects shall appear therein resulting from defective
workmanship by the permittee, he shall reimburse the City for the cost
of all necessary repairs to the permanent paving, plus 15%.
C. If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of two years
from date of completion of the permanent restoration, it shall in general
be as conclusive evidence of defective backfilling. Any expense which
§ 435-70 SPITTING § 435-72
431:893
§ 435-73. Default in performance; notice.
Whenever the Engineer shall find that a default has occurred in the
performance of any term or condition of any permit, written notice thereof
shall be given to the principal and to the surety of the bond. Such notice
shall state the work to be done, the estimated cost thereof and the period of
time deemed by the Engineer to be reasonably necessary for the completion
of such work.
§ 435-74. Completion of work after default.
§ 435-75. Permittee's work not chargeable to City; City's liability.
may be incurred by the City in correcting such settlement shall be paid
by the permittee or recovered from his bond, plus 15%.
A. After receipt of such notice, the surety must, within the time therein
specified, either cause the required work to be performed or, failing
therein, pay over to the Engineer the estimated cost of doing the work
as set forth in the notice. Upon the receipt of such moneys, the
Engineer shall proceed by such mode as he deems convenient to cause
the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall
be incurred therein other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand.
B. In the event of any default in the performance of any term or condition
of the permit for the work, the surety or any person employed or
engaged on his behalf shall have the right to go upon the premises to
complete the required work or make it safe.
C. No person shall interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or
from any such premises by any authorized representative or agent of
any surety or of the City engaged in completing the work required to be
performed under the permit or in complying with the terms or
conditions thereof.
A. Unless part of the work is being performed by the City, no opening or
excavation made by a permittee shall be considered in the charge or
care of the City or of any officer or person employed by the City, and no
officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or assume any
jurisdiction over any such opening or excavation except in the exercise
of police power where and when it is necessary to protect life and
property.
B. This article shall not be construed as imposing upon the City or any
official or employee any liability or responsibility for damages to any
person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which an
excavation permit is issued hereunder; nor shall the City or any official
or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or
responsibility by reason of inspection authorized hereunder, the
issuance of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
§ 435-72 PATERSON CODE § 435-76
431:894
§ 435-76. Maps filed with Engineer.
Every person owning, controlling or having an interest in pipes, conduits,
ducts, tunnels or other structures under the surface of any street used
for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity, communication
impulses, water, sewage, steam, oil or any other material to or from the City
or to or from its inhabitants or for any other purposes shall file with the
Engineer, upon his request, any map or set of maps showing the location,
size and description of all such installations when required for municipal
purposes.
§ 435-77. Annual corrected map.
Within 30 days after the first day of January of each and every year, such
person shall file with the Engineer a corrected map or set of maps showing
such installations, including all those made during the previous year, to and
including the last day of such year. However, such person may at his own
option elect to provide corrected atlas sheets throughout the year as they
are available rather than proceed as above noted.
§ 435-78. Affidavit of maps required.
Each map herein required shall be accompanied by an affidavit endorsed
thereon to the effect that the same correctly exhibits the details required to
be shown by this article.
§ 435-79. Maps open to inspection.
Maps and plans submitted in accordance herewith shall be open to the
inspection of all persons requesting to see the same.
§ 435-80. Notice of improvements made by City.
When the City shall improve or pave any street, the Engineer shall first
give notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street about to
be paved or improved and to all public utility companies operating in the
City, and all such persons and utility companies shall do all work which
would necessitate excavation of the street within 45 days from the giving of
such notice. The time may be extended if permission has been requested in
writing and has been approved by the Engineer.
§ 435-81. Engineer's schedules.
The Engineer is authorized to establish a schedule of charges for
inspections, labor, materials and such other expenses and requirements of
this article. The schedule shall be open to public inspection in the office of
the Engineer upon demand.
§ 435-76 SPITTING § 435-82
431:895
§ 435-82. Engineer's decision on costs.
The decision of the Engineer as to the cost of any work done or repairs made
by him or under his direction pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be controlling; provided, however, that such decision may be appealed to
the City Council as indicated in § 435-84 of this chapter.
§ 435-83. Enforcement.
The Engineer shall be responsible for enforcing all provisions of this article.
§ 435-84. Appeals to City Council.
Any person believing himself to be aggrieved by a decision of the Engineer
or his refusal to grant a permit shall have the right to appeal to the City
Council within 30 days from the Engineer's decision or refusal to grant a
permit, and the Council's decision on such appeal shall be final.
§ 435-85. Violations and penalties.
A. In case any person shall violate any provision of this article, any permit
issued by the City to such person under this article shall be revoked,
and such person, upon conviction before the courts, shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000, imprisonment for not more than
90 days or a period of community service for not more than 90 days, or
any combination thereof, and costs of prosecution. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
B. The penalty provided for in Subsection A of this section and the
imposition thereof shall not constitute a bar to or be deemed in
substitution of the exercise of any right or power or remedy of the City
provided for in this chapter or in any other provision of this Code of the
City of Paterson applicable to the subject matter of this chapter.
§ 435-82 PATERSON CODE § 435-85
431:896
ARTICLE IV
Obstructions
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 23, Art. 4, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 435-86. Obstructions prohibited. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No.
98-035]
§ 435-87. Depositing items from vehicles on streets and sidewalks
restricted.
No truckman or other person shall deposit from a truck or vehicle of any
kind any box, barrel, keg, crate, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind
upon the streets or sidewalks of the City unless some person shall be there
to receive the same. It shall be the duty of the person to whom said goods
are consigned immediately to remove the same from said street or sidewalk.
A. Unless otherwise provided in this Code of the City of Paterson, no
person shall:
(1) Maintain, erect or construct any show window, bay window, step,
stoop, platform, shed, post, pole, fence, gate, railing, sign or any
other obstruction made or composed of any material whatever so
that the same shall extend upon, into or over any street line or
building line.
(2) Maintain or place any post, pole, stand, showcase, box, barrel, keg,
bag, bale, crate, goods, wares and merchandise or any other thing
or things upon the streets or sidewalks of the City.
(3) Display any merchandise, goods, wares or any other things outside
the indoor premises of a permanent business establishment. This
prohibition shall be deemed to prohibit, among other things, the
display of items hanging from any portion of the outside permanent
business premises, items attached to the permanent business
premises or any portion thereof, items displayed within an outdoor
entry area of said business premises despite the fact that said entry
area is not a part of the public sidewalk, displays hanging from any
pole, fence, gate, railing, sign, grating or other protrusion from the
permanent business establishment.
B. This prohibition shall not be deemed to apply to the display of
perishable foods on the sidewalks immediately adjacent to a permanent
business establishment which sells said perishable foods, provided that
a minimum width of five feet of passageway is maintained for
pedestrians.
§ 435-86 SPITTING § 435-88
431:897
§ 435-88. Removal of obstructions by City; collection of costs.
[Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
The Director of Public Works or his designee shall remove all obstructions
placed or maintained upon, into or over the streets or sidewalks of the City
contrary to the provisions of this article and shall collect the costs incurred
in removing such obstructions from the person or persons responsible
therefor. If necessary, the City shall proceed with a civil action for the
recovery of the costs incurred in removing such obstructions.
§ 435-89. Construction of article; obstructions excepted.
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit the
installation of an outside public telephone booth or a drive-up book return
receiving station for the public library or for a bank deposit receiving
station when the location therefor has been approved by the Director of
the Department of Public Works, after formal application has been made
therefor.175
§ 435-90. Regulations in B-3A Zones.
A. In a B-3A Zone, nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the
placement of stands, bins, barrels, crates and other similar containers
upon portions of the public sidewalks for the display of perishable
foods, provided that a minimum of five feet of clear passageway from
the curb is maintained for pedestrians except that such stands, bins,
barrels, crates or other similar containers may be placed two feet from
the curb on the public sidewalks, provided that a minimum width of five
feet of passageway is maintained for pedestrians and there is a loading
and unloading zone in the street in front of such curb with other
parking prohibited.
B. In a B-3A Zone, nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the
placement of stands, bins, barrels, crates and other similar containers
holding perishable foods on the street or the sidewalk while such
containers are in the actual process of being loaded and unloaded.
C. In a B-3A Zone, nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the
placement of containers and debris transfer bodies, including Dempsey
Dumpsters, on the public sidewalk and street during the hours of 3:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m., provided that such do not occupy more than 1/3 of
the street, that such containers prominently display the name, address
and telephone number of the owner of the container and that said body
is reflectorized for night safety.
175. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 23-85, Regulation outside of B-3A Zones, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 9-9-1986 by Ord. No. 86-034.
§ 435-88 PATERSON CODE § 435-91
431:898
§ 435-91. Promulgation of rules and regulations by Department.
The Department of Public Works is hereby empowered to develop
reasonable rules and regulations regarding the alignment and maintenance
of such stands, bins, barrels, crates and other similar containers used
by commercial establishments selling perishable foods, as well as the
alignment and maintenance of debris transfer bodies in the B-3A Zone.
§ 435-92. Permit to obstruct streets and public places required.
[Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
No person shall encumber or obstruct any street or other public place in the
City by placing therein or thereon any building materials or any article or
thing whatsoever without having first obtained a permit from the Director
of Public Works or his designee.
§ 435-93. Prerequisites for granting of obstruction permits.
No permit shall be granted under this article to place:
§ 435-94. Restriction on width of street used.
The width of the street to be used under a permit issued under this article
shall be limited in accordance with the traffic conditions, and in no event
shall the portion used exceed 1/3 of said street.
§ 435-95. Permit fee.
A fee of $25 shall be paid for permits for obstructing streets for a period of
30 days or part thereof for each 50 linear feet of frontage or part thereof
occupied.
§ 435-96. Deposit required; refund. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
A. Building material on any street or other public place unless the roadbed
of said places is first protected with two-inch plank laid on one-inch by
two-inch furring strips to provide air space. Cutters shall be kept open
for a space of one foot from face of curb to allow a free flow.
B. A container or debris transfer body unless each container prominently
displays the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
container or transfer body and said body is reflectorized for night
safety.
A. No permit shall be issued under this article unless at the time of the
application, in addition to the fees prescribed by § 435-95, shall be
deposited with the Director of Public Works or his designee the sum of
$100, conditioned upon the removal of all obstructions in accordance
with the terms of the permit and conditioned upon the restoration of the
street and sidewalk to its former condition.
§ 435-91 SPITTING § 435-96
431:899
§ 435-97. Placement of obstructions near fire hydrants prohibited.
No person shall place an obstruction of any kind, either permanent or
temporary, upon any street, sidewalk or public place in the City within 10
feet of any fire hydrant.
§ 435-98. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein, any person who
violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not more than
90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. After such removal of the obstruction and restoration of the street and
sidewalk, the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee, provided that
said obstruction shall be properly removed and the street and sidewalk
properly restored to its original condition to the satisfaction and
approval of the Director of Public Works or his designee.
C. In the event of the failure of the applicant to remove the obstruction
and restore the street or sidewalk within 24 hours after notification
thereof from the Director of Public Works or his designee, the Director
of Public Works or his designee may cause the obstruction to be
removed and the street or sidewalk to be repaired properly, and the
cost thereof shall be deducted from the deposit heretofore made.
§ 435-96 PATERSON CODE § 435-98
431:900
ARTICLE V
Protective Measures
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 23, Art. 6, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 435-99. Obstruction of or damage to streets prohibited.
No person shall obstruct or damage any street by the filling, spilling,
flowing or throwing of stones, dirt, earth or any other materials thereon.
§ 435-100. Operating motor vehicle resulting in spillage prohibited.
No person shall:
§ 435-101. Curb blocks and planks to be used for protection.
§ 435-102. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein, any person who
violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not more than
90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. Operate any trucks or motor vehicles carrying or conveying stones, dirt,
sand, gravel, earth, fill or other similar materials unless said materials
have been covered or retained in place by tarpaulins or other suitable
equipment or device to prevent said materials from falling off the truck
or vehicle while in motion.
B. Drive or move any vehicle or truck if the wheels or tires carry onto or
deposit in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt, adhesive
substances or foreign matter of any kind.
A. No vehicle shall pass over or stand on any sidewalk in the City unless a
curb block is used for the protection of the curb and proper planks are
used from the sidewalk to the property line.
B. The provisions of Subsection A of this section prohibiting passing over
any sidewalk shall not apply to driveways.
§ 435-99 SPITTING § 435-102
431:901

ARTICLE VI
Removal of Snow and Ice
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 23, Art. 7, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 435-103. Owner or tenant to remove snow and ice.
The owner or tenant in possession of lands abutting or bordering upon the
sidewalks of public streets or public places in the City shall remove all snow
and ice from the abutting sidewalks within 12 hours of daylight after the
same shall fall or be formed thereon.
§ 435-104. Failure to comply; removal by City; lien for cost.
[Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
If the owner or tenant of any such premises shall neglect or refuse to
remove the snow or ice as required in § 435-103, it shall be the duty of the
Director of Public Works or his designee to forthwith have said snow and
ice removed. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall thereupon
certify the cost of the removal to the Department of Finance, which shall
examine such certificate and, if found to be correct, shall cause such cost
to be charged against the land abutting or bordering upon such sidewalks,
and the amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien and tax upon such
real estate and be added to and be a part of the taxes next to be assessed
and levied upon such lands and shall bear interest at the same rate as other
taxes and shall be collected and enforced in the same manner as other
taxes.
§ 435-105. Casting snow or ice upon streets and sidewalks.
No person shall:
§ 435-106. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068; 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-045]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein, any person who
violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to punishment by payment of a fine in the amount of $50. Fines are
payable at the Violations Bureau without a court appearance. Costs of court
of $30 will be imposed, consistent with New Jersey Court Rule 7:11-4, for
all such payments.
A. Place or cause to be placed any snow or ice upon the traffic lanes of the
roadway of any street. If it is necessary to clear the roadway of snow
and ice in front of any property for the purpose of providing parking
space or to give access to such property, then such snow or ice shall be
properly piled in the roadway line and in such a manner that the
gutterway shall be unobstructed.
B. Remove any snow or ice from any private property and place the same
onto any sidewalk or roadway of any street.
§ 435-103 SPITTING § 435-106
431:903

ARTICLE VII
Signs, Awnings and Canopies
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 23, Art. 9, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 435-107. Erection and maintenance of awnings restricted.
§ 435-108. Permit for certain canopies required; regulations.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in § 435-107 of this article, the
Department of Public Works may issue permits, upon application made
therefor, for the erection of canopies at the entrances of apartment houses
which accommodate 30 families or more. Such canopies, however, shall be
at least 10 feet wide and not less than eight feet in height.
§ 435-109. License required to maintain projecting signs. [Amended
12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
No person shall erect or maintain any sign or signs projecting 18 inches or
more beyond the building line in any street or highway in the City without
first obtaining a license therefor from and payment of the license fee to the
Director of Public Works or his designee.
§ 435-110. License term and fee. [Amended 10-19-1982 by Ord. No.
82-024]
§ 435-111. Prerequisites to issuance of license; compliance with
construction and zoning regulations.
A. No awning shall be erected or maintained in the City unless it is:
(1) Eight feet clear above the sidewalk level.
(2) Entirely supported from the building to which it is attached and not
by sidewalk supports.
B. No awning shall project from the building to which it is attached beyond
a line drawn perpendicularly upward from 18 inches inside the
curbline.
A. Licenses shall be issued by the Director of Public Works or his designee
for a term of one year beginning on February 1 and expiring on the first
day of February following its issuance. [Amended 12-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 95-068]
B. The annual license fee, imposed for revenue purposes, shall be at the
rate of $0.10 per square foot of actual surface of each sign, measured
on one side but not including that portion of the sign within 18 inches of
the building line; provided, however, that in no case shall a license fee
be less than $10 per sign.
§ 435-107 SPITTING § 435-111
431:905
§ 435-112. Regulations for erection and maintenance of signs.
§ 435-113. Inspection and records. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
§ 435-114. Noncomplying signs; notice to repair or remove signs.
A. No license shall be granted or issued under this article unless and until
a permit for the erection, attachment to or suspension from the building
or structure has been issued by the Construction Official as required by
the State Uniform Construction Code.176
B. No license shall be granted or issued under this article for any sign
which does not comply with the provisions and requirements of the
State Uniform Construction Code and Zoning Ordinance of the City.177
A. Every sign erected or maintained shall be of a substantial character and
shall be securely fastened so that such sign is unlikely to fall or be
blown down. The sign shall be attached to the building or structure by
bolts, anchors, chains, rods or guys. No nails or staples shall be used to
secure any sign to a building or structure.
B. No sign shall contain or be made of any inflammable or combustible
material unless otherwise permitted by the State Uniform Construction
Code.
C. No projecting sign shall project from the face of a building or structure
on or over streets and sidewalks in the City beyond a line drawn
perpendicularly upward from two feet inside the curbline.
D. A clear space of not less than nine feet shall be provided below all parts
of projecting signs.
A. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall, from time to time,
cause an inspection to be made of all projecting signs for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the same have been licensed and maintained in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall keep a record of all
licenses issued under this article.
A. If, after the issuance of a license under this article, any sign erected or
maintained is found not to comply with the provisions of this article or
the State Uniform Construction Code, the owner or licensee shall, after
notice, alter or change said sign to comply with such provisions or
remove said sign.
176. Editor's Note: See Ch. 183, Construction Codes, Uniform.
177. Editor's Note: See Ch. 183, Construction Codes, Uniform, and Ch. 483, Zoning and Land
Development.
§ 435-111 PATERSON CODE § 435-114
431:906
§ 435-115. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein, any person who
violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000, by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days or by a period of community service for not more than
90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
B. Any sign erected or maintained in violation of this article or which may
be considered dangerous by the Director of Public Works or his
designee may be removed by him after notice, and the cost and expense
of removing such sign shall be charged to the owner or to the person,
firm or corporation in charge, possession or control thereof and shall, if
necessary, be recovered in a civil action from such person, firm or
corporation. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
§ 435-114 SPITTING § 435-115
431:907

ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 23, Art. 12, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 435-116. Sale of merchandise from stands and stationary vehicles;
consequence of violation.
§ 435-117. Sidewalk sales.
§ 435-118. Restrictions on roller-skating.
Roller-skating is prohibited on the streets of the City except in zones set
apart for this purpose by the Department of Public Works.
A. No person shall use or occupy any space or place in or on any public
street of the City with a stall, stand, cart or wagon or truck or other
vehicle maintained stationary therein or thereon for the sale or offering
for sale of any merchandise of whatever kind or character; provided,
however, that such person, if licensed under this article, shall be
permitted to stop his vehicle at the curb when requested to do so by
prospective purchasers for the purpose and during the process of
consummating said sale.
B. The Director of Public Works or his designee shall cause any stall,
stand, cart, wagon, truck or other vehicle maintained stationary upon
or in any public street of the City, in violation of the provisions of
Subsection A, to be removed forthwith and kept in some safe place until
claimed by the owner by payment of the reasonable expenses incurred
in such removal. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord. No. 95-068]
A. Sales prohibited. No person, including a peddler or hawker, shall
display, sell, solicit or dispose of any goods, wares or merchandise on
any sidewalk of the City at any time.
B. Persons exempt. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to
the following persons who are expressly exempt from its application:
(1) Persons who are entitled to special licenses pursuant to N.J.S.A.
45:24-9.
(2) Community organizations who organize permanent business
establishments in the City to display merchandise on sidewalks
adjacent to their permanent business establishment as part of a
special event or celebration approved by the Municipal Council.
[Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-035]
§ 435-116 SPITTING § 435-119
431:909
§ 435-119. Payment of costs for street vacation ordinances.
[Amended 10-5-1982 by Ord. No. 82-023; 11-4-1982 by Ord. No.
82-027]
Any person who shall apply to the Division of Planning and Zoning for the
passage of an ordinance to vacate any street in the City shall, at the time of
filing of the application, pay to the City Clerk, Planning and Zoning Division,
the sum of $165 to cover the cost of advertising said ordinance and to pay
the necessary filing fee with the Passaic County Registrar's office and to pay
the costs of serving notices upon property owners.
§ 435-120. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068; 5-23-2006 by Ord. No. 06-046]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided herein, any person who
violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to punishment by payment of a fine in the amount of $50. Fines are
payable at the Violations Bureau without a court appearance. Costs of court
of $30 will be imposed, consistent with New Jersey Court Rule 7:11-4, for
all such payments.
§ 435-119 PATERSON CODE § 435-120
431:910
ARTICLE IX
Traffic Work Zones
[Adopted 8-23-1994 as Ord. No. 94-057]
§ 435-121. Purpose; adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
§ 435-122. Preconstruction meeting.
It shall be the responsibility of the person or contractor or a representative
of a public utility, in the case of said utility wishing to conduct work on,
under or above the roadway, to contact the Traffic Division of the Paterson
Police Division in order to arrange a preconstruction meeting to submit
plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of construction or
work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section
prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not approved by the
Traffic Division of the Paterson Police Division is in violation of this section.
Public utilities conducting routine maintenance work need not comply with
the preconstruction meeting requirement.
§ 435-123. Emergency contact telephone numbers; costs when City
responds to emergency situations.
Prior to the start of any work, the person, contractor or utility shall provide
the Traffic Division with at least two emergency contact phone numbers to
be called in case of emergency problems at the construction or maintenance
site. If, for any reason, emergency contacts cannot be reached or if the
emergency contact person does not respond to a call from the Police
Division to correct a hazardous condition, the City may respond to correct
such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for such emergency services
A. The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around road or street
construction, maintenance operations and utility work above or below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the
normal flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the
public health, safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish
controls and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement
of traffic through construction, maintenance and utility work areas and
to provide safety for the work forces performing these operations.
B. The City of Paterson in the County of Passaic, State of New Jersey, does
hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
1978 Edition, hereafter known as "MUTCD," except as herein
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs the
normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor or utility which fails to
comply with the provisions of MUTCD while performing such work is in
violation of this section.
§ 435-121 SPITTING § 435-123
431:911
to correct the hazardous condition shall be charged by the City to the
person, contractor or utility responsible for such condition.
§ 435-124. (Reserved)178
§ 435-125. Time limits for construction work. [Amended 11-21-2017
by Ord. No. 17-083]
§ 435-126. Approval of road closings and detours.
Road closings and/or traffic detours relative to street and highway
construction, maintenance and utility operations shall not be permitted
unless approved by the Paterson Police Division, Traffic Division.
§ 435-127. Traffic directors. [Amended 2-21-1995 by Ord. No.
95-013179; 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-083]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction, maintenance and utility
work sites when determined by the Paterson Police Division that the same
are necessary to provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
Said traffic directors shall be chosen at the discretion of the person,
contractor or public utility.
§ 435-128. Stop-work orders.
The Traffic Division of the Paterson Police Division shall have the authority
to stop work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored
material within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations and/
or other related work, in order to abate any nuisance, traffic delay and/
or safety hazard or for any violation of this article. Any expenses incurred
pursuant to the same shall be assessed to the person, contractor or public
utility performing such operation.
§ 435-129. Emergency repair work.
A. There shall be no construction, maintenance or utility work in the City
under, on or above any roadway before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after
4:00 p.m.
B. These time limits may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the Traffic Division of the
Paterson Police Division only if it is determined by the officer in charge
of the Paterson Police Traffic Division that the construction or
maintenance operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. on any
roadway is necessitated by an emergency, as defined in § 435-25.
178. Editor’s Note: Former § 435-124, Heavily traveled roads, as amended, was repealed
11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-083.
179. Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor 3-8-1995 and passed by the City
Council over the Mayor's veto by a two-thirds vote 3-14-1995.
§ 435-123 PATERSON CODE § 435-129
431:912
§ 435-130. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-19-1995 by Ord.
No. 95-068; 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-083]
Any person, contractor or utility who or which commits a violation of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof for an offense, pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $2,000, be imprisoned in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days or be sentenced to serve a period of community
service for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 435-130.1. When effective. [Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No.
17-083]
This article shall take effect 60 days from the date of publication.
§ 435-130.2. Applicability. [Added 11-21-2017 by Ord. No. 17-083]
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all contractors who enter
into a contract to perform construction, maintenance or utility work within
the City of Paterson after the effective date of this article. The provisions
of this article shall not be applicable to any contractor who entered into
a contract to perform construction, maintenance or utility work within the
City of Paterson prior to the effective date of this article.
A. In the case of emergency repair work where construction, maintenance
or emergency utility work must be performed that will obstruct,
interfere or detour traffic on any roadway in the City, and said
emergency conditions prevent a preconstruction meeting pursuant to
§ 435-122, the person, contractor or utility performing such operation
shall notify the Paterson Police Division of such emergency operation
within four hours of the start of such emergency repair work. The
person, contractor or utility shall disclose the nature of the emergency,
location and hours of operation.
B. All such emergency construction, maintenance and utility operations
shall be performed with full regard to safety and to keep traffic
interference to an absolute minimum. During such emergency repair
work, the person, contractor or utility shall comply with the provisions
of the MUTCD while performing such emergency repair work.
§ 435-129 SPITTING § 435-130.2
431:913

ARTICLE X
Vehicles Obstructing Snow Removal
[Adopted 5-9-1995 as part of Ord. No. 95-027]
§ 435-131. Snow removal during street cleaning times; removal of
unoccupied vehicles.
In addition to emergency snow removal, the Department of Public Works
shall remove snow from City streets during said street's designated street
cleaning day and time. Any unoccupied vehicle, stopped, parked or standing
on a street during said street's designated days and hours for street
cleaning and/or snow removal shall be removed by any police officer, the
Director of the Department of Public Works or any person designated by
him for the removal of such vehicle. The owner of such motor vehicle shall
pay the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from
removal before gaining possession of said vehicle.
§ 435-132. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-8-2005 by Ord. No.
05-015]
Every owner of a motor vehicle who is convicted under this article shall pay
a fine in the amount of $50. Fines for violation of § 435-131 are payable
at the Violations Bureau without a court appearance. Costs of court of $30
will be imposed, consistent with New Jersey Court Rule 7:11-4, for all such
payments.
§ 435-131 SPITTING § 435-132
431:915

ARTICLE XI
Public Utility Poles or Facilities
[Adopted 8-23-2005 by Ord. No. 05-058180]
§ 435-133. Placement; notice to municipal officials required.
Before a public utility places, replaces or removes a pole or an underground
facility located in the City of Paterson, the public utility shall notify both the
Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Code Official in writing, which may
be by fax or e-mail, at least, but not less than 24 hours before undertaking
any excavation related to the replacement or removal of the utility pole
or underground facility, which pole or underground facility is used for the
supplying and distribution of electricity for light, heat or power, or for
the furnishing of water service or telephone or other telecommunications
service on or below a public right-of-way in the City. The Municipal Council
of the City of Paterson shall notify any public utility that provides service in
the City of the application of the provisions of this article. For the purpose
of this section "underground facility" means one or more underground
pipes, cables, wires, lines or other structures used for the supplying and
distribution of electricity for light, heat or power or for the providing
of water services, or for the furnishing of telephone or other
telecommunications services.
§ 435-134. Site restoration.
After completing the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or an
underground facility pursuant to this article, the public utility shall remove
from such right of way any pole or underground facility no longer in use
as well as any other debris created from such placement, replacement
or removal and restore the property, including, but not limited to, the
installation of a hot patch as needed to restore the property within the
right-of-way to its previous condition as much as possible. As used in this
section, "hot patch" means the installation of a mixture of asphalt to restore
property within the right-of-way to its previous condition subsequent to
the construction or excavation of a site required for the placement or
replacement of a pole or an underground facility pursuant to this section.
For the purposes of this section, "pole" means, in addition to its commonly
accepted meaning, any wires or cable connected thereto, and any
replacements therefor which are similar in construction and use.
§ 435-135. Fines.
In the event a public utility does not meet the requirements of § 435-132 of
this article, concerning the removal of debris and the restoring of property,
including, but not limited to, the installation of a hot patch within a rightof-
way to its previous condition within 90 days of placement, replacement
180. Editor's Note: This ordinance was originally adopted as §§ 435-131 through 435-134, but
was renumbered as §§ 435-133 through 435-136 as §§ 435-131 and 435-132 already
existed.
§ 435-133 SPITTING § 435-135
431:917
or removal of a pole or an underground facility, said public utility will be
fined up to an amount not to exceed $100 each day until the requirements
of § 435-132 are met, except that if the public utility is unable to complete
the installation of a hot patch due to the unavailability of asphalt material
during the period of time from November through April, the public utility
shall not be required to complete the hot patch installation until 60 days
immediately following the end of the November through April period. At
least five business days prior to the end of the ninety-day period established
by this section, the municipality shall notify the public utility that the
penalties authorized by this section shall begin to be assessed against the
utility after the end of the ninety-day period unless the utility complies
with the requirements of § 435-134 of this section. Any penalty imposed
shall be collected or enforced in a summary manner, without a jury, in
any court of competent jurisdiction according to the procedure provided
by the Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.). The
Superior Court and municipal court shall have jurisdiction to enforce the
provisions of this section. In the case of removal or replacement of a pole or
an underground facility utilized by two or more public utilities, the public
utility last removing its pipes, cables, wires, lines or other structures shall
be liable for the removal and restoration required under § 435-134 of this
article, unless a written agreement between the public utilities provides
otherwise.
§ 435-136. Emergency approval.
Under emergency conditions which significantly impact the placement of
a pole or underground facility resulting from natural forces or human
activities beyond the control of the public utility, or which pose an imminent
or existing threat of loss of electrical, water, power, telephone, or other
telecommunication service, or which pose an imminent or existing threat
to the safety and security of persons or property, or both, or which require
immediate action by a public utility to prevent bodily harm or substantial
property damage from occurring, the provisions of § 435-133 of this section
shall not apply when a public utility undertakes any construction or
excavation related to the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or
an underground facility in response to such an emergency, provided that
the public utility undertaking such construction or excavation notifies the
Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Code Official of the City of Paterson
at the earliest reasonable opportunity and that all reasonable efforts are
taken by the public utility to comply with the removal and restoration
requirements of § 435-134 of this article after responding to the emergency.
§ 435-135 PATERSON CODE § 435-136
431:918
Chapter 438
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 183.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 309.
Zoning and land development — See Ch. 483.
§ 438-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BARRIER — A fence, wall, building wall or combination thereof that
completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the
swimming pool.
GRADE — The underlying surface, such as earth or a walking surface.
HOT TUB — See definition of "spa, non-self-contained" and "spa, selfcontained."
IN-GROUND POOL — See definition of "swimming pool."
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any manufactured, artificially constructed
or developed swimming pool or swimming pond intended for swimming or
recreational bathing, excluding reservoirs or ponds used by farmers as part
of their irrigation system, which has a depth in excess of 18 inches at any
point and is permanently or temporarily established or maintained upon any
residential premises by any individual for such individual, such individual's
family or such individual's guests. Small wading pools, which are emptied
when not in use, are exempt from these requirements.
SPA, NON-SELF-CONTAINED — A hydro-massage pool or tub for
recreational or therapeutic use, not located in health-care facilities,
designed for immersion of users and usually having a filter, heater and
motor-driven blower. It may be installed indoors or outdoors, on the ground
or on a supporting structure, or in a ground or in a supporting structure.
A non-self-contained spa is intended for recreational bathing and contains
water over 24 inches deep.
SPA, SELF-CONTAINED — A continuous-duty appliance in which all control,
water-heating and water-circulating equipment is an integral part of the
product, located entirely under the spa skirt. A self-contained spa is
intended for recreational bathing and contains water over 18 inches deep.
§ 438-2. Permit required; application.
A. Permit required. No private swimming pool shall hereafter be
constructed, installed or altered without the property owner having
first obtained a permit in the manner hereinafter provided.
§ 435-136 SWIMMING POOLS § 438-2
438:919
§ 438-3. Action on application by Health Officer.
The application will be forwarded by the Construction Official to the Health
Officer, who, within 14 days after receipt of the application, shall take one
of the following actions:
§ 438-4. Issuance of permit.
Upon receipt of an approved application from the Health Officer, the
Construction Official will examine the application for conformity to existing
building codes and this chapter. The Construction Official will issue a permit
upon payment of applicable fees.
§ 438-5. Inspections.
Before the pool is put into use, the Construction Official and Health Officer
will make an inspection and assure compliance with the structure and
health requirements. The building permit shall then be endorsed as a use
permit.
§ 438-6. Fees.
The following fees for permits shall apply: same as for building permits.
B. Application for permit. An application for such a permit shall be made
to the Construction Official. The application shall include:
(1) Two sets of plans and specifications or descriptive brochures.
(2) Two plot plans drawn to scale, showing the entire lot upon which
said pool is proposed to be constructed, developed, installed or
altered and showing the area within 100 feet of the proposed pool
site. The plot plan shall also include the size, shape, depth and
location of the pool; the type, height and location of the fence; the
distance of the pool from property lines and from all other
structures on said lot or adjacent area; and the location of the
septic system and any electrical installation within 15 feet of a pool
edge or above any part of the pool.
(3) A description of the water inlet system
(4) A description of the method of disinfection, treatment and disposal
of the water to be used.
A. Approve the application and so indicate to the Construction Official.
B. Approve the application subject to additional sanitary safeguards
deemed necessary for the safeguard of public health, and so indicate to
the Construction Official.
C. Reject the application and indicate the reasons therefor to the
Construction Official.
§ 438-2 PATERSON CODE § 438-7
438:920
§ 438-7. Construction and equipment requirements; location
restriction; fencing; water supply.
A. No provision of this chapter shall mitigate any provision of the Building
Code that is applicable to swimming pools.
B. The construction of any swimming pool (portable or permanent) shall
follow the design and safety precautions of good building practice. All
pools shall be designed and constructed so as to facilitate emptying and
cleaning and shall be maintained and operated in such manner as to be
clean and sanitary at all times.
C. All permanent swimming pools shall be so constructed, developed,
installed and maintained as to provide necessary equipment for
chlorination and other disinfection and filtration. The filtration system
shall have sufficient capacity to complete the recirculation of pool water
in 18 hours or less.
D. Swimming pools will not be located over or within 20 feet horizontally
from any septic disposal field or within 10 feet horizontally of a septic
tank or distribution box. No property will be subdivided if the result will
be that a swimming pool will be separated in ownership from an
adjoining residence.
E. All private swimming pools now existing or hereafter constructed,
installed, established or maintained shall be enclosed with a substantial
barrier and gate that complies with the minimum requirements listed
below:
(1) The top of the barrier shall be at least 72 inches above grade
measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the
swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade
and the bottom of the barrier shall be two inches, measured on the
side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The
maximum vertical clearance at the bottom of the barrier may be
increased to four inches when grade is a solid surface, such as a
concrete deck, or when the barrier is mounted on top of the
aboveground pool structure. When barriers have horizontal
members spaced less than 54 inches apart, the horizontal members
shall be placed on the pool side of the barrier. Any decorative
design work on the side away from the swimming pool, such as
protrusions, indentations or cutouts, which render the barrier
easily climbable, is prohibited.
(2) Openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a sphere of 1 3/4
inches in diameter.
(3) When vertical spacing between such openings is 54 inches or more,
the opening size may be increased such that the passage of a
sphere four inches in diameter is not allowed.
§ 438-7 SWIMMING POOLS § 438-7
438:921
(4) For fencing composed of vertical and horizontal members, the
spacing between vertical members may be increased up to four
inches when the distance between the tops of horizontal members
is 54 inches or more.
(5) Chain link fences used as the barrier shall not be less than 11
gauge.
(6) Access gates shall comply with the requirements of Subsection E(3)
through (5). Pedestrian access gates shall be self-closing and have
a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the selflatching
device is located less than 54 inches from the bottom of
the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of
the barrier at least three inches below the top of the gate, and the
gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than 1/2 inch within
18 inches of the release mechanism. Pedestrian gates shall swing
away from the pool. Any gates other than pedestrian access gates
shall be equipped with lockable hardware or padlocks and shall
remain locked at all times when not in use.
(7) Where a wall of a dwelling unit serves as part of the barrier and
contains door openings between the dwelling unit and the outdoor
swimming pool that provide direct access to the pool, a separation
fence meeting the requirements of Subsection E(3), (4), (5) and (6)
of § 438-7 shall be provided.
(8) When approved by the Building Official, one of the following may
be used:
(a) Self-closing and self-latching devices installed on all doors with
direct access to the pool with the release mechanism located a
minimum of 54 inches above the floor.
(b) An alarm installed on all doors with direct access to the pool.
The alarm shall sound continuously for a minimum of 30
seconds within seven seconds after the door and its screen, if
present, are opened, and shall be capable of providing a sound
pressure level of not less than 85 dBA when measured indoors
at 10 feet. The alarm shall automatically reset under all
conditions. The alarm system shall be equipped with a manual
means, such a touchpad or switch, to temporarily deactivate
the alarm for a single opening. Such deactivation shall last no
longer than 15 seconds. The deactivation switch shall be
located at least 54 inches above the threshold of the door.
(c) Other means of protection may be acceptable so long as the
degree of protection afforded is not less than that afforded by
any of the devices described above.
(d) Where an aboveground pool structure is used as a barrier or
where the barrier is mounted on top of the pool structure, and
the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or
§ 438-7 PATERSON CODE § 438-7
438:922
steps shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed
to prevent access or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded
by a barrier that meets the requirements of Subsection E(2)
through (7). When the ladder or steps are secured, locked or
removed, any opening created shall be protected by a barrier
complying with Subsection E(3) through (7).
(9) Where a window faces a swimming pool enclosure, said window
shall be equipped with a screwed-in-place wire mesh screen, a
keyed lock that prevents opening the window more than four
inches or a latching device located not less that 54 inches above the
floor. Emergency escape or rescue windows in bedrooms which
face swimming pool enclosures shall be equipped with a latching
device located no less that 54 inches above the floor.
(10) An above-the-ground pool having a sidewall height of at least four
feet above finished ground level is exempt from the above fencing
requirement, provided that access to the pool is by means of a
removable or retractable ladder. A retractable ladder shall be
equipped with a key-operated locking device which will secure the
ladder in the retractable position when not in use.
(11) An above-the-ground pool of sidewall height less than four feet
above finished ground level may be exempt from the above fencing
requirements, provided that a suitable strong protective covering is
placed over the pool and adequately secured whenever the pool is
unattended or not in use; and provided, further, that the above
provisions with regard to ladders are also adhered to where
applicable.
F. No electrical switches, outlets or appliances and no electrical wiring
not in well-grounded shielding conduit shall be within a three-foot
radius of any point of the pool's edge or surface as measured in any
direction. No electrical installation shall be so constructed or located
that in the event that it should collapse or fall, it would fall into the pool.
The circulating pumps, motors, lights, filtration equipment and all other
electrical equipment used in conjunction with a swimming pool shall be
electrically supplied through an underwriter's approved ground fault
circuit breaker. Such breaker will be mounted within the main service
panel within the building on which public service has mounted its
meter. Ground fault breakers designed to plug into existing wall
receptacles will not be approved for pool use. All electrical equipment
will be installed as to comply with the National Electrical Code, 2002,
and as thereafter adopted by the State of New Jersey.
G. There shall be no physical connection between a potable water system
and a pool. The water supply system for a pool shall be in compliance
with the National Standard Plumbing Code, 2004, and as thereafter
adopted annually by the State of New Jersey.
§ 438-7 SWIMMING POOLS § 438-7
438:923
§ 438-8. Artificial lighting.
All artificial lighting of the pool areas shall be shielded from direct view of
neighboring properties or roads.
§ 438-9. Indoor pools.
For an indoor swimming pool, protection shall comply with the
requirements of § 438-7.
§ 438-10. Spas and hot tubs.
§ 438-11. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 441
TATTOOING
H. Preferably, the discharge should empty into a storm sewer, stream or
dry well of adequate capacity. In no case shall the pool water be
discharged within 50 feet of a well or within 25 feet of an adjacent
property, pool or residence.
A. For a non-self-contained and self-contained spa or hot tub, protection
shall comply with the requirements of § 438-7.
B. A self-contained spa or hot tub equipped with a listed safety cover shall
be exempt from the requirements of § 438-7.
A. Maximum penalty. Any person who violates any provision or order
promulgated under Chapter 438 established herein shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $1,250 and/or community service of up to 10
days and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days.
B. Separate violations. Except as otherwise provided, every day in which a
violation of any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the
City exists shall constitute a separate violation.
C. Application. The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended
to state an appropriate penalty for every violation. Any lesser penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for
a particular case or violation.
D. Additional remedies. The imposition of a penalty as provided in
Subsection A, or as specifically provided in any other chapter of this
Code or in another ordinance of the City shall be in addition to any
injunctive or remedial relief which is authorized under the laws of the
state, with the same force and effect as though provided for in this
Code. Such penalty shall not be deemed to be in lieu of any provision for
revocation or suspension of any license or permit.
§ 438-7 PATERSON CODE § 441-1
438:924
§ 441-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BODY PIERCER — One who engages in body piercing.
BODY PIERCING — The piercing of any portion of the human body for
placement of any type of jewelry or any other ornamentation, other than ear
lobe piercing.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Written approval from the Health Officer
or his/her authorized representative that said tattooing or body piercing
establishment has been inspected and meets all of the terms of this chapter.
ESTABLISHMENT — The premises wherein tattooing or body piercing is
performed.
HEALTH OFFICER — The City of Paterson Health Officer or his/her
authorized representative.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, company, corporation, or association
that owns or operates an establishment where tattooing or body piercing is
performed, and any individual who performs or practices the art of tattooing
on the person of another.
PERSONAL IDENTIFICATION — A document or other written or
memorialized instrument setting forth the presenter's true name, address,
correct age, or other identifying data, examples of which include but are not
limited to driver's license, credit card issued by a national company, birth
certificate, passport, employment identification card, or any instrument
issued by a governmental agency setting forth the pertinent and required
information.
SANITIZE — A bacterial treatment of cleaned surfaces by a process which
is effective in reducing the number of microorganisms to a safe level.
SINGLE USE — Products or items that are disposed of after use on each
client, including, but not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper
products, paper or plastic cups, gauze and sanitary covering, razors,
needles scalpel blades, stencils and ink cups.
STERILIZATION — A bacterial treatment of cleaned surfaces by a process
which is effective in reducing the number of microorganisms to a safe level.
TATTOO, TATTOOED or TATTOOING — Any method of placing designs,
letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any marks under the skin with ink or any
other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin, by the aid of needles
or any other instruments designed to puncture the skin.
TATTOO ARTIST — One who engages in tattooing.
§ 441-2. Licensing regulations.
A. It shall be unlawful for any operator to engage in the business of
operating an establishment where tattooing or body piercing is
§ 441-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 441-2
438:925
performed without first obtaining a license from the City of Paterson
Health Division to engage in such business in accordance with the
provisions hereof.
B. A Division application for an initial license shall be made to the Health
Division of the City of Paterson accompanied by a fee in the amount of
$350.
(1) Application for licenses under this chapter shall be made to the City
of Paterson Division of Health, in writing, upon such printed forms
as the City of Paterson Division of Health shall prescribe and
prepare which may be obtained from the City of Paterson Health
Division and shall be signed by the applicant under oath and shall
contain the following information:
(a) If an individual, the full name, age, sex, residence address at
the time of application.
(b) If a corporation, the full corporate name, the date and the state
of incorporation, address of the place or places of business, the
name and address of the registered agent, and the name,
address and age of any principal owning more than 10% of the
stock.
(c) If a partnership, the information required by Subsection
B(1)(a) above for each partner and the name under which the
business is being conducted.
(d) The apprenticeship, training and/or business experience of the
applicant in the business or occupation for which the license is
sought.
(e) The length of time that the applicant has engaged in such
business or occupation.
(f) Whether the applicant carries public liability insurance, and, if
so, the amount of said coverage and the company providing
such liability insurance.
(g) Name, address and age of every tattoo artist and/or body
piercer to be initially employed to conduct the service. This
shall be a continuing obligation for licensees to update once a
year the list of tattoo artists and/or body piercers employed by
the establishment.
(h) The date upon which Construction Official has approved the
location for business.
(i) Evidence that the applicant has satisfied the requirements of,
and is in compliance with, N.J.A.C. 7:26-A.8.
C. No ownership rights in any license or renewal thereof granted under
the provisions of this chapter shall be assignable or transferable
§ 441-2 PATERSON CODE § 441-2
438:926
§ 441-3. General provisions.
without the permission of the Health Division whose permission shall
not be unreasonably withheld. Any change of ownership shall require a
new application and license with payment of fees.
D. The renewal license fee for engaging in the business of operating an
establishment subject to this article with the City of Paterson shall be
$350 per year. All licenses shall expire on the last day of each calendar
year. The first license expiration date for renewal shall be December 31,
2001. All applications for renewal must be presented to the Health
Division in writing on a form prescribed by the Health Division not less
than 60 days prior to the end of the calendar year.
E. All establishments existing at the time of the enactment of this chapter
will be considered renewal applications provided that they apply for
renewal of said license within one month after the effective date of this
chapter. Establishments failing to apply within the specified time period
will be considered new applicants and will be subject to the provision of
Subsection B of this section.
F. If renovations of the tattoo or body piercing establishment occur, plans
must be submitted to the City of Paterson's Health Division and the
applicant will be required to comply with § 441-4 herein, as well as all
other applicable codes, regulations or laws.
G. In the event that an applicant fails to qualify for a license under this
chapter, the fee herein shall not be refunded.
H. The license issued pursuant to this section shall be posted
conspicuously in the place of business or location named therein.
I. All establishments shall manage contaminated contact waste materials
(body fluids) as medical waste pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26-A.8. All
establishments shall be licensed with the State of New Jersey as a
medical waste generator, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:26-A.8, prior to
approval from the City of Paterson's Health Division.
A. It shall be a violation of this chapter for anyone or any tattoo or body
piercing business to tattoo or pierce any part of the body of any
individual under 18 years of age without authorization signed by the
parent or legal guardian, witnessed and attested to by a notary public.
The operator shall be responsible for maintaining the original consent
form and copies of all consent information for a period of two years
beyond the recipient's 18th birthday. The operator shall obtain a copy of
two forms of personal identification of such individual being tattooed
and/or pierced.
B. Each person wishing to receive a tattoo or body piercing must first sign
a consent form presented by the operator, the content of which has
been approved by the City of Paterson Health Division. This form shall
commence with the following statement: "I swear, certify or affirm
§ 441-2 SWIMMING POOLS § 441-3
438:927
§ 441-4. Sanitary requirements, design and layout specifications.
under the penalties of false swearing or perjury the following
information." The consent form shall contain language above the
applicant's signature which shall read, "I have read and understand
the contents of this form, and acknowledge that an operator of the
above-named tattoo and/or body piercing establishment has reviewed
the same with me. I have presented to the operator the following
forms of identification which I represent, warrant and guarantee are
truthful and correct and are identification that relates to me. I further
represent that I am an adult over the age of 18, and am not currently
intoxicated or under the influence of any narcotic substance, and make
this statement entirely of my own free will and sound mind." The form
shall also include a signature line for the operator above which the
following language shall appear: "I have reviewed the language of this
form with the applicant who has represented to me that he/she fully
understands the contents of same, and that the information provided is
truthful, in addition, I have reviewed the documentation presented by
the applicant with respect to his/her age." If the applicant appears to
be intoxicated or disoriented, the operator must refuse the applicant.
C. All records regarding tattoos or body piercing are to be maintained for
a minimum of two years. Information required for each applicant
referred to in § 441-3B is to include the name, age, date of birth, health
history including allergies and medical conditions, home address and
telephone numbers of the applicant as well as the name of the person
who did the tattoo or body piercing, the design, location and the date of
the tattoo or type of body piercing done.
A. Each tattoo or body piercing facility shall have a bathroom accessible to
the public and staff, and a stainless steel sink in a separately designated
sterilization room which is to be used by staff only as required by this
chapter. The sink in the sterilization room shall be connected to hot and
cold running water. Each bathroom shall be equipped with commode
and sink, with the sink being connected to hot and cold running water.
Soap and sanitary towels, or other approved hand drying devices, shall
be available at the sink in the bathroom(s) and sterilization room at all
times. Common towels are prohibited. Employee handwashing signs
shall be posted in each bathroom and sterilization room. There shall be
no door requiring the use of a tattoo artist/body piercer's hand in going
from a hand-washing area to a work area.
B. The chair or seat reserved for the person receiving the tattoo or body
piercing shall be a material that is smooth and easily cleanable and
constructed of material that is nonabsorbent. Any surface on the chair
that becomes exposed to blood or body fluids must be cleaned and
sanitized prior to use by the next customer.
C. The work table or counter used by the tattoo artist or body piercer shall
be smooth and easily cleanable and constructed of material that is nonabsorbent.
There shall be a nonpermeable juncture between a table/
§ 441-3 PATERSON CODE § 441-4
438:928
counter and a wall if the table/counter is to be placed against a wall.
This table/counter must be cleaned and sanitized utilizing a method
approved by the City of Paterson's Health Division between each
customer.
D. The walls in the tattooing or body piercing area shall be of durable
material that is non-absorbent and is smooth and easily cleanable. Walls
shall be kept clean.
E. The floor in the tattooing or body piercing area shall be of durable
material that is non-absorbent and is smooth and easily cleanable.
Floors shall be kept clean.
F. Lighting within the tattoo or body piercing area shall be adequate so as
to provide a minimum of 100 footcandles in all areas. Such illumination
shall be free from glare and distributed to avoid shadows.
G. Each establishment must contain at least one enclosed "privacy room"
so as to protect the confidentiality of the applicant, and revelation of the
service provided. The privacy room must be used when tattooing or
body piercing is to be performed on either female breasts, or the
buttocks or groin areas of males or females. The privacy room shall
have a swinging type door for ingress and egress, and be separated
from other areas of the establishment by either walls or durable
partitions, or other materials able to be sanitized, extending at least six
feet in height and so designed as to prevent visual observation of the
customer and the tattoo artist or body piercer from any other area by
any persons other than the customer and the tattoo artist or body
piercer.
H. Any surfaces in the establishment that become exposed to blood or
bodily fluids must be cleaned and sanitized, utilizing a method approved
by the City of Paterson Health Division.
I. Cleaning, disinfection and sterilization activities must be conducted in a
physically separate work area. This area should have a clearly defined
work pattern from soiled to clean in order to prevent crosscontamination.
All sterile equipment must be stored in enclosed
cabinets outside of the processing room. All containers, regardless of
size, must be clearly marked with the name of the product.
J. Proper waste receptacles shall be provided and waste shall be disposed
of at appropriate intervals.
K. The use of tobacco in any form in the establishment is prohibited.
L. The consumption of food or drink shall be prohibited in the tattoo/body
piercing work areas of the parlor.
M. Only articles considered necessary for the routine and customary
operation and maintenance of the tattoo/body piercing business shall
be permitted in the tattoo or body piercing establishment.
§ 441-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 441-4
438:929
§ 441-5. Regulation of tattoo or body piercing establishment.
N. No live bird, turtle, snake, dog, cat or other animal or reptile shall be
permitted in any area used for the conduct of tattooing and/or body
piercing operations or in the immediate open, adjacent areas including
the main waiting area and the public access to the toilet room, with the
exception of animals utilized for the assistance of the blind and/or deaf.
O. Effective measures shall be taken to protect the establishment from the
breeding or presence of insects and rodents.
(1) Anyone using pesticides in the licensed premises must be certified
by the State of New Jersey for application of same.
(2) The use of pesticides shall not result in the contamination of dyes,
inks, ink reservoirs, needles, jewelry or gloves or any equipment
used in connection with the operation.
P. Proper ventilation and exhaust is to be provided.
A. Tattoo artist or body piercer operator's certificate:
(1) No person shall practice the art of tattooing or body piercing within
the City of Paterson without first obtaining an operator's certificate
from the Department.
(2) All certificates shall automatically expire on December 31 annually.
(3) No certificate to practice the art of tattooing or body piercing shall
be issued unless:
(a) The applicant furnishes proof of having previously held such a
certificate; or
(b) The applicant furnishes proof of having practiced the art of
tattooing or body piercing as a full-time occupation, which may
take the form of a letter from a tattoo and/or body piercing
establishment representing that the applicant is/was employed
by said establishment as a tattoo artist or body piercer, or that
the applicant presently operates or had in the past operated a
tattoo or body piercing establishment, or had in the past or
presently maintains an ownership interest in a business,
partnership or corporation which operates or operated a tattoo
or body piercing establishment; and
(c) The applicant furnishes proof of having attended bloodborne
pathogen training which includes principles of disinfection and
sterilization. Compliance with this subsection will be waived
for guest tattoo artists retained by the establishment so long as
the customer upon whom the guest tattoo artist is to provide
the service is provided with prior written notice that the guest
tattoo artist has not attended bloodborne pathogen training
including principles of disinfection and sterilization; and
§ 441-4 PATERSON CODE § 441-5
438:930
(d) Proof of Hepatitis B pre-exposure vaccination or proof of
immunity is recommended for all tattoo artists or body
piercers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all tattoo artists or
body piercers shall provide the Paterson Health Division with
one of the following:
[1] Proof of Hepatitis B pre-exposure vaccination of proof of
immunity; or
[2] A letter or statement from a physician certifying that the
individual does not have Hepatitis B and the vaccination is
contraindicated; or
[3] A written statement or letter signed by the tattoo artist or
body piercer declining to provide the information sought in
the immediately preceding Subsection A(3)(d)[1] and [2].
(e) The operator shall develop operating guidelines, in accordance
with the CDC and OSHA, that will reduce the likelihood of
accidental needle sticks and establish a monitoring system for
those person(s) accidentally stuck by a needle. The guidelines
shall be submitted to the Paterson Health Division for approval
prior to the issuance of a license and subsequent renewals of
license; and
(f) The applicant pays the initial and annual certificate fee of
$350. Each application for a certificate shall set forth:
[1] The name and address of the applicant;
[2] A physical description of the premises where tattooing/
body piercing is to be done;
[3] Such other information as the Division may require.
(4) Operator's certificates shall be issued unless the Paterson Health
Division demonstrates that the tattoo/body piercing operator has
failed to comply with the provisions of this section after being
afforded reasonable opportunity to cure any deficiencies found in
its application.
(5) All certificates shall be conditioned upon continued compliance
with the provisions of this section as well as other applicable
provisions.
(6) The certificate shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area
where it may be readily observed by patrons.
(7) The operator of a tattoo/body piercing establishment shall submit a
written aftercare plan to the Paterson Division of Health. Body
piercing establishments will submit an aftercare plan specific to
each body site intended to pierce.
§ 441-5 SWIMMING POOLS § 441-5
438:931
B. Before working on each patron, each tattoo artist or body piercer shall
scrub and wash his/her hands thoroughly with hot water and antiseptic
soap. Fingernails shall be kept clean and short.
C. Disposable vinyl or latex gloves shall be worn by the tattoo artist or
body piercer during tattoo preparation and application to prevent
contact with blood or body fluids. Universal precautions described by
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) shall be followed.
All materials shall be disposed of in accordance with § 441-5A(5) of this
chapter after contact with each patron. Hands shall be washed
immediately after removal of gloves. Any skin surface that has contact
with blood shall be washed immediately.
D. Immediately after tattooing or body piercing a patron, the tattooist or
body piercer shall advise the patron on the care of the tattoo or body
piercing in a written form and shall instruct the patron to consult a
physician at the first sign of infection of the tattoo or body piercing.
Printed instructions regarding these points shall be given to each
patron.
E. All medically diagnosed infections resulting from the practice of
tattooing or body piercing which become known to the operator shall be
promptly reported to the Health Officer by the person owning or
operating the tattoo or body piercing establishment or by the tattoo
artist or body piercer within 24 hours.
F. Employee health.
(1) The establishment shall comply with all current OSHA
requirements applicable to its operation.
(2) No person affected with infected wounds, open and infected sores,
and acute respiratory infection shall work in any area of a tattoo or
body piercing establishment in any capacity in which there is a
likelihood of contaminating tattoo or body piercing equipment,
supplies or work surfaces.
G. Skin preparation.
(1) Tattooing or body piercing shall be done only on normal, healthy
skin surface that is free of moles or infection.
(2) Only safety razors with disposable blades shall be used for the skin
preparation. Blades shall be disposed of according to § 441-5A(5) of
this chapter after each use and new blades shall be used for each
patron.
(3) Following shaving, the area shall be thoroughly cleansed and
scrubbed with tincture of green soap or its equivalent and warm
water. Before placing the design or body piercing on the patron's
skin, the area shall be treated with 70% alcohol and allowed to air
dry.
§ 441-5 PATERSON CODE § 441-5
438:932
(a) Piercing of mucous membranes (i.e., oral, nasal, vaginal, etc.)
shall be treated with an industry-appropriate and medically
indicated antiseptic solution prior to the procedure.
(4) Only petroleum jelly (U.S.A. or National Formulary) or antiseptic
ointment shall be applied to the tattoo area prior to tattooing or
body piercing. The ointment shall be applied in a sanitary manner,
disposing of the utensil after spreading. Collapsible tubes of
ointment or jelly may also be used.
H. Tattooing or body piercing.
(1) The use of single-service hectographic stencils shall be required for
applying a tattoo outline to the skin. Multi-use stencils shall be
prohibited.
(2) Only nontoxic dyes or pigments may be used. Premixed sterile
materials are preferred. Premixed dyes shall be used without
adulteration of the manufacturer's original formula. The operator
shall represent to the Paterson Health Division, at the time of
license application and renewal, that to the best of his/her
knowledge the dyes and pigments used in tattoo applications are of
nontoxic origins and shall submit supporting documentation on
same. The operator shall also present to the Paterson Health
Division labels or manufacturer's data sheets relating to dyes and
pigments or such other written documentation as is applicable to
the dyes and pigments that they are nontoxic or nonhazardous to
human health.
(3) Single-service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used
for each patron and the container disposed of immediately after
completing work on each patron.
(4) The completed tattoo shall be washed with sterile gauze or singleuse
paper tissue and a solution of tincture of green soap or its
equivalent, then disinfected with 70% alcohol. The area shall be
allowed to air dry and antiseptic ointment shall be applied and
spread with sterile gauze and sterile dressing attached.
(5) Upon completion of piercing of the mucous membranes, the area
shall be disinfected with the industry-appropriate and medically
indicated solutions.
I. Needles, instruments and dyes.
(1) Only single-service sterilized needles and needle bars shall be used
for each patron.
(2) If solder is used in manufacturing needles, needle bars or needle
tubes, it must be free of lead.
§ 441-5 SWIMMING POOLS § 441-5
438:933
(3) Any needle that penetrates the skin of the tattoo artist or body
piercer shall be immediately disposed of in accordance with
§ 441-5A(5) of this chapter.
(4) Needle tubes shall be ultrasonically cleaned in a solution which is
alconox or its equivalent, then scrubbed with a clean brush, then
rinsed clean. Needle tubes shall be sterilized in accordance with
§ 441-5, stored in sterile bags and maintained in a dry, closed area.
(5) Each item to be sterilized shall be individually wrapped using
chemical indicator bags or chemical indicator strips. Sterilization
shall be by steam sterilization/autoclave. The autoclave shall be
well maintained with a tight fitting gasket and clean interior. The
manufacturer's operating instructions and sterilization
specifications shall be at hand. The sterilizer shall conform to the
manufacturer's specifications with regard to temperature, pressure
and time of sterilization cycle. Proper functioning of sterilization
cycles shall be verified by the monthly use of biologic indicators
(i.e., spore tests). A record of these monthly test results shall be
available, and a test may be required to be done during any
inspections. Establishments are required to maintain an autoclave
on site, with a minimum interior chamber that is no less than seven
inches in diameter and 15 inches in depth.
(6) If the primary source of sterilization malfunctions, the Paterson
Health Division shall be notified no later than four hours after the
deficiency. In an emergent situation, the Paterson Health Division
may approve alternate sterilization techniques.
(7) Needles and bars shall not be bent or broken prior to disposal.
Tattoo artists or body piercers shall take precautions to prevent
injuries from contaminated needles or tubes.
(8) All dyes and inks shall be from a source of supply which complies
with applicable U.S. Food and Drug Administration regulations
when available. Dyes and inks are to be used in accordance with
the manufacturer's directions and are not to be adulterated with
any substance not recommended by the manufacturer.
(a) Immediately before applying a tattoo, the quantity of dye to be
used for the tattoo shall be transferred from the dye bottles
and placed into sterile, single-use paper cups or plastic caps.
Upon completion of the tattoo, these single use cups or caps
and their contents shall be discarded.
(b) Excess dye or ink shall be removed from the skin with a single
service wiping tissue or sterile gauze which shall be discarded
after each use.
J. Disposal of waste. All used needles, needle bars or other disposable
tools used in the tattooing process, as well as gloves, gauze and other
§ 441-5 PATERSON CODE § 441-5
438:934
§ 441-6. Prohibited acts.
Temporary tattoo/body piercing establishments are prohibited. Temporary
establishments shall be defined as any establishment not intended to
operate at a particular location for at least one year.
§ 441-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 445
TAXATION
materials saturated with blood or body fluids, shall be removed through
the use of a licensed medical waste hauler.
A. Any person or entity who or which violates any section of this chapter
shall be subject to the following penalty: A fine not to exceed $1,000;
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days in the county jail; community
service not to exceed 90 days or any combination thereof in the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge. Each day that the violation
exists is considered to be a separate offense.
B. After due notice and hearing, the Paterson Health Division may suspend
or revoke any license issued under this chapter for violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 441-5 SWIMMING POOLS § 441-7
438:935

ARTICLE I
Tax Exemptions and Abatements for Improvements
[Adopted 7-31-2007 by Ord. No. 07-044181]
§ 445-1. Purpose.
The City of Paterson makes known its intention to utilize the tax abatement
and exemption provisions authorized by Article VIII, Section 1, paragraph
6 of the New Jersey State Constitution, as enacted through the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., to permit and authorize tax exemption and
abatement for the improvement of one- or two-unit residential structures;
the improvement, expansion or construction of new commercial and
industrial projects; the conversion to, or improvement of, existing multiple
dwellings; or a combination of the above projects as defined herein. The
intent of said property tax exemptions and abatements is to induce
construction and rehabilitation of residential, industrial and commercial
facilities and to stabilize the economic base of Paterson.
§ 445-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATEMENT — That portion of the assessed value of a property as it
existed prior to construction, improvement, or conversion of a building or
structure thereof which is exempted from taxation pursuant to this article.
ASSESSOR — The office or official charged with the duty of assessing real
property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — A structure or part thereof
used for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of material or
manufactured products, or for research, office, industrial, commercial,
retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or warehousing purposes, or
for any combination thereof which the City Council of the City of Paterson
determines will tend to maintain or provide gainful employment within
the municipality, assist in the economic development of the municipality,
maintain or increase the tax base of the municipality and maintain or
diversify and expand commerce within the municipality. It shall not include
any structure or part thereof used or to be used by any business relocated
from another qualifying municipality.
COMPLETION — Substantially ready for the intended use for which a
building structure is constructed, improved or converted. The issuance of
a certificate of occupancy or the time at which a certificate of occupancy
could be issued, if requested, shall constitute completion.
CONSTRUCTION — The provision of a new dwelling, multiple dwelling or
commercial or industrial structure, or the enlargement of the volume of an
existing multiple dwelling or commercial or industrial structure by more
181. Editor’s Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Tax Exemptions and
Abatements for Improvements, adopted 8-24-1993 by Ord. No. 93-029.
§ 445-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 445-2
438:937
than 30%, but shall not mean the conversion of an existing building or
structure to another use.
CONVERSION ALTERATION — The alteration or renovation of a
nonresidential building or structure, or hotel, motor hotel or guest house, in
such manner as to convert the building or structure from its previous use to
use as a dwelling or multiple dwelling.
DWELLING — A building or part of a building to be used or held for use
as a home or residence, including accessory buildings located on the same
premises, together with the land upon which such building or buildings are
erected and which may be necessary for the fair enjoyment thereof, but
shall not mean any building or part of a building defined as a "multiple
dwelling" pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law, (N.J.S.A.
55:13A-1 et seq.). A dwelling shall include, as they are separately conveyed
to individual owners, individual residences within a cooperative, if
purchased separately by the occupants thereof, and individual residences
within a horizontal property regime or a condominium, but shall not include
"general common elements" or "common elements" of such horizontal
property regime or condominium as defined pursuant to the Horizontal
Property Act (N.J.S.A. 46:8A-1 et seq.) or the Condominium Act (N.J.S.A.
46:8B-1 et seq.), or of a cooperative, if the residential units are owned
separately.
EXEMPTION — That portion of the assessor's full and true value of any
improvement, conversion alteration, or construction not regarded as
increasing the taxable value pursuant to this act.
IMPROVEMENT — A modernization, rehabilitation, renovation, or
alteration or repair which produces physical change in an existing building
or structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or attractiveness
of the building or structure as a place for human habitation or work, and
which does not change its permitted use. In the case of a multiple dwelling,
it includes only improvements which affect common areas or elements, or
three or more dwelling units within the multiple dwelling. In the case of a
multiple dwelling or commercial or industrial structure, it shall not include
ordinary painting, repairs and replacement of maintenance items, or an
enlargement of the volume of an existing structure by more than 30%. In
no case shall it include the repair of fire or other damage to a property for
which payment of a claim was received by any person from an insurance
company at any time during the three-year period immediately preceding
the filing of an application pursuant to this act.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A building or structure meeting the definition
of "multiple dwelling" set forth in the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law
(N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.), and means for the purpose of improvements or
construction the "general common element" and "common element" of a
condominium, a cooperative, or a horizontal property regime.
§ 445-2 PATERSON CODE § 445-3
438:938
§ 445-3. Exemptions for improvements to dwellings.
For the exemption from taxation of improvements to dwellings, in
determining the value of real property, the first $25,000 in assessor's full
and true value of improvements for each dwelling primarily and directly
affected by the improvement in any dwelling more than 20 years old shall
be regarded as not increasing the value of the property for a period of
five years, notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the
improvements are made is increased thereby. During the exemption, the
assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment thereon
existing immediately prior to the improvements unless there is damage
to the dwelling through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction.
§ 445-4. Exemption of taxation for improvements to multiple
dwellings or conversion to multiple dwelling use.
With respect to the exemption from taxation of improvements to multiple
dwellings or of conversions of other buildings and structures including
unutilized public buildings to multiple dwelling use, the assessor's full
and true value of the improvements or conversion alterations shall not be
regarded as increasing the value of the property for a period of five years,
notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the improvements
or conversion alterations are made is increased thereby. During the
exemption, the assessment on the property shall not be less than the
assessment thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements or
conversion alterations, unless there is damage to the multiple dwelling
through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.
§ 445-5. Exemption of taxation for improvements to commercial or
industrial structures.
In determining the value of real property for purposes of granting
exemption from taxation of improvements to commercial or industrial
structures, the assessor's full and true value of improvements shall not be
regarded as increasing the value of the property for a period of five years,
notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the improvements
are made is increased thereby. During the exemption period, the
assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment thereon
existing immediately prior to the improvements, unless there is damage
to the structure through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a
reduction.
§ 445-6. Application procedure.
A. The following procedure shall govern applications for tax exemption or
abatement under the article. No exemption or abatement shall be
granted except upon written application filed with the Assessor. Every
application shall be on a form prescribed by the Director of Taxation in
the Department of the Treasury, which form shall be on file in the City of
§ 445-3 SWIMMING POOLS § 445-6
438:939
§ 445-7. Ordinance authorizing tax agreements.
§ 445-8. Contents of applications.
Applicants for tax exemption and abatement shall provide the municipal
governing body with an application setting forth:
Paterson Tax Assessor's office. Each application for construction or
conversion alteration shall also contain the items set forth in § 445-8.
It shall be filed with the Assessor not later than 30 days, including
Saturdays and Sundays, following the completion of the improvement,
conversion alteration or construction. Every application for exemption
for existing structures which does not increase the volume of the
structure by more than 30% which is filed within the time specified
shall be approved and allowed by the Assessor to the degree that the
application is consistent with the provisions of this article and provided
that the improvement for which the application is made qualifies as
an improvement pursuant to the provision of this article. Each such
determination by the Tax Assessor's office shall be no later than within
60 days of the filing of the application. The granting of such exemption
shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the official tax records
of the City of Paterson which record shall contain a notice of the
termination date of the exemption.
B. The Assessor shall refer any completed application for new
construction or conversion alteration to the City Clerk with copies to
the City of Paterson Law Department and Department of Community
Development. All such applications shall be subject to review,
evaluation and approval by the City Council pursuant to § 445-7 of this
article.
A. The municipal governing body may approve ordinances authorizing tax
agreements and enter into such agreements for a five-year abatement
of real property taxes for construction and conversion alterations. The
agreement shall provide for the applicant to pay to the municipality in
lieu of full property tax payments an amount annually to be computed
by one of the formulas set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-10. The abovereferenced
agreement between the applicant and the governing body
shall be in the form of an ordinance of said governing body which shall
have the agreement attached thereto.
B. If, during the tax year prior to the termination of such agreement, the
property owner disposes of the property, the tax which would have
otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable
unless the City Council determines by resolution that the new owner of
the property will continue to use the property pursuant to the
conditions which qualified the property.
A. A general description of a project for which exemption and abatement is
sought;
§ 445-6 PATERSON CODE § 445-8
438:940
§ 445-9. Determination of tax due.
The Assessor shall determine on October 1 of the year following the date
of the completion of an improvement the true taxable value thereof. Except
for projects subject to agreement pursuant to § 445-7, the amount of tax to
be paid for the first full tax year following completion shall be based on the
assessed valuation of a property for the previous year plus any portion of
the assessed valuation of the improvement, conversion or construction not
allowed an exemption pursuant to this article.
§ 445-10. Additional improvements, conversion or construction.
Any additional improvement, conversion or construction completed on a
property granted a previous exemption or abatement pursuant to this
B. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
C. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the project;
D. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the project site within two years of completion of the
project;
E. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption and abatement on
the project, and a description of the benefits to be realized by the
applicant if a tax agreement is granted;
F. Estimates of the cost of completing such project;
G. A statement showing:
(1) The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project site;
(2) Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the
applicant on the project during the period of the agreement; and
(3) Estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on the
project during the first full year following the termination of the tax
agreement;
H. If the project is a commercial or industrial structure, a description of
any lease agreements between the applicants and proposed users of the
project, and a history and description of the users' businesses;
I. If the project is a multiple dwelling, a description of the number and
types of dwelling units to be provided, a description of the common
elements or general common elements, and a statement of the
proposed initial rentals or sales prices of the dwelling units according
to type and of any rental lease or resale restriction to apply to the
dwelling units respecting low- or moderate-income housing;
J. Such other pertinent information as the governing body may require.
§ 445-8 SWIMMING POOLS § 445-10
438:941
article, during the period in which such previous exemption or abatement is
in effect, shall be qualified for an exemption, or exemption and abatement,
just as if such property had not received a previous exemption or
abatement. In such case, the additional improvement, conversion or
construction shall be considered as separate for the purposes of calculating
exemptions and abatements, except that the assessed value of any previous
improvement, conversion or construction shall be added to the assessed
valuation as it was prior to that improvement, conversion alteration or
construction for the purpose of determining the assessed valuation of a
property from which any additional abatement is to be subtracted.
§ 445-11. Ineligibility of property for which property taxes are due.
No exemption or abatement shall be granted with respect to any property
for which property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid or for which
penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 445-12. Property taxes subject to exemption and abatement.
The exemption and abatement of real property taxes provided by the City
of Paterson pursuant to this article shall apply to property taxes levied for
municipal purposes, school purposes, county government purposes and for
the purposes of funding any other property tax exemptions or abatements.
§ 445-13. Applicant's responsibility for costs.
All advertising costs for publishing the ordinance to grant tax abatement to
a particular project shall be paid by the applicant.
§ 445-14. Conformance with construction, statutory and regulatory
requirements.
§ 445-15. Effective date of applications.
Application for exemptions and abatements from taxation may be filed to
take initial effect for the first full tax year commencing after the tax year
in which this article is adopted and for the tax years thereafter as set forth
herein. No application for exemptions or abatements shall be filed to take
initial effect for the 11th full tax year or thereafter, unless this article is
readopted by the governing body.
A. All improvements, conversion alterations or constructions
contemplated by this article shall, during progress and when
completed, conform with all statutory and municipal requirements
relating to construction, land, buildings and the use thereof.
B. All projects pursuant to tax agreement shall be subject to all applicable
federal, state and local laws and regulations on pollution control,
worker safety, discrimination in employment, housing provision, zoning,
planning and building code requirements.
§ 445-10 PATERSON CODE § 445-15
438:942
ARTICLE II
Exemption Pursuant to Economic Opportunity Act of 2013
[Adopted 11-3-2013 by Ord. No. 13-052]
§ 445-16. Authority and opt-in.
The City of Paterson hereby determines to utilize the "opt-in" authority
granted by P.L. 2013, c. 161 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-489s) to establish the
eligibility of improvements to real property within the City for exemptions.
The said opt-in shall be construed as a complete opt-in, such that any rights
and duties that the said statute mandates shall be deemed adopted herein
as well.
§ 445-17. Exemptions for improvements to real property.
Pursuant to the authorization contained in N.J.S.A. 52:27D-489s, the
Assessor shall be authorized to grant exemptions for improvements to real
property in the City that are made after the effective date of this article. The
owner of eligible property must obtain a final certificate of occupancy on or
before September 18, 2023.
§ 445-18. Implementation of exemption pursuant to Economic
Opportunity Act.
A. In determining the value of real property, the City Tax Assessor shall
regard the assessor's full and true value of the improvements
constructed after September 18, 2013, as not increasing the value of
the property, under the following terms:
(1) For a property owner other than a Garden State Growth Zone
Development Entity, the said value of the improvements
constructed after September 18, 2013, shall not increase the value
of the property for five years from the issuance of a final certificate
of occupancy.
(2) For a Garden State Growth Zone Development Entity, which prior
to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy shall provide to
the assessor proof that it qualifies as such entity, the said value of
the improvements constructed after September 18, 2013, shall not
increase the value of the property for 10 years from the issuance of
a final certificate of occupancy, followed thereafter by payments in
lieu of taxes under the following statutory schedule:
(a) In the 11th year after completion, 10% of taxes otherwise due
on the said improvements;
(b) In the 12th year after completion, 20% of taxes otherwise due
on the said improvements;
(c) In the 13th year after completion, 30% of taxes otherwise due
on the said improvements;
§ 445-16 SWIMMING POOLS § 445-18
438:943
§ 445-19. Payment of taxes.
§ 445-20. Expiration of exemption.
Upon the expiration of the tax exemption authorized pursuant to this article,
the project shall be subject to all applicable real property taxes, as provided
by state laws and regulations and local ordinances, provided that nothing
herein shall be deemed to prohibit the project or improvement at the
termination of the agreement from qualifying for and receiving the full
benefits of any other tax preference provided by law.
(d) In the 14th year after completion, 40% of taxes otherwise due
on the said improvements;
(e) In the 15th year after completion, 50% of taxes otherwise due
on the said improvements;
(f) In the 16th year after completion, 60% of taxes otherwise due
on the said improvements;
(g) In the 17th year after completion, 70% of taxes otherwise due
on the said improvements;
(h) In the 18th year after completion, 80% of taxes otherwise due
on the said improvements;
(i) In the 19th full year after completion, 90% of taxes otherwise
due on the said improvements;
(j) In the 20th year after completion, and each year thereafter,
100% of taxes.
B. An amount not less than 5% of all payments by a Garden State Growth
Zone Development Entity pursuant to this subsection shall be paid to
the county.
A. The required payments shall be made in quarterly installments
according to the same schedule as real property taxes are due and
payable.
B. In addition to the payments required in lieu of taxes, the owner of the
property granted an exemption pursuant to this article shall be liable
for all real property taxes assessed and levied against the land on which
the improvement is situated, as well as the value of the improvements
on the property in the last full tax year prior to the issuance of the final
certificate of occupancy.
C. Failure to make the payments set forth in Subsections A or B of this
section shall result in the termination of the exemption. In addition to
the remedy set forth herein, the requirements imposed shall be
enforced in the same manner as is provided for real property taxes
pursuant to Title 54 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 445-18 PATERSON CODE § 445-21
438:944
§ 445-21. Applicability of exemption to tax types.
The exemption of real property taxes provided by the City pursuant to this
article shall apply to property taxes levied for municipal purposes, school
purposes, county government purposes and for the purpose of funding any
other property tax exemptions.
§ 445-21 SWIMMING POOLS § 445-21
438:945
Chapter 449
TAXICABS, AUTOCABS AND RENTED MOTOR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles for hire — See Ch. 463.
§ 445-21 PATERSON CODE § 445-21
438:946
Part 1
[Adopted 3-8-1994 As Ord. NoT.a 9x4ic-0ab1s9 (Ch. 24 Of The 1979 Revised
General Ordinances Of Paterson)]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 449-1. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TAXICAB — Any motor vehicle with a taximeter which does not operate over
a fixed route, commonly called a "taxicab," "taxi" or "cab," which is engaged
in the business of carrying passengers for hire to or from points or places
within Paterson or to or from points or places outside of Paterson.
TAXICAB MEDALLION — A City of Paterson license to operate a taxicab
business.
TAXIMETER — A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for
hire of a taxicab is mechanically calculated either for distance traveled or
for waiting time or for both and upon which the fee shall be indicated by
means of figures.
§ 449-2. Applicability. [Amended 4-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-032]
Except as provided by § 449-4 below, or any successor provision addressing
Taxicab Division enforcement of general motor vehicle offenses, this Part 1
shall not apply to any omnibus or autobus which operates by authority of
law, an ordinance, a permit or consent upon a fixed route through the City.
§ 449-3. Establishment of Taxicab Division. [Amended 4-11-2017 by
Ord. No. 17-032]
There shall be established a Taxicab Division within the Department of
Police, which shall include a Director and at least one taxicab inspector.
§ 449-4. Enforcement; powers of Director of Taxicab Division.
[Amended 4-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-032]
A. The Taxicab Division, in conjunction with the Police Division, shall be
charged, with regard to any person, business entity or vehicle that is
licensed under this Part 1, or that is required to be licensed under this
Part 1, with the duty of enforcing the following:
(1) Provisions of this Part 1;
(2) Violations of any state law specifically and expressly addressing
taxicabs; and
(3) Any City ordinance that may be applied to the use and operation of
taxicabs.
§ 449-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-4
438:947
B. Additionally, with regard to any motor vehicle with which a driver
generally or actually provides passenger transportation on a fee-perride
or fee-per-mile basis along public streets, including but not limited
to a taxi, bus, autobus, omnibus or jitney, or the owner or operator
thereof, the Taxicab Division shall also be authorized to enforce the
following:
(1) Any of the following provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes, entitled "Motor Vehicles and Traffic":
(a) N.J.S.A. 39:3-4 (unregistered vehicle).
(b) N.J.S.A. 39:3-29 (failure to exhibit license, registration and/or
insurance).
(c) N.J.S.A. 39:3-33 (unclear plates).
(d) N.J.S.A. 39:3-66 (maintenance of lamps).
(e) N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2f (failure to wear seatbelt).
(f) N.J.S.A. 39:4-81 (failure to observe signal).
(g) N.J.S.A. 39:4-85 (improper passing).
(h) N.J.S.A. 39:4-97 (careless driving).
(i) N.J.S.A. 39:4-97.3 (improper use of cell phone while driving:
talk and/or text).
(j) N.J.S.A. 39:4-124 (failure to turn).
(k) N.J.S.A. 39:4-144 (failure to stop or yield).
(l) N.J.S.A. 39:8-1 (failure to inspect).
(m) N.J.S.A. 39:8-4 (failure to make repairs).
(2) Any successor statute that may in whole or in part replace any of
the above-cited sections of Title 39.
(3) Any law addressing impermissible motor vehicle parking, stopping
or standing.
(4) Any law addressing obstruction of traffic.
C. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, a member of the Taxicab
Division shall under no circumstances pursue or chase any motor
vehicle, or undertake any law enforcement activity for which he or she
lacks any required certification, expertise or training, or for which he or
she is not duly authorized by the Police Department.
D. The Police Director is hereby empowered to appoint such inspectors as
he or she may find necessary to carry out the duties with which the
Taxicab Division is charged.
§ 449-4 PATERSON CODE § 449-4
438:948
§ 449-5. Jurisdiction of Taxicab Division.
The Taxicab Division shall have control of:
§ 449-6. Requirements for operation of taxicab business;
suspension or revocation of taxicab business license or taxicab
medallion.
E. Subject to City Council approval, the Police Director is hereby
authorized and empowered to establish rules and regulations for the
operation of taxicabs, insofar as they are not inconsistent with the other
provisions of this Part 1.
A. Processing applications for City of Paterson taxicab registrations.
B. Inspection of vehicles registered under this Part 1.
C. Issuing licenses to drivers in accordance with the provisions of this Part
1.
D. Such other matters as are set forth in this Part 1.
A. No license or taxicab medallion granted pursuant to this Part 1 shall be
issued to an applicant to operate a taxicab business, unless the
applicant is either incorporated or otherwise duly authorized to engage
in the taxicab business under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. Prior to filing an application for issuance or renewal of any license or
taxicab medallion granted pursuant to this Part 1, the applicant shall
provide a statement from the Zoning and Planning Division of the
Department of Community Development that the proposed use is
permitted under the zoning ordinances of the City of Paterson182 at the
location in question. In the event that the proposed use is found not to
be permitted, then the applicant shall provide a statement from the
Department of Community Development that the appropriate variance
or other relief has been obtained. No application shall be accepted
without the requested statement attached.
C. No license or taxicab medallion granted pursuant to this Part 1 shall be
issued to an applicant to operate a taxicab business where said
applicant or an officer or partner in the applicant's organization is not
of good moral character or has been convicted of a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude, a sex or drug offense or a violent crime.
D. A subsequent conviction for any of the disqualifying criminal offenses
by any applicant, any officer or any partner in the applicant's
organization shall serve to automatically suspend any license or taxicab
medallion granted to the applicant pursuant to this Part 1.
182. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 449-4 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-6
438:949
§ 449-7. Transfer of taxicab business license or taxicab medallion.
Any business license or medallion issued under this Part 1 shall not be
transferable except in accordance with the following procedures:
E. Upon conviction for any of the disqualifying criminal offenses
mentioned above in Subsection C by any applicant, any officer or any
partner in the applicant's organization, the applicant shall notify the
Taxicab Division of said conviction in writing, within three business
days following said conviction.
F. Within three business days following a conviction for a disqualifying
criminal offense, the applicant shall deliver to the Taxicab Division all
taxicab medallions or licenses issued to the applicant under this Part 1.
G. Upon suspension of any license or taxicab medallion, an applicant may
request a hearing before the Public Safety Director on forms provided
by the Taxicab Division. The Director of Public Safety or his or her
designee may then confirm the revocation or suspension, he or she may
modify the revocation or suspension or he or she may change entirely
the penalty that is imposed.
H. The hearing before the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee
shall be held within five business days following the Taxicab Division's
receipt of the request. If through no fault or acquiescence of the
applicant said hearing is not held within the prescribed five business
days, the applicant's license or taxicab medallion shall be returned and
the suspension in question shall be rescinded pending said hearing.
A. The applicant shall apply in writing to the City Council, and such
application shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than 10 days prior
to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council.
B. The application shall set forth the same matters and things which are
required in connection with an application to operate a taxicab or
autocab business.
C. The application for transfer shall include a written statement by the
current holder of the medallion(s) or business license(s) consenting to
the transfer.
D. In the event that an applicant for a transfer of a business license(s)
intends to operate said business from a location different from that
originally noted on the license to be transferred, said applicant shall
cause to be published once in a local newspaper, at least seven days
prior to said meeting of the Council, a notice of intention to apply for
the transfer. Said newspaper notice shall specify the name and address
of the present licensee, the location of the present license, the name of
the applicant, the proposed location of the license and the date and
time of the meeting of the Council.
§ 449-6 PATERSON CODE § 449-7
438:950
E. In the event that the applicant intends to locate at a new location, said
applicant shall also provide a statement from the City of Paterson,
Department of Community Improvements, Zoning and Planning
Division, which indicates that the intended use is permitted at the
proposed new location or that the appropriate variance or other relief
has been obtained.
F. In the event that the applicant for the transfer does not intend to
change the existing location of the business, said applicant shall not be
required to comply with the publication requirements of Subsection D.
G. Where a medallion or business license transfer is approved on or after
August 1 of any year, the application shall be accompanied by one-half
(1/2) of the fee described in § 449-14A. In the event that the requested
transfer is not granted by the City Council, the transfer fee, less 10%,
shall be returned to the applicant.
H. In all applications by corporations, the names and addresses and
amount of stock held by all stockholders holding 1% or more of any of
the stock thereof and the names and addresses of all officers and all
members of the Board of Directors must be stated in the application. If
one or more such officers or members of the Board of Directors or one
or more of the stockholders who directly or indirectly own more than
10% of such stock would fail to qualify as an individual applicant in any
respect, no medallion or business license shall be granted to said
corporation.
I. If a corporation holding a current medallion or business license wishes
to transfer a taxicab medallion or an autocab business license to
another corporation to be used in a bona fide operation of a taxicab or
autocab business and not less than 90% ownership of each corporation
rests with the same person or group of persons, then the application fee
for said transfer shall be $200 per vehicle.
J. Whenever any change shall occur in the facts as set forth in any
application for a medallion or autocab business license, the applicant
shall file a notice, in writing, of such change with the City Clerk within
10 days after the occurrence thereof; said change, when so filed, shall
thereupon become a part of said application.
K. Notice of changes in stock holdings need not be given unless and until
the aggregate of such changes, if made before the time of said
application, would have prevented the issuance of the medallion(s) or
autocab business license(s).
L. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the certificate of
incorporation issued by the Secretary of State shall accompany the
application, and such certification shall not have been issued more than
90 days prior to the filing of the application.
§ 449-7 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-7
438:951
M. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $200 per vehicle. An
application shall not be considered filed until the required fee has been
paid.
§ 449-7 PATERSON CODE § 449-7
438:952
ARTICLE II
Taxicab Registrations
§ 449-8. Taxicab registration or consent to operate required.
No taxicab shall operate along any street in the City without first obtaining
a valid City of Paterson taxicab registration for said vehicle, except where
said vehicle is operated within the City merely to discharge a passenger(s)
and said motor vehicle already has a valid license from another municipality,
then rather than a City of Paterson taxicab registration, consent of this City
is required before said vehicle may operate here. Such consent is deemed
given where said vehicle is in compliance with State of New Jersey minimum
insurance requirements.
§ 449-9. Application for taxicab registration or renewal; contents.
A. All applications for a taxicab registration or its renewal should be made
upon forms furnished by the Taxi Division.183
B. The application shall contain:
(1) The type of vehicle ownership, i.e., individual, joint individuals,
corporation, partnership or sole proprietor.
(2) The full name of the vehicle's owner and, if the vehicle is owned by
a corporation or other organization, the name of at least one
individual who will serve as the agent for purposes of service of
notices. This provision, however, shall not be a bar to proper
service where service is made upon another individual or entity and
such service is otherwise valid under the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
(3) The mailing address and actual residential address of the party(s)
named in Subsection B(2) and, where the owner is a corporation,
the mailing address and actual residential address of all officers
and all shareholders who own at least 10% of the corporation.
(4) Where the owner is a corporation, a copy of the corporation's
Articles of Incorporation shall also be filed with the application.
(5) The year, make, model, vehicle identification number and an
accurate odometer reading from the vehicle.
(6) The passenger capacity of the vehicle.
(7) A copy of the title and the valid insurance identification card for the
vehicle.
(8) Any other information deemed necessary by the Director of the
Taxicab Division.
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 449-8 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-10
438:953
§ 449-10. Inspection of vehicles; issuance of taxicab inspection
sticker.
§ 449-11. Limitation on age of vehicles; removal of taxicabs from
service. [Amended 1-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-002; 12-19-2013 by
Ord. No. 13-053]
A. The Taxicab Division shall supervise all vehicles registered under this
Part 1 to see that they are kept in a condition of fitness for public use. To
this end, the Taxicab Division shall inspect all proposed taxicabs prior
to the applicant being issued a taxicab registration and at least twice a
year thereafter.
B. Prior to inspection by the Taxicab Division, all taxicabs or proposed
taxicabs must first pass the regular State of New Jersey motor vehicle
inspection.
C. No taxicab registered under this Part 1 shall be operated on any street
within the City of Paterson without both a valid New Jersey vehicle
inspection sticker and a valid City of Paterson taxicab inspection
sticker.
D. No vehicle registered under this Part 1 shall be issued a taxicab
inspection sticker until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected
and found to be safe for the transportation of passengers, clean both on
the interior as well as the exterior, well painted and otherwise in good
condition and of good appearance.
E. No vehicle shall be issued a taxicab inspection sticker until its taximeter
has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and found to be operating
accurately.
A. No vehicle shall be placed in service as a taxicab for the first time by the
owner where it has already reached the age of 10 model years,
measured as described in this section.
B. When a vehicle reaches the age of 10 model years, measured as
described in this section, it shall be removed from service as a taxicab.
C. For the purposes of this section, vehicle age shall be measured in model
years, from the model year referenced by the Vehicle Identification
Number (VIN) to the model year as of the expiration date of the taxi's
annual registration. For example, where the expiration date for all
taxicab annual registrations is set as March 31, vehicles whose VIN
indicates the 2004 model year may remain in service through March 31,
2014; those whose VIN indicates the 2005 model year may remain in
service through March 31, 2015, and so on.
§ 449-10 PATERSON CODE § 449-12
438:954
§ 449-12. Term of taxicab registrations.
A registration issued under this Part 1 shall be for a period commencing on
April 1 of the year of issuance and ending on March 31 of the following year,
unless sooner suspended or revoked.
§ 449-13. Limitation on number of taxicab medallions; procedure
for issuance of additional medallions. [Amended 9-23-2003 by Ord.
No. 03-047; 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 05-070]
A. The number of taxicab medallions issued shall be limited to 250.
[Amended 1-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-002]
B. A taxicab medallion holder shall actively use each taxicab medallion he
or she possesses by placing a corresponding car in service for each
taxicab medallion he or she possesses within 90 days following issuance
of the taxicab medallion. Thereafter, failure to use the corresponding
vehicle on a regular basis will be a violation of this subsection and shall
serve to bar the holder from being eligible to receive any additional
medallions until all medallions the holder already possesses are actively
being used on a regular basis. Nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to waive the registration, inspection or insurance provisions
of this Part 1 or any other provision.
C. When additional medallions are available, public notice of which shall
be made, and no sooner than 30 days after such notice is given, the
additional medallions shall be distributed in accordance with the
following procedure:
(1) All medallions shall be assigned randomly in a blind draw.
(2) Initially, 60% of the available medallions shall be available only to
those owners who have fewer than 10 medallions at the time of the
distribution.
(3) Medallions assigned under Subsection C(2) shall be limited to a
maximum number of 10 per each owner, including existing
medallions already held by the owner.
(4) If, after the distribution or attempted distribution of the initial 60%
of the medallions, any remain available, then these shall be
distributed along with the other 40% of the available medallions to
all applicants, regardless of the number of medallions which each
individual applicant already has.
(5) Following being awarded a new medallion but before the applicant
may place a corresponding vehicle in service, the applicant shall
provide a statement from the Zoning and Planning Division of the
Department of Community Development that the proposed use is
permitted under the zoning ordinances of the City of Paterson at
the location in question. In the event that the proposed use is found
not to be permitted, then the applicant shall provide a statement
§ 449-12 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-13
438:955
§ 449-14. Taxicab registration fees. [Amended 11-27-2012 by Ord.
No. 12-049]
§ 449-15. Insurance requirements; certificate of compliance; power
of attorney.
from the Department of Community Development that the
appropriate variance or other relief has been obtained.
(6) Medallion holders shall otherwise comply with the provisions of
this Part 1 or else their privilege of possessing a taxicab medallion
may be revoked or suspended.
A. An annual fee of $350 per vehicle shall be charged for a taxicab
registration, and $50 for each duplicate.
B. Where a registration is issued on or after December 1 of any year, the
registration fee shall be 1/2 of the annual amount stated in Subsection
A of this provision.
A. No person, whether owner, lessee, bailee or otherwise, shall operate,
cause to be operated or permit to be operated any taxicab unless the
owner of the taxicab or proposed taxicab has filed with the City Clerk an
insurance policy from an insurance company duly licensed to transact
business under the insurance laws of the State of New Jersey and said
insurance policy remains in full force and effect and it provides for the
payment of a sum of not less than $10,000 to satisfy all claims for
damages, by reason of bodily injury to or death of any one person
resulting from an accident and a sum of not less than $20,000 to satisfy
all claims for damages by reason of bodily injuries to or death of all
persons on account of any such accident, by reason of the ownership,
operation, maintenance or use of such taxicab upon any public street;
and conditioned for the payment of a sum of not less than $5,000 to
satisfy any claim for damages to property of any one person resulting
from an accident and a sum not less than $5,000 to satisfy all claims for
damages to property of all persons on account of any such accident by
reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of any such
taxicab upon any public street. Such insurance policy shall also be for
the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or injury as
aforesaid.
B. In lieu of the requirements of Subsection A, an owner of more than one
taxicab may instead file a bond or insurance policy from an insurance
company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of
the State of New Jersey which provides for blanket coverage of all
taxicabs operated by such owner in the amount of $50,000, provides for
the payment of any final judgment recovered by any person on account
of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of any such taxicab
upon any public street and which is for the benefit of every person
suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
§ 449-13 PATERSON CODE § 449-15
438:956
§ 449-16. Notification of change of address.
When a taxicab driver changes residences, he or she must notify the Taxicab
Division of his or her new address, in writing on forms provided by the
Taxicab Division, within three days after such change.
§ 449-17. Taxicab registration cards; contents.
The registering of a taxicab shall be evidenced by the issuance of a taxicab
registration card signed by the Director of the Taxicab Division.
§ 449-18. Suspension or revocation of taxicab registration;
impounding of vehicles.
C. Each owner of a taxicab or proposed taxicab shall execute and deliver
to the City Clerk a power of attorney appointing the Director of Finance
as his or her true and lawful attorney for the purpose of acknowledging
service of any process out of a court of competent jurisdiction to be
served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity granted under the
insurance policy filed.
D. The City Clerk shall issue a certificate of compliance to the applicant
when the provisions of Subsections A and B of this section have been
complied with.
E. A certificate of compliance shall remain in effect only so long as the
insurance policy submitted to the City Clerk remains in full force and
effect.
A. Any vehicle registration issued under this Part 1 may be revoked or
suspended after a hearing before the Public Safety Director or his or
her designee if:
(1) The registered vehicle is found to be unfit or unsuited for public
transportation or public patronage because it is not in good
condition or appearance or is not clean or safe or for any other
good cause.
(2) The owner or operator of the registered vehicle has violated any
provision of this Part 1.
B. The Director of the Taxicab Division is hereby empowered to
temporarily suspend the registration of any vehicle pending a hearing
before the Public Safety Director if he or she reasonably believes that
the vehicle presents an unreasonable risk of danger to the health or
safety of the public.
C. A vehicle may be impounded by order of the Director of the Taxicab
Division, where:
(1) The operation of the taxicab presents an unreasonable risk of
danger to the health or safety of the public.
§ 449-15 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-18
438:957
(2) The vehicle is operated as a taxicab without a valid registration.
(3) For any other reason permitted under the state and local motor
vehicle and traffic laws.
D. Where a taxicab registration is suspended or a vehicle is impounded by
order of the Director of the Taxicab Division, the owner of the vehicle
may apply to the Taxicab Division for a hearing before the Director of
Public Safety or his or her designee for the limited purpose of reviewing
the order in question. The hearing shall be scheduled within 10 working
days from the date of the application. If through no fault or
acquiescence of the owner the hearing is not held within the stated
period, the suspension shall be rescinded or, regarding an impounded
vehicle, the vehicle shall be released to the owner. Any summons for an
underlying violation, however, will remain in effect and shall not be
dismissed without good cause.
E. The Director of Public Safety or his or her designee shall render a
decision no later than three working days from the conclusion of the
hearing.
F. The Taxicab Division shall notify an applicant that his registration has
been suspended or revoked, in writing, and shall retain a copy of this
letter in the applicant's file.
G. A suspension or revocation of a taxicab registration shall become
effective five days after written notice of the suspension or revocation
was sent unless the applicant was otherwise notified of the suspension
or revocation prior to the elapsing of the five-day period; then the
suspension or revocation shall become effective on the date the
applicant was so notified.
§ 449-18 PATERSON CODE § 449-18
438:958
ARTICLE III
Taxicab Driver Licenses
§ 449-19. State driver's license and taxicab driver's license
required; obligation to attend orientation and refresher classes;
payment of fines.
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon any street in the City of
Paterson, nor shall any person who owns or controls a taxicab permit it to
be so driven, unless the driver of said vehicle has:
§ 449-20. Qualifications of applicant for taxicab driver's license.
Each applicant for a City of Paterson taxicab driver's license shall:
A. A valid New Jersey driver's license or a valid license from the state in
which the taxicab service is located and his privilege to drive in New
Jersey is not revoked or under suspension.
B. A valid City of Paterson taxicab driver's license or, where the operator
merely discharged a passenger(s) within the City of Paterson and did
not pick up or attempt to pick up a passenger(s), a valid license from the
municipality in which the taxicab service is located.
C. Successfully completed Paterson's taxicab driver orientation class and
any applicable refresher classes which are offered. All driver's are
required to attend driver orientation refresher classes every three
years.
D. Paid all outstanding motor vehicle or parking fines in full.
A. Be at least 18 years of age.
B. Be of sound mind and body, with good eyesight and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble, drug or alcohol addiction or any other
infirmity which might render him or her unfit for the operation of a
taxicab.
C. Be able to read and write English.
D. Have driven a motor vehicle for at least one year.
E. Be clean in dress and person.
F. Be of good character.
G. Not have a criminal conviction for any drug or sex offense or for a
violent crime, which includes but is not limited to murder, rape,
robbery, assault, burglary and possession of a weapon.
H. Be a citizen of the United States or legal alien thereof.
§ 449-19 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-20
438:959
§ 449-21. Application for taxicab driver's license; accompanying
items.
I. Be the holder of a valid taxicab business license or be the employee or
promised employment by an individual who has a valid taxicab business
license.
J. Not have a conviction for driving while intoxicated within the past three
years.
K. Not currently have seven points or more for moving violations on one's
license.
L. Not have any motor vehicle or parking fines outstanding which have not
been fully paid.
A. Every City taxicab driver's license application and application for
renewal shall be filed with the Taxicab Division on forms provided by it
and shall be retained on file as a permanent record, as provided in
§ 449-25.
B. Every application and every application for renewal shall be verified
under oath and shall truthfully and accurately contain the following
information:
(1) The applicant's full name and address.
(2) The applicant's date of birth.
(3) The applicant's social security number.
(4) The applicant's driver's license number.
(5) The applicant's residences for the preceding five years.
(6) The applicant's age, height, hair and eye color.
(7) The applicant's United States citizenship status.
(8) The applicant's employment history for the preceding five years.
(9) The applicant's criminal record.
(10) The applicant's official driving record with a separate list of moving
violations and suspensions or revocations, with the cause for each
suspension or revocation.
(11) Any other information required by the Division of Taxicabs.
C. Each application and each application for renewal shall be
accompanied by four two and one-half by two and one-half (2 1/2 x 2 1/
2) inches, recent front-view photographs of the applicant. One of said
photographs shall be attached to the application maintained in the
Taxicab Division.
§ 449-20 PATERSON CODE § 449-21
438:960
§ 449-22. Examination of applicant.
§ 449-23. Issuance of taxicab driver's license; form of license.
D. The applicant shall submit with his or her application, on forms
provided by the Taxicab Division, notarized affidavits regarding the
applicant's good character from two reputable citizens of Paterson who
have known the applicant and observed his or her conduct during the
previous 12 months. Affidavits are not required for renewal
applications.
E. Each application and each application for renewal shall be
accompanied by a letter from a physician duly authorized to practice
medicine in the State of New Jersey, certifying that he or she has
examined the applicant and the applicant has been found to be
physically fit and, in his professional opinion, medically able to perform
the duties of a taxicab driver. Such examination shall not exceed 60
days prior to the date from the filing of the application.
(1) Annual drug testing for license applicants and renewal applicants.
Every applicant for a new taxicab driver’s license or an existing
license holder who applies for a renewal of his or her license shall
submit to a drug screening test at his or her own expense and
provide the City of Paterson with a certificate of compliance
evidencing his or her satisfactorily passing said test. Any person
who fails said test and tests positive for a controlled dangerous
substance or a prescription medication that he or she does not have
a valid prescription for shall be denied a taxicab driver’s license or
renewal of an existing license and may not reapply for same until
six months have passed from the date of the failed test. The
applicant shall then resubmit a new certificate of compliance
evidencing his or her satisfactorily passing the drug screening test.
[Added 11-27-2012 by Ord. No. 12-049]
F. Any false statement contained in the application will be grounds for
rejection of the application and shall promptly be reported to the City
Council and may subject the applicant to prosecution by the Passaic
County Prosecutor's Office, in addition to penalties imposed under this
Part 1.
A. Each applicant must pass an examination given by the Taxicab Division
testing his or her knowledge of the provisions of this Part 1, the local
geography, local traffic regulations and state motor vehicle laws.
B. Each applicant must take a road test accompanied by a taxicab
inspector, and he or she must satisfactorily demonstrate his or her
ability to drive in crowded and/or congested areas of the city.
A. The taxicab driver's license shall be signed by the licensee and the
Director of the Taxicab Division.
§ 449-21 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-23
438:961
§ 449-24. Term of license; fee for taxicab driver's license. [Amended
11-27-2012 by Ord. No. 12-049]
§ 449-25. Obligation to maintain records.
The Taxicab Division shall maintain a file on each licensee, and such file
shall contain:
§ 449-26. Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.
Subject to City Council approval, the Director of the Taxicab Division is
hereby authorized to make additional rules and regulations for the
ownership and/or operation of vehicles for hire covered in this Part 1, so
long as they are reasonable and not inconsistent with the other provisions
of this Part 1.
§ 449-27. Other regulations concerning taxicab operation.
B. A photograph supplied in accordance with § 449-21 shall be attached to
the license in such a manner as to prevent the substitution of another
picture without detection.
C. Taxicab driver's licenses shall otherwise take such form and content as
is prescribed by the Director of the Taxicab Division.
A. A license issued under this Part 1 shall be valid for a period
commencing on December 1 of the year of issuance and ending on
November 30 the following year unless sooner suspended or revoked.
B. The fee for a taxicab driver’s license shall be $75 per year or $50 for the
remaining period if issued after December 1.
A. The licensee's original application and all subsequent applications for
renewal, including photographs.
B. The licensee's official driving record submitted with the original
application, plus updates, which are to be submitted with each
application for renewal.
C. The licensee's official criminal history, plus updates, which are to be
submitted with each application for renewal application.
D. Any records of complaints made about the driver.
A. Any licensed driver who defaces, removes or obliterates any official
entry made upon his license or who removes the photograph which was
attached to his or her license or who allows another to do either of the
above shall be subject to suspension or revocation of his or her license.
B. Every taxicab driver licensed by the City of Paterson shall, upon
demand of a taxicab inspector, police officer, passenger or other
authorized person, exhibit his or her taxicab operator's license for
inspection.
§ 449-23 PATERSON CODE § 449-27
438:962
§ 449-28. Suspension or revocation of driver's licenses.
C. A taxicab operator's license is nontransferable, so it may not be lent,
sold, given or otherwise transferred to any other person.
A. Taxicab driver's licenses may be revoked or suspended by the Director
of the Taxicab Division pending a hearing before the Director of Public
Safety or his designee where the continued operation of a taxicab by
the driver presents an unreasonable risk to the health or safety of the
public. Following the hearing, the Director of Public Safety or his or her
designee may then confirm the revocation or suspension, he or she may
modify the revocation or suspension or he or she may change entirely
the penalty that is imposed.
B. Following a hearing before the Public Safety Director or his or her
designee, a taxicab driver's license may be suspended or revoked for
any violation of this Part 1.
C. Any suspension or revocation shall be noted in the Taxicab Division's
file on the licensee in question, together with the reasons for such
action. Additionally, the driver's employer may be notified of the
suspension/revocation.
D. Where a license has been suspended for a specific period, the license
shall be returned to the licensee at the expiration of the suspension
period.
E. Where a license has been suspended for the same reason as a previous
suspension or a license has been suspended for the third time for any
reason, the license shall be revoked.
F. No taxicab driver whose license has been revoked shall again be
licensed, except upon approval of the City Council.
G. Where a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee shall immediately
turn in his or her license to the Taxicab Division. Failure to turn in a
suspended or revoked license may subject the licensee to further
penalties, as provided in § 449-52.
H. The Taxicab Division shall notify an applicant that his registration has
been suspended or revoked, in writing, and shall retain a copy of this
letter in the applicant's file.
I. A suspension or revocation of a taxicab registration shall become
effective five days after written notice of the suspension or revocation
was sent unless the applicant was otherwise notified of the suspension
or revocation prior to the elapsing of the five-day period; then the
suspension or revocation shall become effective on the date the
applicant was so notified.
§ 449-27 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-28
438:963

ARTICLE IV
Fares, Rates and Schedules
§ 449-29. Taximeters.
§ 449-30. Taxicab fare rates; senior citizen discount coupons.
All persons owning, operating or controlling any taxicab shall charge the
following rates to be determined by the taximeter:
A. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a taximeter of a size, shape and
design in accordance with guidelines provided by the Taxicab Division.
B. Between sunset and sunrise, the face of every taximeter shall be
illuminated by a light so positioned as to throw a continuous steady
light thereon and render the figures on the taximeter readily
discernible by any passenger. [Amended 1-24-2014 by Ord. No.
14-003]
C. No owner or driver shall use or permit a taxicab to be used for hire
where it has a taximeter on which the seal is broken or whose cover and
gear are not intact.
D. No driver of a taxicab shall, while carrying a passenger or otherwise
employed by a passenger, display a signal affixed to the taximeter in
such a position as to denote that such vehicle is not employed or in such
position as to denote that he or she is employed at a rate which he or
she is not entitled to under this Part 1.
E. No person shall operate a taxicab where its taximeter has not been
inspected and approved by the Taxicab Division.
A. For not more than three passengers, $6 for the first 1.5 miles or fraction
thereof; $0.35 for each additional 1/8 of a mile or fraction thereof; and,
in addition, [Amended 1-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-003]
B. For each passenger exceeding three, $0.50 per trip per passenger, not
including children under 14 years of age; and, in addition,
C. For each three minutes of waiting time or fraction thereof, $0.60.
"Waiting time," as used herein, shall include the time when the taxi is
not in motion, beginning with the arrival at the place to which it has
been called or the time consumed while standing at the direction of the
passenger, but no charge shall be made for time lost for inefficiency of
the cab or its driver or time consumed by a premature response to a
call.
D. For senior citizens 62 years of age or over and qualified handicapped
persons, upon presentation of a prepurchased discount coupon, a flat
rate fare of not more than $5 to any point within the City limits. Not
more than three senior citizens 62 years of age or over or three
qualified handicapped persons or any combination thereof not to
§ 449-29 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-30
438:965
§ 449-31. Extra charges; luggage handling rates.
exceed three persons may utilize the discount fare provided in this
section on any single trip. For each additional senior citizen passenger
or qualified handicapped passenger exceeding three, the fare shall be
$0.50. Any trip paid for by the use of a senior citizen/handicapped
person discount coupon shall be from the point of pickup to the point
of destination without any additional stops for pickups or discharges
en route. Additional pickups or discharges during any such trip shall
require the presentation of an additional senior citizen/handicapped
person discount coupon, together with the payment of an additional
flat fare of $5. Discount coupons may be purchased at the Licensing
Division, Monday through Friday, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m. The persons owning, operating or controlling taxicabs can
cash in said coupons during the same hours set forth above, receiving
$4.90 per coupon; $0.10 will be retained by the City for costs of printing
coupons and administering the sale and reimbursement as provided in
this section. Coupons will be sold in books of five tickets. [Amended
3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-016; 5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 99-026;
1-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-003]
E. A qualified handicapped person under this article shall include, in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-204, any person who has lost the use of
one or more limbs as a consequence of paralysis, amputation or other
permanent disability or who is permanently disabled as to be unable to
ambulate without the aid of an assisting device or whose mobility is
otherwise limited as certified by a physician with a plenary license to
practice medicine and surgery or a podiatrist licensed to practice in this
state or a bordering state or a physician stationed at a military or naval
installation located in this state who is licensed to practice in any state.
[Added 3-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-016]
A. A driver shall notify a passenger(s) of any extra charge prior to the act
giving rise to the extra charge.
B. A driver shall give any passenger who requests it a receipt reflecting
any extra charge in accordance with § 449-34 of this Part 1.
C. Although lesser rates may be charged, the following shall be the
maximum fare to be paid when a driver personally lifts luggage or other
packages into or out of a taxicab:
(1) For each trunk: $0.50, regardless of its weight.
(2) For each item over 50 pounds: $0.50.
(3) For each grocery bag over two: $0.10.
(4) For each suitcase over two: $0.10.
(5) For each item over two, not previously named in Subsection C(1)
through (4), weighing under 50 pounds: $0.10.
§ 449-30 PATERSON CODE § 449-32
438:966
§ 449-32. Overcharging prohibited.
No person shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger or potential
passenger a fare at a rate in excess of the rate permitted for said vehicle in
this Part 1.
§ 449-33. Fare disputes. [Amended 1-24-2014 by Ord. No. 14-003]
When a fare dispute arises, the passenger shall pay the disputed fare and
the driver shall issue the passenger a receipt. The passenger may then
file a written complaint with the Taxicab Division on forms provided by
the Taxicab Division. A hearing shall then be scheduled before the Police
Director or his or her designee within 30 days from the date in which the
complaint was filed.
§ 449-34. Fare receipts.
If demanded by a passenger, the taxi driver shall deliver to the person
paying for the hiring of the cab, at the time of payment, a legible receipt
containing:
A. The name of the taxi company.
B. The name of the driver.
C. The driver's taxi license number.
D. The total amount paid.
E. The additional services provided and amount paid for them.
F. The date of service and, if different, the date of payment.
§ 449-32 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-34
438:967

ARTICLE V
Vehicle Equipment and Maintenance
§ 449-35. Taxicab identification.
§ 449-36. Vehicle partition and steel plate required; opaque tinting,
side curtains, shades or other obstructions prohibited.
Within one year following the adoption of this Part 1:
§ 449-37. Taxicab dome light required.
A. Every taxi licensed under this Part 1 shall bear on the outside of each
rear door, in plainly painted letters at least two inches in height, the
name of the taxicab company. Underneath this, there shall be painted,
at least four inches in height, the company's official cab license number.
B. In the center of the back panel of the cab shall be painted, at least four
inches in height, the company's official cab license number.
C. On both sides of the roof of the vehicle, the vehicle's fleet identification
number shall be displayed. Such number shall denote a particular
vehicle within a taxi company's fleet of vehicles, and such numbers shall
run from one through the maximum number of authorized vehicles in a
taxi company's fleet.
D. No other number shall be displayed on the outside of a cab, except the
phone number of the cab company and any other number required or
approved under the rules and regulations of the Taxicab Division.
A. Every taxicab shall be equipped with a full partition, extending from
roof to floor and from door to door, to separate the driver's
compartment from the passenger's compartment.
B. The partition shall be a made of a bullet-resistant material with a
minimum thickness of three-eighths (3/8) inch, surrounded by a
14-gauge steel enclosure.
C. The partition shall contain a change slot to enable payment of fares
without direct contact between the driver and passengers.
D. The back of the front seat shall be equipped with a 14-gauge steel plate,
covered with foam padding, covered with leather, leatherette or other
material ordinarily used to cover the foam padding of vehicle seats.
E. Opaque tinting, side curtains, shades or other such obstructions are
prohibited in passenger compartment windows.
A. All taxicabs shall be equipped with an external dome light.
B. The dome light shall be located on the center of the vehicle roof and
shall carry the word "on-duty."
§ 449-35 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-37
438:969
§ 449-38. Seating restrictions; number of passengers restricted;
seat belts and child restraints.
§ 449-39. Records of trips; inspection of records.
§ 449-40. Records of licensed vehicles.
C. Whenever the vehicle is on duty, the word "on-duty" shall be
illuminated.
A. No person, other than a duly licensed taxicab driver, shall sit or
otherwise occupy the driver's section of a taxicab when it is on duty,
except:
(1) Where the passenger section is fully occupied by other passengers.
(2) Where occupancy of the driver's section is needed by the front seat
passenger due to a physical impairment or other health-related
reason.
B. A taxicab driver shall not transport together or attempt to transport
together more than four persons over six years of age.
C. It shall be a violation of this section for a taxicab to be operated in
violation of Title 39, State of New Jersey, seat belt and child restraint
laws.
A. Each owner or driver of a taxicab shall record in a book kept solely for
that purpose the details of each trip as follows:
(1) The time the car responded to the location.
(2) The place of origin of the trip and the destination.
(3) The company's taxi license number.
(4) The name and address of the driver.
(5) The driver's taxicab driver's license number.
(6) The fare paid.
B. All such records shall be kept for five years and shall be open for
inspection at all times to the Director of the Taxicab Division, his
designees and members of the Police Division.
A. The Taxicab Division shall maintain records regarding the ownership
and operation of vehicles licensed under this Part 1. Such records shall
include but are not limited to the following:
(1) The name and address of all owners and operators.
(2) The license number of all owners and operators.
§ 449-37 PATERSON CODE § 449-40
438:970
§ 449-41. Display of licenses, rate card and other items.
(3) Vehicle descriptions, including make, model and serial numbers.
(4) Inspection records, including date of inspection, name of inspector
and the inspection results.
B. The above Taxicab Division records shall be open for public inspection
at all reasonable times and shall be public records, extracts of which
may be certified by the Director of the Taxicab Division for use as
evidence in court.
A. Each taxicab shall exhibit within the vehicle in a conspicuous place and
within view of all passengers the following:
(1) The taxicab registration card.
(2) The driver's taxicab operator's license.
(3) A rate card, showing the currently authorized taxicab rates.
(4) A valid certificate of compliance card affixed to the front right sun
visor so as not to obstruct the vision of the driver.
(5) A valid taxicab inspection sticker, displayed on the right side of the
vehicle's rear window.
(6) A citizen complaint card, affixed to the left side of the vehicle's
partition, which shall contain the fare resolution procedure of
§ 449-33 and the telephone number and address of the Division of
Taxicabs.
B. The above-mentioned items shall be displayed in a holder approved by
the Taxicab Division.
§ 449-40 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-41
438:971

ARTICLE VI
Operating Regulations
§ 449-42. Parking and standing restrictions; soliciting passengers.
§ 449-43. Cruising prohibited.
No taxicab shall seek employment by:
§ 449-44. Reporting accidents required.
All accidents involving vehicles licensed under this Part 1, except rented
motor vehicles, shall promptly be reported by the driver of said licensed
vehicle to the Taxicab Division on forms provided by the Taxicab Division,
within 24 hours after the accident.
§ 449-45. Lost articles.
Every driver of a vehicle licensed under this Part 1 shall, upon completion
of each trip, search said vehicle for any property lost or left therein. Any
property found shall, unless sooner claimed by or delivered to the owner
of said property, be delivered to and left at the Taxicab Division within 24
hours after its discovery.
§ 449-46. Service by the drivers; personal appearance of drivers.
A. No taxicab driver shall stand or stop his or her vehicle on any public
street or at any public place, other than at an authorized taxi stand, and
solicit passengers.
B. No person shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except the driver of said
cab and only when he or she is seated in the driver's seat of the cab in
question.
A. Repeatedly driving his or her taxicab along any street.
B. Interfering with the proper access or egress from any place of public
gathering, such as a theater, hotel, grocery store or railway station.
A. No taxi driver shall refuse or neglect to drive any orderly person, upon
request, to any destination in Paterson, unless the driver has already
been engaged to convey another passenger or the driver is unable to
drive any person at the time of the request.
B. Without the consent of the first passenger, no cab driver shall carry any
additional passenger along with the first passenger employing the
taxicab.
C. Anyone engaged in the operation of a taxicab shall behave in a
professional manner and shall not use profanity or any other indecent
or insulting language.
§ 449-42 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-46
438:973
§ 449-47. Use of licensed vehicles for illegal purposes.
No person shall, in a vehicle licensed under this Part 1, knowingly transport
or cause to be transported or aid or assist in obtaining transportation for
any person for the purpose of committing or attempting to commit a crime
or a disorderly persons offense.
§ 449-48. Permissible locations for receipt and discharge of
passengers.
A taxicab driver shall not pick up or discharge any passenger in the
roadway, but shall pull the taxicab to the curb, so that passengers do not
have to cross the roadway in order to enter or exit the taxicab.
§ 449-49. Obligation to obey all motor vehicle and traffic laws.
It shall be a violation of this section for anyone, while operating a taxicab or
any other vehicle covered under this Part 1, to violate any state or municipal
motor vehicle or traffic law, including but not limited to the laws pertaining
to parking and the wearing of seat belts and child restraints.
D. Anyone engaged in the operation of a taxicab shall be neat and clean in
appearance and all facial hair shall be well-groomed at all times.
E. No one shall operate a taxicab while bare-chested, barefooted or while
wearing clothing which is indecent or insulting to any passenger or
prospective passenger.
§ 449-46 PATERSON CODE § 449-49
438:974
ARTICLE VII
Taxi Stands
§ 449-50. Designation of taxi stands.
§ 449-51. Regulation of taxicabs at taxi stands.
A. The City Council is hereby authorized to locate and designate as taxi
stands the space alongside the curb adjacent to property used as public
parks, public buildings, railroad stations, hotels, restaurants and
theaters.
B. The City Council shall further designate the number of cabs which shall
be authorized to stand at the taxi stand at a given time, and such
number shall be displayed on a sign provided by the City of Paterson,
and such sign shall be attached to a post or stanchion adjacent to the
taxi stand.
C. Any property owner may apply to the City Council requesting that a taxi
stand be established adjacent to his or her property. Such application
shall state the number of cabs desired to occupy the stand at a given
time.
D. No taxi stand shall be permitted without the consent of the owner of the
property adjacent to the proposed taxi stand.
E. Taxi stands are authorized solely at the discretion of the City Council,
and the City Council may revoke its consent at any time.
A. Only the designated number of taxicabs may remain at a taxi stand at
any given time and all cars must be in single file and otherwise operate
in accordance with all traffic rules and regulations.
B. No driver standing at the head of the line at a taxi stand shall refuse or
neglect to carry any orderly person requesting a cab who agrees to pay
the proper fare. Passengers may, however, select any cab he or she
desires, whether it is at the head of the line or not.
C. As a cab leaves the line, those cabs behind it shall move up. All drivers
seeking a space at the taxi stand shall approach only from the rear of
the line and shall stop as near as possible to the last cab already on line.
D. No taxicab shall stand at the curb within 15 feet of the entrance to any
building adjacent to a taxi stand.
§ 449-50 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-51
438:975

ARTICLE VIII
Violations
§ 449-52. Violations and penalties.
A. Except as provided by law, any person who violates or permits, aids or
abets in the violation of any provision of this Part 1 may have any
taxicab medallion, taxicab registration or taxicab driver's license issued
under this Part 1 suspended or revoked and shall be subject to a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 90 days, or both.
B. A separate offense is deemed to arise on each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 449-52 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-52
438:977

Part 2
Autoc[Aadbos,p Rteednt6e-d1 4M-1o9t9or4 VAeshOicrlde.s NAon.d 9 L4i-m03o7u]sines
ARTICLE IX
General Provisions
§ 449-53. Definitions.
As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOCAB — Includes motor vehicles commonly known as "limousines"
and any automobile or motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire which is held out, announced or advertised to operate
or which operates over any street or public highway of the city's and which
is hired by charter or out of a particular contract or by the day or hour
or other fixed period or to transport passengers to a specified place or
places or which charges a fare agreed upon in advance. Nothing contained
in this definition shall be construed to include taxicabs, hotel buses or
buses employed solely in transportation of school children or teachers,
or autobuses which are subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of Public
Utilities or interstate autobuses required by federal law or state law or
the Board of Public Utilities to carry insurance against loss from liability
imposed by law on account of bodily injury of death.
LIMOUSINE — A luxury autocab driven by a uniformed chauffeur, excluding
vans and other nonluxury vehicles.
RENTED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle rented out from a business
without a driver and with the understanding that the lessee, bailee or his
agent or servant shall operate the vehicle for the purposes other than the
transportation of passengers for hire.
§ 449-54. Applicability. [Amended 4-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-032]
Except as provided by § 449-55 below, or any successor provision
addressing Taxicab Division enforcement of general motor vehicle offenses,
this Part 2 shall not apply to any omnibus or autobus which operates by
authority of law, an ordinance, a permit or consent upon a fixed route
through the City.
§ 449-55. Enforcement; powers of Director of Taxicab Division.
[Amended 4-11-2017 by Ord. No. 17-032]
A. The Taxicab Division, in conjunction with the Police Division, shall be
charged, with regard to any person, business entity or vehicle that is
licensed under this Part 2, or that is required to be licensed under this
Part 2, with the duty of enforcing the following:
(1) Provisions of this Part 2;
§ 449-53 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-55
438:979
(2) Violations of any state law specifically and expressly addressing
autocabs, limousines, and rented motor vehicles, as defined above;
and
(3) Any City ordinance that may be applied to the use and operation of
autocabs, limousines, and rented motor vehicles, as defined above.
B. Additionally, with regard to any motor vehicle with which a driver
generally or actually provides passenger transportation on a fee-perride
or fee-per-mile basis along public streets, including but not limited
to a taxi, bus, autobus, omnibus or jitney, or the owner or operator
thereof, the Taxicab Division shall also be authorized to enforce the
following:
(1) Any of the following provisions of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes entitled "Motor Vehicles and Traffic":
(a) N.J.S.A. 39:3-4 (unregistered vehicle).
(b) N.J.S.A. 39:3-29 (failure to exhibit license, registration and/or
insurance).
(c) N.J.S.A. 39:3-33 (unclear plates).
(d) N.J.S.A. 39:3-66 (maintenance of lamps).
(e) N.J.S.A. 39:3-76.2f (failure to wear seatbelt).
(f) N.J.S.A. 39:4-81 (failure to observe signal).
(g) N.J.S.A. 39:4-85 (improper passing).
(h) N.J.S.A. 39:4-97 (careless driving).
(i) N.J.S.A. 39:4-97.3 (improper use of cell phone while driving:
talk and/or text).
(j) N.J.S.A. 39:4-124 (failure to turn).
(k) N.J.S.A. 39:4-144 (failure to stop or yield).
(l) N.J.S.A. 39:8-1 (failure to inspect).
(m) N.J.S.A. 39:8-4 (failure to make repairs).
(2) Any successor statute that may in whole or in part replace any of
the above-cited sections of Title 39.
(3) Any law addressing impermissible motor vehicle parking, stopping
or standing.
(4) Any law addressing obstruction of traffic.
C. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, a member of the Taxicab
Division shall under no circumstances pursue or chase any motor
vehicle, or undertake any law enforcement activity for which he or she
§ 449-55 PATERSON CODE § 449-55
438:980
§ 449-56. Jurisdiction of Taxicab Division.
The Taxicab Division shall have control of:
§ 449-57. Requirements for operation of autocab or rented motor
vehicle business; suspension or revocation of autocab or rented
motor vehicle business license.
lacks any required certification, expertise or training, or for which he
or she is not duly authorized by the Police Department.
D. The Police Director is hereby empowered to appoint such inspectors as
he or she may find necessary to carry out the duties with which the
Taxicab Division is charged.
E. Subject to City Council approval, the Police Director is hereby
authorized and empowered to establish rules and regulations for the
operation of autocabs and rented motor vehicles, insofar as they are not
inconsistent with the other provisions of this Part 2.
A. Processing applications for City of Paterson autocab and rented motor
vehicle registrations.
B. Inspection of vehicles registered under this Part 2.
C. Issuing licenses to drivers in accordance with the provisions of this Part
2.
D. Such other matters as are set forth in this Part 2.
A. No license granted pursuant to this Part 2 shall be issued to an
applicant to operate an autocab or rented motor vehicle business,
unless the applicant is either incorporated or otherwise duly authorized
to engage in such business under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
B. Prior to filing an application for issuance or renewal of any license
granted pursuant to this Part 2, the applicant shall provide a statement
from the Zoning and Planning Division of the Department of Community
Development that the proposed use is permitted under the zoning
ordinances of the City of Paterson184 at the location in question. In the
event that the proposed use is found not to be permitted, then the
applicant shall provide a statement from the Department of Community
Development that the appropriate variance or other relief has been
obtained. No application shall be accepted without the requested
statement attached.
C. No license granted pursuant to this Part 2 shall be issued to an
applicant to operate an autocab or rented motor vehicle business where
said applicant or an officer or partner in the applicant's organization is
184. Editor's Note: See Ch. 483, Zoning and Land Development.
§ 449-55 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-57
438:981
§ 449-58. Transfer of autocab or rented motor vehicle business
license.
Any license issued under this Part 2 shall not be transferable except in
accordance with the following procedures:
not of good moral character or has been convicted of a criminal offense
involving moral turpitude, a sex or drug offense or a violent crime.
D. A subsequent conviction for any of the disqualifying criminal offenses
by any applicant, any officer or any partner in the applicant's
organization shall serve to automatically suspend any license granted
to the applicant pursuant to this Part 2.
E. Upon conviction by any applicant, officer or partner in the applicant's
organization of any of the disqualifying criminal offenses mentioned
above in Subsection C, the applicant shall notify the Taxicab Division of
said conviction, in writing, within three business days following said
conviction.
F. Within three business days following a conviction for a disqualifying
criminal offense, the applicant shall deliver to the Taxicab Division all
licenses issued to the applicant under this Part 2.
G. Upon suspension of any license issued under this Part 2, the applicant
may request a hearing before the Public Safety Director on forms
provided by the Taxicab Division. The Director of Public Safety or his or
her designee may then confirm the revocation or suspension, he or she
may modify the revocation or suspension or he or she may change
entirely the penalty that is imposed.
H. The hearing before the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee
shall be held within five business days following the Taxicab Division's
receipt of the request. If through no fault or acquiescence of the
applicant said hearing is not held within the prescribed five business
days, the applicant's license shall be returned and the suspension in
question shall be rescinded pending said hearing.
A. The applicant shall apply, in writing, to the City Council and such
application shall be filed with the City Clerk no later than 10 days prior
to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council.
B. The application shall set forth the same matters and things which are
required in connection with an application to operate an autocab or
rented motor vehicle business.
C. The application for transfer shall include a written statement by the
current holder of the license(s) consenting to the transfer.
D. In the event that an applicant for a transfer of license or licenses
intends to operate said business from a location different from that
originally noted on the license to be transferred, said applicant shall
§ 449-57 PATERSON CODE § 449-58
438:982
cause to be published once in a local newspaper, at least seven days
prior to said meeting of the Council, a notice of intention to apply for
the transfer. Said newspaper notice shall specify the name and address
of the present licensee, the location of the present license, the name
of the applicant, the proposed location of the license and the date and
time of the meeting of the Council.
E. In the event that the applicant intends to locate at a new location, said
applicant shall also provide a statement from the City of Paterson,
Department of Community Improvements, Zoning and Planning
Division, which indicates that the intended use is permitted at the
proposed new location or that the appropriate variance or other relief
has been obtained.
F. In the event that the applicant for the transfer does not intend to
change the existing location of the business, said applicant shall not be
required to comply with the publication requirements of Subsection D.
G. Where the requested license transfer is approved on or after August 1
of any year, the application shall be accompanied by 1/2 of the fee
described in § 449-64A. In the event that the requested transfer is not
granted by the City Council, the transfer fee, less 10%, shall be
returned to the applicant.
H. In all applications by corporations, the names and addresses and
amount of stock held by all stockholders holding 1% or more of any of
the stock thereof, the names and addresses of all officers and all
members of the Board of Directors must be stated in the application. If
one or more such officers or members of the Board of Directors or one
or more of the stockholders who directly or indirectly own more than
10% of such stock would fail to qualify as an individual applicant in any
respect, no license shall be granted to said corporation.
I. If a corporation holding a current license wishes to transfer an autocab
or rented motor vehicle license to another corporation to be used in a
bona fide operation of an autocab or rented motor vehicle business and
not less than 90% ownership of each corporation rests with the same
person or group of persons, then the application fee for said transfer
shall be $200 per autocab.
J. Whenever any change shall occur in the facts as set forth in any
application for an autocab or rented motor vehicle license, the
applicant shall file a notice, in writing, of such change with the City
Clerk within 10 days after the occurrence thereof; said change, when so
filed, shall thereupon become a part of said application.
K. Notice of changes in stock holdings need not be given unless and until
the aggregate of such changes, if made before the time of said
application, would have prevented the issuance of the license(s).
L. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the certificate of
incorporation issued by the Secretary of State shall accompany the
§ 449-58 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-58
438:983
application, and such certification shall not have been issued more than
90 days prior to the filing of the application.
M. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $200 per vehicle. An
application shall not be considered filed until the required fee has been
paid.
§ 449-58 PATERSON CODE § 449-58
438:984
ARTICLE X
Autocab and Rented Motor Vehicle Registrations
§ 449-59. Autocab registration, rented motor vehicle registration or
consent to operate required.
No autocab or rented motor vehicle shall operate along any street in the
City without first obtaining a valid City of Paterson registration for said
vehicle, except where said vehicle is operated within the City merely to
discharge a passenger(s) and said motor vehicle already has a valid license
from another municipality, then rather than a City of Paterson registration,
consent of this City is required before said vehicle may operate here. Such
consent is deemed given where the following two criteria have been met:
§ 449-60. Application for autocab or rented motor vehicle
registration; renewal; contents; limit on number of autocab
registrations issued.
A. Said vehicle is in compliance with State of New Jersey minimum
insurance requirements.
B. A certificate of compliance listing the name of the insurance company,
the policy number, the date of expiration and a description of the
vehicle in question is posted in a conspicuous place within the autocab
or rented motor vehicle.
C. Any violation of TCOP § 449-59 shall be reported to the office of the
Insurance Fraud Prosecutor. [Added 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-007]
D. Any violation of TCOP § 449-59 shall be reported to the violator’s
insurance company, if applicable. [Added 3-10-2009 by Ord. No.
09-007]
A. All applications for an autocab or rented motor vehicle registration or
its renewal shall be made upon forms furnished by the Taxicab Division.
B. The application shall contain:
(1) The type of vehicle ownership, i.e., individual, joint individuals,
corporation, partnership or sole proprietor.
(2) The full name of the vehicle's owner and, if the vehicle is owned by
a corporation or other organization, the name of at least one
individual who will serve as the agent for purposes of service of
notices. This provision, however, shall not be a bar to proper
service where service is made upon another individual or entity and
such service is otherwise valid under the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
(3) The mailing address and actual residential address of the party(s)
named in Subsection B(2) and, where the owner is a corporation,
§ 449-59 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-60
438:985
§ 449-61. Inspection of vehicles.
§ 449-62. Limitation on age of autocabs; removal of vehicles from
service. [Amended 1-24-1995 by Ord. No. 95-003]
the mailing address and actual residential address of all officers
and all shareholders who own at least 10% of the corporation.
(4) Where the owner is a corporation, a copy of the corporation's
Articles of Incorporation shall also be filed with the application.
(5) The year, make, model, vehicle identification number and an
accurate odometer reading from the vehicle.
(6) The passenger capacity of the vehicle.
(7) A copy of the title and the valid insurance identification card for the
vehicle.
(8) Any other information deemed necessary by the Director of Taxicab
Division.
C. The number of autocab registrations issued by the City shall not exceed
100. [Amended 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 20-040]
A. The Taxicab Division shall supervise all vehicles registered under this
Part 2 to see that they are kept in a condition of fitness for public use. To
this end, the Taxicab Division shall inspect all proposed autocabs or
rented motor vehicles prior to the applicant being issued a City
registration and prior to the renewal of any registration previously
issued under this Part 2.
B. Prior to inspection by the Taxicab Division, all vehicles must first pass
the regular State of New Jersey motor vehicle inspection.
C. No autocab or rented motor vehicle registered under this Part 2 shall be
operated on any street within the City of Paterson without both a valid
New Jersey vehicle inspection sticker and a valid City of Paterson
inspection sticker.
D. No vehicle registered under this Part 2 shall be issued an inspection
sticker until it has been thoroughly and carefully inspected and found to
be safe for the transportation of passengers, clean both on the interior
as well as the exterior, well-painted and otherwise in good condition
and of good appearance.
A. No vehicle shall be placed in service as an autocab for the first time by
the owner where it has already reached the age of 72 months.
B. When a vehicle reaches the age of 72 months old, it shall be removed
from service as an autocab, except those vehicles which have already
reached the age of 72 months on the effective date of this Part 2.
§ 449-60 PATERSON CODE § 449-62
438:986
§ 449-63. Term of registrations.
A registration issued under this Part 2 shall be for a period commencing on
April 1 of the year of issuance and ending on March 31 of the following year,
unless sooner suspended or revoked.
§ 449-64. Registration fees.
§ 449-65. Insurance requirements; certificate of compliance; power
of attorney.
C. Within five years from the effective date of this Part 2, all owners and
autocab companies with autocabs which had already reached the age of
72 months on the effective date of this Part 2 shall have at least 50% of
their vehicles below 72 months old.
D. Within seven years from the effective date of this Part 2, all owners and
companies with autocabs which had already reached the age of 72
months on the effective date of this Part 2 shall have 100% of their
vehicles below seven years of age.
A. An annual fee of $200 per vehicle shall be charged for a City of Paterson
registration.
B. Where a license is issued on or after October 1 of any year, the license
fee shall be one-half (1/2) of the amount stated in Subsection A.
A. No person, whether owner, lessee, bailee or otherwise, shall operate,
cause to be operated or permit to be operated any autocab or rented
motor vehicle unless the owner or agent thereof has filed with the Clerk
of the municipality in which the owner has his principal place of
business an insurance policy from an insurance company duly licensed
to transact business under the insurance laws of the State of New
Jersey and said insurance policy remains in full force and effect and it
provides for the payment of a sum of not less than $50,000 against loss
by reason of the liability imposed by law upon every autocab or rented
motor vehicle owner for damages on account of bodily injury or death
suffered by any person as a result of an accident occurring by reason of
the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of said autocab or rented
motor vehicle upon any public street. Such insurance policy shall be for
the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid
and shall name the City of Paterson as an additional insured.
B. In lieu of the requirements of Subsection A, any corporation organized
under the laws of the State of New Jersey may carry its own liability
insurance, upon filing with the City Clerk the order from the State
Commissioner of Insurance exempting the corporation from the state's
minimum insurance requirements contained in N.J.S.A. 48:16-14 and a
sworn affidavit from an officer in the corporation stating that the
corporation is the owner of the autocab or rented motor vehicle in
§ 449-62 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-65
438:987
§ 449-66. Notification of change of address.
When an autocab driver changes residences, he or she must notify the
Taxicab Division of his or her new address, in writing on forms provided by
the Taxicab Division, within three days after such change.
§ 449-67. Autocab registration cards; contents.
The registering of an autocab or rented motor vehicle shall be evidenced
by the issuance of a registration card signed by Director of the Taxicab
Division.
§ 449-68. Suspension or revocation of vehicle registration;
impounding of vehicles.
question and that the corporation has paid up cash value of not less
than $150,000.
C. The insurance exemption contained in Subsection B shall remain in
effect only so long as the paid up cash value of the corporation is not
less than $150,000 and the order of the State Commissioner of
Insurance exempting the corporation from the state's minimum
insurance requirements remains in effect.
D. In the event that a corporation's insurance exemption lapses for any
reason, the corporation shall immediately obtain insurance in
compliance with Subsection A of this section.
E. Each owner of an autocab or rented motor vehicle shall execute and
deliver to the City Clerk a power of attorney appointing the Director of
Finance as his or her true and lawful attorney for the purpose of
acknowledging service of any process out of a court of competent
jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity
granted under the insurance policy filed.
F. The City Clerk shall issue a certificate of compliance to the applicant
when the provisions of Subsections A, B and E of this section have been
complied with.
G. The original certificate of compliance shall be posted within each
autocab and shall contain the name of the insurance company, the
policy number, the expiration date of the policy, a description of every
autocab or rented motor vehicle insured thereunder and their
registration numbers.
H. A certificate of compliance shall remain in effect only so long as the
insurance policy submitted to the City Clerk or the insurance exemption
remains in full force and effect.
A. Any vehicle registration issued under this Part 2 may be revoked or
suspended after a hearing before the Public Safety Director or his or
her designee if:
§ 449-65 PATERSON CODE § 449-68
438:988
(1) The registered vehicle is found to be unfit or unsuited for public
transportation or public patronage because it is not in good
condition, it has a bad appearance, it is not clean, it is not safe or
for any other good cause.
(2) The owner or operator of the registered vehicle has violated any
provision of this Part 2.
B. The Director of the Taxicab Division is hereby empowered to
temporarily suspend the registration of any vehicle pending a hearing
before the Public Safety Director if he or she reasonably believes that
the vehicle presents an unreasonable risk of danger to the health or
safety of the public.
C. In the event that the Taxicab Division suspends or revokes a vehicle
registration, the Taxicab Division shall so notify the owner of the
vehicle, in writing, and shall retain a copy of this letter on file.
D. The suspension or revocation of a vehicle registration shall become
effective immediately upon actual receipt of notice by the owner of the
vehicle in question or his or her agent or, where notice is sent by mail,
the suspension or revocation shall become effective five days after
notice of the suspension or revocation was sent.
E. A vehicle may be impounded by order of the Director of the Taxicab
Division where:
(1) The operation of the vehicle presents an unreasonable risk of
danger to the health or safety of the public.
(2) The vehicle is operated as a vehicle for hire without a valid City
registration.
(3) For any other reason permitted under state law or local ordinance.
F. Where a vehicle registration is suspended or a vehicle is impounded by
order of the Director of the Taxicab Division, the owner of the vehicle
may apply to the Taxicab Division for a hearing before the Director of
Public Safety or his or her designee for the limited purpose of reviewing
the order in question. The hearing shall be scheduled within 10 working
days from the date of the application. If through no fault or
acquiescence of the owner the hearing is not held within the stated
period, the suspension shall be rescinded or, regarding an impounded
vehicle, the vehicle shall be released to the owner. Any summons for an
underlying violation, however, will remain in effect and shall not be
dismissed without good cause.
G. The Director of Public Safety or his or her designee shall render a
decision no later than three working days from the conclusion of the
hearing.
§ 449-68 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-68
438:989

ARTICLE XI
Operator's License
§ 449-69. State driver's license and operator's license required;
obligation to attend orientation and refresher classes.
No person shall operate a vehicle for hire upon any street in the City of
Paterson, nor shall any person who owns or controls a vehicle for hire
permit it to be so driven, unless the driver of said vehicle has:
§ 449-70. Qualifications of applicant.
Each applicant for a City of Paterson driver's license shall:
A. A valid New Jersey driver's license or a valid license from the state in
which the autocab service is located and his privilege to drive in New
Jersey is not revoked or under suspension.
B. A valid City of Paterson operator's license or, where the operator merely
discharged a passenger(s) within the City of Paterson and did not pick
up or attempt to pick up a passenger(s), a valid license from the
municipality in which the autocab service is located.
C. Successfully completed Paterson's driver orientation class and any
applicable refresher classes which are offered. All drivers are required
to attend driver orientation refresher classes every three years.
D. Paid all outstanding motor vehicle or parking fines in full.
A. Be at least 18 years of age.
B. Be of sound mind and body, with good eyesight and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble, drug or alcohol addiction or any other
infirmity which might render him or her unfit for the operation of an
autocab.
C. Be able to read and write English.
D. Have driven a motor vehicle for at least one year.
E. Be clean in dress and person.
F. Be of good character.
G. Not have a criminal conviction for any drug or sex offense or for a
violent crime, which includes but is not limited to murder, rape,
robbery, assault, burglary and possession of a weapon.
H. Be a citizen of the United States or legal alien thereof.
I. Be the holder of a valid autocab or rented motor vehicle business
license or be the employee or promised employment by an individual
who has such a license.
§ 449-69 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-70
438:991
§ 449-71. Application for operator's license; accompanying items.
J. Not have a conviction for driving while intoxicated within the past three
years.
K. Not currently have seven points or more for moving violations.
L. Not have any motor vehicle or parking fines outstanding which have not
been fully paid.
A. Every City driver's license application and application for renewal shall
be filed with the Taxicab Division on forms provided by it and shall be
retained on file as a permanent record, as provided in § 449-75.
B. Every application and every application for renewal shall be verified
under oath and shall truthfully and accurately contain the following
information:
(1) The applicant's full name and address.
(2) The applicant's date of birth.
(3) The applicant's social security number.
(4) The applicant's driver's license number.
(5) The applicant's residences for the preceding five years.
(6) The applicant's age, height, hair and eye color.
(7) The applicant's United States citizenship status.
(8) The applicant's employment history for the preceding five years.
(9) The applicant's official criminal history which shall be determined
via the applicant's fingerprints submitted to the Paterson Police
Division.
(10) The applicant's official driving record with a separate list of moving
violations and suspensions or revocations, with the cause for each
suspension or revocation.
(11) Any other information required by the Division of Taxicabs.
C. Each application and each application for renewal shall be
accompanied by four two and one-half by two and one-half (2 1/2 x 2 1/
2) inches, recent front-view photographs of the applicant. One of said
photographs shall be attached to the application maintained in the
Taxicab Division.
D. The applicant shall submit with his or her application on forms provided
by the Taxicab Division notarized affidavits regarding the applicant's
good character from two reputable citizens of Paterson who have
known the applicant and observed his or her conduct during the
§ 449-70 PATERSON CODE § 449-71
438:992
§ 449-72. Examination of applicant.
§ 449-73. Issuance of autocab operator's license; form of license.
§ 449-74. Term of license; fee.
§ 449-75. Obligation to maintain records.
The Taxicab Division shall maintain a file on each licensee, and such file
shall contain:
previous 12 months. Affidavits are not required for renewal
applications.
E. Each application and each application for renewal shall be
accompanied by a letter from a physician duly authorized to practice
medicine in the State of New Jersey, certifying that he or she has
examined the applicant and the applicant has been found to be
physically fit and, in his professional opinion, medically able to perform
the duties of an autocab driver. Such examination shall not exceed 60
days prior to the date from the filing of the application.
F. Any false statement contained in the application will be grounds for
rejection of the application and shall promptly be reported to the City
Council and may subject the applicant to prosecution by the Passaic
County Prosecutor's Office, in addition to any penalties which may be
imposed under this Part 2.
A. Each applicant must pass an examination given by the Taxicab Division
testing his or her knowledge of the provisions of this Part 2, the local
geography, local traffic regulations and state motor vehicle laws.
B. Each applicant must take a road test, accompanied by a taxicab
inspector, and he or she must satisfactorily demonstrate his or her
ability to drive in crowded and/or congested areas of the city.
A. The autocab operator's license shall be signed by the licensee and the
Director of the Taxicab Division.
B. A photograph supplied in accordance with § 449-71 shall be attached to
the license in such a manner as to prevent the substitution of another
picture without detection.
C. Autocab operator's licenses shall otherwise take such form and content
as is prescribed by the Director of the Taxicab Division.
A. A license issued under this Part 2 shall be valid for a period
commencing on April 1 of the year of issuance and ending on March 31
the following year, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
B. The fee for an autocab operator's license shall be $25 per year or $15
for the remaining period if issued after October 1.
§ 449-71 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-75
438:993
§ 449-76. Promulgation of additional rules and regulations.
Subject to City Council approval, the Director of the Taxicab Division is
hereby authorized to make additional rules and regulations for the
ownership and/or operation of vehicles for hire covered in this Part 2, so
long as they are reasonable and not inconsistent with the other provisions
of this Part 2.
§ 449-77. Other regulations concerning autocab operation.
§ 449-78. Suspension or revocation of driver's licenses.
A. The licensee's original application and all subsequent applications for
renewal, including photographs.
B. The licensee's official driving record submitted with the original
application, plus updates, which are to be submitted with each
application for renewal.
C. The licensee's official criminal history, plus updates, which are to be
submitted with each application for renewal application.
D. Any records of complaints made about the driver.
A. No autocab operator shall deface, remove or obliterate any official
entry made upon his license, nor shall any autocab operator remove the
photograph which was attached to his or her autocab operator's license
or allow another to do either of the above.
B. Every driver licensed by the City of Paterson shall, upon demand of a
taxi inspector, police officer, passenger or other authorized person,
exhibit his or her autocab operator's license for inspection.
C. A City of Paterson operator's license is nontransferable, so it may not be
lent, sold, given or otherwise transferred to any other person.
A. Autocab operator's licenses may be revoked or suspended by the
Director of the Taxicab Division pending a hearing before the Director
of Public Safety or his designee where the licensee operated a vehicle
for hire which he or she knew or should have known presented an
unreasonable risk to the health or safety of the public. Following a
hearing, the Director of Public Safety or his or her designee may then
confirm the revocation or suspension, he or she may modify the
revocation or suspension or he or she may change entirely the penalty
that is imposed.
B. Following a hearing before the Public Safety Director or his or her
designee, an autocab operator's license may be suspended or revoked
for any violation of this Part 2.
C. Any suspension or revocation shall be noted in the Taxicab Division's
file on the licensee in question, together with the reasons for such
§ 449-75 PATERSON CODE § 449-78
438:994
action. Additionally, the driver's employer may be notified of the
suspension or revocation.
D. Where a license has been suspended for a specific period, the license
shall be returned to the licensee at the expiration of the suspension
period.
E. Where a license has been suspended for the same reason as a previous
suspension or a license has been suspended for the third time for any
reason, the license shall be revoked.
F. No licensee whose license has been revoked shall again be licensed to
operate an autocab, except upon approval of the City Council.
G. Where an autocab operator license is suspended or revoked, the
licensee shall immediately turn in his or her license to the Taxicab
Division. Failure to turn in a suspended or revoked license may subject
the licensee to further penalties, as provided in § 449-98.
H. Where the Director of the Taxicab Division suspends or revokes the
license of an autocab operator, the Taxicab Division shall so notify the
owner of the vehicle, in writing, and shall retain a copy of this letter on
file.
I. A suspension or revocation of an autocab operator's license shall
become effective immediately upon actual receipt of notice by the
owner of the vehicle in question or his or her agent or, where notice is
sent by mail, the suspension or revocation shall become effective five
days after notice of the suspension or revocation was sent.
§ 449-78 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-78
438:995

ARTICLE XII
Fares, Rates and Schedules
§ 449-79. Rates to be agreed upon in advance; flat fee. [Amended
4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 97-020]
The fare to be paid for riding in an autocab shall be agreed upon in advance
of the commencement of the trip and shall be a flat fee. The driver of the
autocab shall produce for each potential customer, prior to the customer
entering into the autocab, a written statement as to the fare agreed upon.
The written statement shall be in a form prescribed by the Director of the
Taxicab Division but shall, as a minimum, including the date, destination
and agreed upon fare.
§ 449-80. Overcharging prohibited.
No person shall charge or attempt to charge any passenger or potential
passenger a fare in excess of the fare agreed upon at the commencement of
the trip.
§ 449-81. Fare disputes.
When a fare dispute arises, the passenger shall pay the disputed fare and
the driver shall issue the passenger a receipt. The passenger may then file
a written complaint with the Taxicab Division on forms provided by the
Taxicab Division. A hearing shall then be scheduled before the Director of
Public Safety or his or her designee within 30 days from the date in which
the complaint was filed.
§ 449-82. Fare receipts.
If demanded by a passenger, the autocab operator shall deliver to the
person paying for the hiring of the autocab, at the time of payment, a legible
receipt containing:
A. The name of the autocab company.
B. The name of the driver.
C. The driver's autocab operator's license number.
D. The total amount paid.
E. Additional services provided and the amount paid for them.
F. The date of service and, if different, the date of payment.
§ 449-79 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-82
438:997

ARTICLE XIII
Vehicle Equipment and Maintenance
§ 449-83. Autocab identification.
§ 449-84. Seating restrictions; seat belts and child restraints.
§ 449-85. Records of trips; inspection of records.
A. Every autocab licensed under this Part 2, except limousines, shall bear
on the outside of each rear door, in plainly painted letters at least two
inches in height, the name of the autocab company. Underneath this,
there shall be painted, at least four inches in height, the company's
official autocab license number.
B. In the center of the back panel of the cab shall be painted, at least four
inches in height, the company's official autocab license number.
C. On both sides of the roof of the vehicle, the vehicle's fleet identification
number shall be displayed. Such number shall denote a particular
vehicle within an autocab company's fleet of vehicles and such numbers
shall run from one through the maximum number of authorized vehicles
in an autocab company's fleet.
D. No other number shall be displayed on the outside of a cab except the
phone number of the autocab company and any other number required
or approved under the rules and regulations of the Taxicab Division.
A. No person, other than a duly licensed autocab driver, shall sit or
otherwise occupy the driver's section of an autocab when it is on duty
except:
(1) Where the passenger section is fully occupied by other passengers.
(2) Where occupancy of the driver's section is needed by the front seat
passenger due to a physical impairment or other health-related
reason.
B. It shall be a violation of this subsection for an autocab to be operated in
violation of Title 39, State of New Jersey, seat belt and child restraint
laws.
A. Each owner or driver of an autocab shall keep on file a copy of all
requests for payment submitted to Medicaid or any other third party
and shall record in a book kept solely for that purpose the details of
each trip as follows:
(1) The time the car responded to the location.
(2) The place of origin of the trip and the destination.
(3) The autocab's registration number.
§ 449-83 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-85
438:999
§ 449-86. Records of licensed vehicles.
§ 449-87. Display of licenses, rate card and other items.
(4) The name and address of the driver.
(5) The autocab driver's license number.
(6) The fare paid.
B. All such records shall be kept for five years and shall be open for
inspection at all times to the Director of the Taxicab Division, his
designees and members of the Police Division.
A. The Taxicab Division shall maintain records regarding the ownership
and operation of vehicles licensed under this Part 2. Such records shall
include but are not limited to the following:
(1) The names and addresses of all owners and operators.
(2) The license number of all owners and operators.
(3) Vehicle descriptions, including make, model and serial numbers.
(4) Inspection records, including date of inspection, name of inspector
and the inspection results.
B. The above Taxicab Division records shall be open for public inspection
at all reasonable times and shall be public records, extracts of which
may be certified by the Director of the Taxicab Division for use as
evidence in court.
A. Each autocab shall exhibit within the vehicle in a conspicuous place and
within view of all passengers the following:
(1) The autocab registration card.
(2) The driver's autocab operator's license.
(3) A valid certificate of compliance card affixed to the front right sun
visor so as not to obstruct the vision of the driver.
(4) A valid autocab inspection sticker displayed on the right side of the
vehicle's rear window.
(5) A citizen complaint card, posted in a conspicuous place within the
autocab, which shall contain the fare resolution procedure outlined
in this Part 2 and the telephone number and address of the Division
of Taxicabs.
B. The above-mentioned items shall be displayed in a holder approved by
the Taxicab Division.
§ 449-85 PATERSON CODE § 449-87
438:1000
ARTICLE XIV
Operating Regulations
§ 449-88. Parking and standing restrictions; soliciting passengers.
§ 449-89. Cruising prohibited.
No autocab shall seek employment by:
§ 449-90. Reporting accidents required.
All accidents involving vehicles licensed under this Part 2, except rented
motor vehicles, shall promptly be reported by the driver of said licensed
vehicle to the Taxicab Division, on forms provided by the Taxicab Division,
within 24 hours after the accident.
§ 449-91. Lost articles.
Every driver of a vehicle licensed under this Part 2 shall, upon upon
completion of each trip, search said vehicle for any property lost or left
therein. Any property found shall, unless sooner claimed by or delivered to
the owner of said property, be delivered to and left at the Taxicab Division
within 24 hours after its discovery.
§ 449-92. Service by drivers; personal appearance of drivers.
A. No autocab driver shall stand or stop his or her vehicle on any public
street or at any public place other than at an authorized autocab stand
and solicit passengers.
B. No person shall solicit passengers for an autocab except the driver of
said cab and only when he or she is seated in the driver's seat of the cab
in question.
A. Repeatedly driving his or her autocab along and street.
B. Interfering with the proper access or egress from any place of public
gathering, such as a theater, hotel, grocery store, railway station or
medical facility.
A. No autocab driver shall refuse or neglect to drive any orderly person,
upon request, to any authorized destination in Paterson unless his or
her vehicle is full or the driver is unable to drive any person at the time
of the request.
B. Anyone engaged in the operation of an autocab shall behave in a
professional manner and shall not use profanity or any other indecent
or insulting language.
C. Anyone engaged in the operation of an autocab shall be neat and clean
in appearance, and all facial hair shall be well-groomed at all times.
§ 449-88 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-92
438:1001
§ 449-93. Use of licensed vehicles for illegal purposes.
No person shall in a vehicle licensed under this Part 2 knowingly transport
or cause to be transported or aid or assist in obtaining transportation for
any person for the purpose of committing or attempting to commit a crime
or a disorderly persons offense.
§ 449-94. Permissible locations for receipt and discharge of
passengers.
An autocab driver shall not pick up or discharge any passenger in the
roadway, but shall pull the autocab to the curb, so that passengers do not
have to cross the roadway in order to enter or exit the autocab.
§ 449-95. Obligation to obey all motor vehicle and traffic laws.
It shall be a violation of this section for anyone while operating an autocab
or any other vehicle covered under this Part 2 to violate any state or
municipal motor vehicle or traffic law, including but not limited to the laws
pertaining to parking and the wearing of seat belts and child restraints.
D. No one shall operate an autocab while bare-chested, barefooted or
while wearing clothing which is indecent or insulting to any passenger
or prospective passenger.
§ 449-92 PATERSON CODE § 449-95
438:1002
ARTICLE XV
Autocab Stands
§ 449-96. Designation of autocab stands.
§ 449-97. Regulation of autocabs at autocab stands.
A. The City Council is hereby authorized to locate and designate as
autocab stands the space alongside the curb adjacent to property used
as public parks, public buildings, railroad stations, hotels, restaurants
and theaters.
B. The City Council shall further designate the number of vehicles which
shall be authorized to stand at the autocab stand at a given time, and
such number shall be displayed on a sign provided by the City of
Paterson, and such sign shall be attached to a post or stanchion
adjacent to the autocab stand.
C. Any property owner may apply to the City Council requesting that an
autocab stand be established adjacent to his or her property. Such
application shall state the number of autocabs desired to occupy the
stand at a given time.
D. No autocab stand shall be permitted without the consent of the owner
of the property adjacent to the proposed autocab stand.
E. Autocab stands are authorized solely at discretion of the City Council,
and the City Council may revoke its consent at any time.
A. Only the designated number of autocabs may remain at an autocab
stand at any given time, and all cars must be in single file and otherwise
operate in accordance with all traffic rules and regulations.
B. No driver standing at the head of the line at an autocab stand shall
refuse or neglect to carry any orderly person requesting a ride who
agrees to pay the proper fare. Passengers may, however, select any
autocab he or she desires, whether it is at the head of the line or not.
C. As an autocab leaves the line, those autocabs behind it shall move up.
All drivers seeking a space at the autocab stand shall approach only
from the rear of the line and shall stop as near as possible to the last
autocab already on line.
D. No autocab shall stand at the curb within 15 feet of the entrance to any
building adjacent to an autocab stand.
§ 449-96 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-97
438:1003

ARTICLE XVI
Violations
§ 449-98. Violations and penalties.
A. Except as provided by law, any person who violates or permits, aids or
abets in the violation of any provision of this Part 2 may have any
medallion, registration or driver's license issued under this Part 2
suspended or revoked and shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days, or both. [Amended 3-10-2009 by Ord. No. 09-007]
B. A separate offense is deemed to arise on each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 449-98 SWIMMING POOLS § 449-98
438:1005
Chapter 451
TELEPHONES, MOBILE
§ 451-1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter and the policy of the municipality to
regulate the use of mobile telephones by persons operating motor vehicles
in order to protect other persons within the municipality. This chapter shall
be liberally construed and applied to promote its purposes and policy.
§ 451-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
MOBILE TELEPHONE — Including but not limited to cellular, analog,
wireless and digital telephones.
PARKED — For an automatic transmission, that the vehicle is in the park
gear; for a standard transmission, that the vehicle is in the neutral gear and
the brake is being utilized or the vehicle is otherwise stationary.
USE — To use a mobile telephone in dialing; answering; talking; and
listening.
§ 451-3. Permitted uses.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter to the contrary, this
chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the use of a mobile telephone:
§ 451-4. Restrictions.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street or highway in the City
of Paterson while engaging in any conduct defined as the "use" of a mobile
telephone unless the operator maintains both hands on the applicable
steering device by using a hands free device.
§ 451-5. Violations and penalties.
Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not
to be less than $100 and not to exceed $250. For the initial thirty-day period
after this chapter takes effect, violators will be issued only warnings. After
the thirty-day period, summonses for violations will be issued.
A. By a person who is using a mobile telephone to contact public safety
personnel in emergency situations.
B. While maintaining the vehicle in the parked position either on public or
private property or with a hands free device which allows the operator
to maintain both hands on the vehicle's applicable steering device while
using the mobile telephone.
§ 449-98 PATERSON CODE § 451-5
451:1006
Chapter 452
TELEPHONES, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435. Telephone franchise — See Ch. A513.
§ 452-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CITY — The City of Paterson.
ILLEGAL OR ILLICIT ACTIVITY — Activity which is proscribed by Title 2C
of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated or any City ordinance or any federal
law or regulation.
PERMITTEE — Any person responsible for placing and maintaining a public
telephone on sidewalks or streets, as hereinafter defined, and receiving a
permit therefor.
PERSON — An individual, business, firm, corporation, association,
partnership or any other organization, group or entity.
PUBLIC TELEPHONE — Any self-service, coin- or credit-card-operated
telephone or bank of such telephones placed adjacent to each other located
in or over a public sidewalk or street.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a highway or street intended for the use of
pedestrians, between the curbline or the lateral line of a shoulder or, if
none, the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent right-of-way line.
STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is opened to the use of the public
for the purposes of vehicular traffic, and shall include but not be limited to
roadways, parkways, alleys and highways.
§ 452-2. Permit required.
No person may place or maintain any outdoor public telephone on or above
any public street or sidewalk without having first obtained a permit as
provided in this chapter. Permits shall be issued subject to the approval of
the location and means of installation of the telephone by the City Engineer.
Prior to installation, a plan or sketch of the telephone shall be furnished
in sufficient detail to describe the size, location, equipment and means of
installation and cabling.
§ 452-3. Initial permit fee; renewal fee; late renewal. [Amended
11-12-1996 by Ord. No. 96-069; 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-084]
§ 451-5 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 452-3
452:1007
§ 452-4. Permit number to be affixed to telephone.
A copy of the permit number shall be affixed to the public telephone in such
a fashion so as to be secure from defacing or damage by the elements.
§ 452-5. Renewal of permits.
Permits shall be renewable annually with all applications for renewal to be
submitted to the City not later than the 15th day of January of each year.
§ 452-6. Removal or relocation of public telephones.
The City Engineer shall be notified of the intent of any person to remove
or relocate a public telephone, which notification shall be in writing and
shall be given not later than 30 days before the intended date of removal
or relocation of said telephone. No telephone may be removed or relocated
without compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 452-7. Rejection of application or revocation of permit for illegal
or illicit activities.
The City Engineer may reject any application for a permit, revoke a permit
or require the removal of an existing outdoor public telephone if it is
determined that a public telephone has the potential to or has illustrated
a propensity to create or contribute to illegal or illicit activities. A
presumption of illegal or illicit activity will be created if during the permit
year five incidents of illegal or illicit activities are associated with the
location or the proposed location of the public telephone.
§ 452-8. Exemptions and restrictions for telephones installed
pursuant to agreement with City.
A. The initial fee for a permit shall be $200 for each public telephone.
B. The annual renewal fee shall be $100 for each public telephone.
C. Any application for a license renewal which is not completed within 30
days of the renewal date shall be subject to an additional late
administrative charge equal to 25% of the cost of the license renewal.
D. Each public telephone shall be subject to a monthly maintenance fee of
$2. The fee shall be paid to the City not later than the 10th day of each
month. There will be a twenty-five-percent additional monthly
maintenance fee if the payment is made after the 10th day of the month.
A. The permit fees set forth herein shall not apply to any public telephone
installation subject to an agreement with the City of Paterson providing
for the payment of any annual commission and a franchise tax to the
City of Paterson, except that such public telephone installations shall be
subject to the following:
§ 452-3 PATERSON CODE § 452-8
452:1008
§ 452-9. Request for hearing upon denial of permit application.
In the event that the City Engineer declines to issue a permit, the applicant
may request a hearing before the City Engineer or a designee as to said
denial. Said request for a hearing must be made, in writing, to the City
Engineer within 10 days of receipt of notice of the denial.
§ 452-10. Liability and insurance requirements.
Before receiving a permit, an applicant shall:
§ 452-11. Standards for installation and maintenance.
Any public telephone installation subject to this chapter shall comply with
the following standards:
(1) Approval of the location of each public telephone by the City
Engineer.
B. The City of Paterson may require any of the following if a public
telephone has the potential to or has illustrated a propensity to create
or contribute to illegal or illicit activity: the removal of an outdoor
telephone; the revocation of a permit; or the restriction or limitation
upon service to permit outgoing calls only. A presumption of illegal or
illicit activity will be created if, during the permit year, five incidents of
illegal or illicit activities are associated with the location or the
proposed location of the public telephone.
A. Execute an indemnification agreement by which the applicant agrees to
defend, indemnify and hold harmless the City of Paterson against
liability for all claims for damage to property or injury to or death of
persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the permit or
the control, maintenance, ownership or use of each public telephone,
including the applicant's public telephone and equipment.
B. File with the Treasurer of the City of Paterson a general liability
insurance policy of $1,000,000 for bodily injury and $50,000 for
property damage naming the City of Paterson as an additional insured,
insuring against injury, loss or damage that may result from placing or
maintaining the telephone on or above the sidewalk, said policy to name
the City of Paterson and its officers and employees as additional
insureds.
A. No booth surrounding a public telephone shall exceed eight feet in
height, four feet in width or four feet in thickness.
B. Each public telephone shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism
to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund if a
call cannot be placed. The coin mechanism shall be maintained in
proper working order.
§ 452-8 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 452-11
452:1009
§ 452-12. Emergency and information requirements.
C. Each public telephone shall have affixed to it, in a place visible to
everyone using the telephone, the name and address of the distributor
and the telephone number of a working telephone service to report a
malfunction, secure a refund or give the notices provided for in this
chapter.
D. Public telephones shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and
in good repair at all times. Public telephones shall be serviced and
maintained according to standards, including but not limited to the
following:
(1) Public telephones shall be reasonably free of chipped, faded,
peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof.
(2) Public telephones shall be reasonably free of rust and corrosion in
the visible metal areas thereon.
(3) Any clear plastic or glass parts of public telephones shall be
unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, graffiti, blemishes
and discoloration.
(4) Any paper or cardboard parts or inserts of public telephones shall
be reasonably free of tears, pealing or fading.
(5) The structural parts of public telephones shall not be broken or
unduly misshapen.
(6) Public telephone receivers shall be attached to the telephones.
E. Any person who fails to maintain a public telephone in proper working
condition shall be given a ten-day notice to repair the telephone by the
City of Paterson. Failure to timely comply with said notice shall be
grounds for revocation of the permit for and removal of said telephone.
[Amended 12-2-2003 by Ord. No. 03-084]
F. Each public telephone shall, upon the written request of the Chief of
Police, be capable of restricted or limited service, allowing outgoing
calls only, within 10 days of the request.
A. All public telephones shall possess 911 emergency number access.
B. Public telephones shall permit the following calls to be placed without
charge:
(1) Calls to the 911 emergency number.
(2) Emergency calls placed through operator assistance to the Police
and Fire Divisions.
C. Current public telephone rates for a local coin call shall be posted on
the public telephone or on the public telephone booth.
§ 452-11 PATERSON CODE § 452-12
452:1010
§ 452-13. Location and placement of public telephones.
§ 452-14. Suspension or revocation of license; hearings.
D. Toll rate quotations must be available for the operator upon request.
A. No public telephone shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any
public street or sidewalk when such installation, use or maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property;
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles,
or is intended to be installed in such a fashion so as to permit,
intentionally or otherwise, its use by occupants of vehicles parked
or stopped upon any sidewalk;
(3) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
(4) Interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals, hydrants or
mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
B. Public telephones shall be placed or otherwise secured so as to prevent
their being blown down onto or around the public street or sidewalk but
shall not be affixed or otherwise secured to any traffic or street signs or
signals.
A. In addition to any other penalties for violation of this chapter, the City
Engineer may, after notice and hearing and for just cause, suspend,
revoke or not renew any permit issued hereunder for:
(1) Any violation of the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Failure to comply with any federal or state laws and/or regulations
or any City ordinance pertaining to the operation of public
telephones.
(3) Any cause which would have been cause for rejection of the
application in the first instance.
(4) A material and knowing misstatement or omission of information
required on the application pursuant to this chapter. The question
of whether a misstatement or omission is material and knowing
shall be a question of fact for the fact finder.
(5) A finding upon receipt of a complaint by any citizen or upon request
of the Chief of Police of the City of Paterson or his designee that the
location and/or use of a public telephone constitutes a threat to the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of this City.
B. Any hearing authorized under this chapter shall be conducted before
the City Engineer or a designee and shall require written notice to the
§ 452-12 TELEPHONES, PUBLIC § 452-14
452:1011
§ 452-15. Applicability to existing public telephones.
§ 452-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-2-2003 by Ord. No.
03-084]
Any violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to a fine of not less
than $100 and no more than $1,250 and/or imprisonment of up to 90 days.
Each noncomplying public telephone violation will constitute a separate
violation. Each day of said violation shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 455
TRAFFIC SIGNALIZATION SYSTEM
§ 455-1. Tampering and interference prohibited.
No person shall purposely or recklessly tamper, connect, disconnect or
interfere by any means, including but not limited to mechanical or electrical
devices, with any portion of the computerized traffic signalization system
within the City of Paterson, including but not limited to wires, cables,
residential cable television subscriber installations and interconnects of
that system.
permittee, which notice shall be given not less than 10 days prior to the
date scheduled for said hearing. If the City Engineer finds the permittee
in violation of any provisions of this section, the City Engineer may
also require that service from said public telephone be restricted to
outgoing calls only.
A. The owners of existing public telephones shall apply for the permit
acquired hereunder within 30 days from the date this chapter becomes
final. The City of Paterson reserves the right to reject any and all
locations submitted for approval based upon their existing
nonconformance to this chapter.
B. If a permit is not obtained within the time specified herein or if the City
Engineer rejects any application for a permit, the owner shall forthwith
remove said public telephone and all ancillary equipment. If the owner
fails or refuses to remove said public telephone within 10 days from
notification by the City Engineer, the City Engineer or a designee may
cause the public telephone to be removed. Public telephone equipment
removed by the City shall be released to the lawful owner thereof upon
payment of a fee of $500 to the City of Paterson. [Amended 12-2-2003
by Ord. No. 03-084]
C. If no person makes a claim for return of a public telephone and/or
ancillary equipment removed by the City under this section within six
months from the date of removal, it may be disposed of pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-157.
§ 452-14 PATERSON CODE § 455-2
455:1012
§ 455-2. Theft of service.
It shall not be a defense to this chapter that said action resulted from or in
conjunction with a violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:20-8.
§ 455-3. Violations and penalties.185
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof.
Chapter 460
UTILITIES, UNDERGROUND
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 455-2 TRAFFIC SIGNALIZATION SYSTEM § 455-3
455:1013

ARTICLE I
Interference with City-Owned Utilities
[Adopted 10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 15-077]
§ 460-1. Protection and relocation of utilities.
All owners of underground utilities shall be responsible for any and all
costs associated with the protection and/or relocation of their utilities if said
utilities interfere with the City's ability to repair and/or maintain its utilities.
§ 460-2. Repair of damage.
All owners of underground utilities shall be responsible for any and all costs
associated with the repair of any damage done to any City of Paterson utility
caused by the construction and/or relocation of that company's utility.
§ 460-3. Responsibility of owner.
All owners of underground utilities shall promptly, when notified by the
City of a conflict, take the necessary steps to protect and/or relocate their
utilities. Failure by the utility owner to act promptly may result in the City
performing the work and having all associated costs borne by the respective
utility owner(s). This shall also include the costs of any potential relocation
of residents caused by such disturbance.
§ 460-4. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall result in a
revocation of any construction permit(s) currently in place for said utility
owner, and suspension of the issuance of new permits, until the matter is
addressed to the satisfaction of the City.
§ 460-1 TRAFFIC SIGNALIZATION SYSTEM § 460-4
455:1015
Chapter 463
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Taxicabs, autocabs and rented motor
vehicles — See Ch. 449.
§ 463-1. Maintenance of vehicles in unsanitary condition
prohibited.
Any autobus or autocab or taxicab or other vehicle used for public
conveyance or for the transportation of the public for hire which is
maintained in a filthy or unsanitary condition is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and punishable as such.
§ 463-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
Chapter 466
VEHICLES, SEIZURE OF
§ 466-1. Impoundment of motor vehicle.
A. A motor vehicle shall be subject to seizure and impoundment whenever
a police officer has probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used
to facilitate the commission of any acts of prostitution, assignation or
lewdness in violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:34 or any violations of N.J.S.A. 2C:35
as to controlled dangerous substance offenses.
B. Upon seizure of a motor vehicle involved in the aforementioned
offense(s), the Police Department shall:
(1) Provide for the towing and impounding of the vehicle by the City's
authorized towing agent; and
(2) Notify in writing the person determined to be the owner of the
vehicle and any person who is found in control of the vehicle at the
time of the seizure of: the fact of the seizure and impoundment of
the vehicle; the right of the individuals receiving notice to a
preliminary hearing to be held within five days after receipt of the
§ 460-4 PATERSON CODE § 466-1
463:1016
§ 466-2. Hearings.
The City shall set a hearing within five days of seizure (excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays) before a special hearing officer of the City. At
the hearing, the City shall have the burden to show that there is probable
cause to believe that the vehicle is subject to impoundment and seizure. The
formal rules of evidence shall not apply at this hearing, and circumstantial
evidence shall be admissible.
§ 466-3. Administrative fee.
At the hearing related to the seizure of a vehicle involved in violations
of these offenses, the Paterson Police Department will provide to the
defendant or his representative an estimated fee of the reasonable
calculated costs to the law enforcement agency that is conducting this
specific police operation in excess of the greater of 10% of the blue book
value of the vehicle or $1,500, plus towing and storage costs. This fee is
required before the vehicle is released. If, after the hearing, the special
hearing officer determines that there is probable cause to believe that the
motor vehicle is subject to impoundment and continued seizure, he shall
order the continued impoundment of the vehicle unless the owner or his
agent or authorized representatives pays the City the above fee or posts
with the Municipal Court a cash bond in the above estimated amount. If,
after the hearing, there is a finding of no probable cause, the vehicle shall
be released forthwith to the owner or his agent or authorized representative
without the imposition of fees.
notice of seizure (Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays excluded);
and the right to pay a fee of $1,500 or 10% of the blue book value
of the automobile, whichever is greater, to offset the aforesaid
costs of the specific law enforcement operation or operations which
resulted in the seizure.
C. The Department notices to be given pursuant to this section shall be
provided by hand delivery at the time of the seizure and impoundment
of the vehicle to the person in control of the vehicle, or if neither the
owner of record nor the person in control of the vehicle at the time of its
seizure is available to receive such notice, the notice shall be provided
to the owner of record by certified mail, return receipt requested,
within 24 hours of the time of the impoundment, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and legal holidays.
D. This section does not apply and the vehicle is not to be seized or
impounded if the vehicle was stolen at the time it was subject to seizure
and impoundment. However, the owner of the vehicle or his insurance
company shall be responsible for towing and storage fees.
A. Within five days of the date the motor vehicle is seized or impounded,
the City shall notify the owner of record by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of the date, time and location of a final hearing to be
conducted pursuant to this subsection. The owner of record will also be
§ 466-1 VEHICLES, SEIZURE OF § 466-3
466:1017
§ 466-4. Return of vehicle.
Except as provided otherwise in § 466-3, an impounded vehicle shall be
released to its owner of record or to the person who is legally entitled to
possess the vehicle upon his payment to the City of the respective fees
recited above. If the fees are not paid, no vehicle will be released until all
charges have been completely disposed.
§ 466-5. Appeal.
The owner of a motor vehicle that has been the subject of a seizure and
impoundment pursuant to § 466-1, 466-2 or 466-3, or the City, may appeal
the final ruling or decision of the special hearing officer to the New Jersey
Superior Court, Passaic County vicinage, within 30 days of the date of the
final order being appealed. The City may charge the appellant a reasonable
fee for preparation of the record for purposes of making the appeal.
Chapter 473
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Commission — See Ch. 95. Sewers — See Ch. 407.
notified of his right to pay the fee of the greater of 10% of the blue book
value of the vehicle or $1,500, plus towing and storage costs, in lieu of
a final hearing whereupon the auto will be returned.
B. A final hearing shall be scheduled and held no later than 30 days after
the date that the vehicle was seized and impounded. If the owner or
agent appears, the City shall have the burden to show by a
preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used as set forth in
§ 466-1A above.
C. If, after a hearing, it is determined that the vehicle was towed and
impounded lawfully, the special hearing officer shall enter an order
fording the owner of record civilly liable to the City for the fees
mentioned above and forfeiture of the vehicle. If, after a hearing, a
finding is made that the City did not meet its burden of proof, or that the
exception of § 466-1D above, applies, the vehicle shall be released to
the owner along with any cash bond posted or any other amounts paid.
D. If the driver/owner refuses to pay the respective costs referred to
above, the City may hold the vehicle until the charges pending against
the defendant (driver/owner) are resolved. In the event that the
defendant is found not guilty, he or she will have to pay no penalty. If the
fee is not paid or the vehicle is not retrieved within 180 days from the
determination, the vehicle will be deemed abandoned and may be sold
by the City at public auction.
§ 466-3 PATERSON CODE § 466-5
473:1018
ARTICLE I
Water Emergencies
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 25, Art. 1, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 473-1. Authority to proclaim emergency and prescribe
regulations.
Whenever the amount of water impounded in the storage reservoirs
supplying users of water in the city has fallen below fifty percent (50%) of
full storage capacity or whenever the engineer in charge of water being
supplied to the city shall certify that an emergency exists in such water
supply or the water of the Passaic River is at a low ebb, the Mayor may,
for the protection, health, safety and general welfare of the citizens and
residents of the city, proclaim the existence of a water emergency and
prescribe regulations to:
§ 473-2. Binding force of proclamation and regulations; compliance
required.
The proclamation of the emergency shall be conclusive of the fact of the
existence of such emergency and shall be binding upon all persons and
users upon the filing of the same in the office of the City Clerk and the
publication thereof at least once in each of the daily newspapers published
and circulating in the city. The regulations set forth in the proclamation
and any subsequent regulations made and published as aforesaid, upon
filing thereof in the office of the City Clerk, shall be deemed to have the
force and effect of regulations adopted under the authority of this Article,
the same as if specifically incorporated and set forth herein. Every owner,
lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises connected with the
city water supply and every user thereof under any contract, ordinance or
statute shall, upon the proclamation and promulgation of the regulations
as aforesaid, become bound thereby and by the provisions of this Article
and shall conform thereto and comply therewith in the use of water and
the maintenance of the water service connections and equipment for the
purposes thereof.
§ 473-3. Duties to prevent waste of water.
A. Prohibit the use of water from the city supply for any purpose not
necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
B. Allocate and prorate the available water supplies.
C. Reduce consumption by users.
D. Prevent waste for the period of duration of such emergency.
A. Every owner of buildings and premises connected with city water
supply shall:
§ 473-1 WATER § 473-3
473:1019
§ 473-4. Inspections.
Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in charge of any
building or premises connected with the city water supply shall admit
thereto the authorized agents and employees of the city for the purpose of
inspecting the water service pipes, fixtures and connections.
§ 473-5. Repairs by city; owner to pay cost.
Whenever an owner shall fail or refuse to make repairs so as to prevent the
waste of water, then the city shall have the power to make such repairs and
to charge the cost thereof to the owner in the same manner as other water
charges are made, as provided by statute.
§ 473-6. Violations and penalties.187
Any person who violates any provision of this Article or any of the
regulations provided for therein shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished
by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.), by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of community
service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination thereof. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which
a violation occurs or continues.
(1) Maintain or cause to be maintained the water service pipes,
fixtures and connections in good order and repair in order to
ensure that there shall be no waste of water.
(2) Forthwith make or cause to be made necessary repairs to prevent
the waste of water.
B. Every lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises
connected with the city water supply shall:
(1) Immediately notify the owner or his agent of any defective water
service pipes, fixtures or connections whereby water is being
wasted.
(2) Immediately notify the Department of Public Works or Police
Division of any waste occurring by reason of defective water
service pipes, fixtures or connections.186
C. Every owner and user of water shall, during the period of a water
emergency, be chargeable with notice of any waste water due to
defective water service pipes, fixtures or connections and of the
regulations promulgated under the proclamation.
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 473-3 PATERSON CODE § 473-6
473:1020
ARTICLE II
Interference With Water System
[Adopted 12-18-1979 by Ord. No. 79-111 as Ch. 25, Art. 2, of the
1979 Revised General Ordinances of Paterson]
§ 473-7. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WATER SYSTEM — Any fire hydrant, gate valve or appurtenance belonging
to or forming part of the publicly owned water distribution system which is
operated by Passaic Valley Water Commission, pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:62-108 et seq.
§ 473-8. Prohibited acts.
No person shall:
§ 473-9. Exemptions.
This Article shall not be construed to apply to any duly authorized employee
of the city who shall:
A. At any time or in any manner, open or operate any fire hydrant, gate
valve or other appurtenance of the water system or tamper with or
damage any part of the water system or destroy or cause to be removed
any part of the water system.
B. Have in his possession or on his person any hydrant or hydrant part
belonging to Passaic Valley Water Commission.
C. Open or operate, turn on, turn off, interfere with, attach any pipe or
hose to or connect anything with any fire hydrant, gate valve or other
appurtenance of the water system or in any manner molest or interfere
with the same.
A. Open or operate any fire hydrant, gate valve or other appurtenance of
the water system or remove any part of the water system.
B. Have in his possession or on his person any hydrant or hydrant part
belonging to Passaic Valley Water Commission.
C. Turn on, turn off, attach any pipe or hose to or connect anything with
any fire hydrant, gate valve or other appurtenance of the water system.
D. Remove any part or parts of the fire hydrant, gate valve or other
appurtenance of the water system in the performance of his duties as
such employee.
§ 473-7 WATER § 473-10
473:1021
§ 473-10. Violations and penalties.188
Any person who violates any provision of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.),
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days or by a period of
community service for not more than ninety (90) days, or any combination
thereof. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues.
188. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I.
§ 473-10 PATERSON CODE § 473-10
473:1022
Chapter 474
NEWSRACKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cigarette vending machines — See Ch. 179.
Food and beverage vending machines — See
Ch. 227.
Food vending vehicles — See Ch. 243.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
§ 474-1. Intent and purpose.
§ 474-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates:
BLOCK — One side of a street between two consecutive intersecting streets.
DISTRIBUTOR — The person responsible for placing and maintaining a
newsrack on private property or in a public right-of-way.
NEWSRACK — Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit
or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers, other news periodicals, or other printed matter.
PARKING LOT — Any public or private area, paved or unpaved, designated
for the purpose of providing parking to the public.
A. Intent and purpose. The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter
contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of
securing and promoting the public health, morals and general welfare
of persons in the City of Paterson in their use of private property and
public rights-of-way through the regulation of placement, appearance,
number, size and servicing of newsracks on private property and the
public rights-of-way so as to:
(1) Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience.
(2) Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic, including ingress to or egress from any place of
business or from the street to the sidewalk.
(3) Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of
commercial stores, sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs and
signals, hydrants, mailboxes and similar appurtenances and access
to locations used for public transportation purposes.
B. Preservation of constitutional rights. It is not the intent of this chapter
to in any way discriminate against, regulate or interfere with the
publication, circulation, distribution or dissemination of any printed
material that is constitutionally protected.
§ 473-10 NEWSRACKS § 474-2
474:1023
PARKWAY — The area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street,
and where there is no sidewalk, the area between the edge of the roadway
and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area
within a roadway that is not open to vehicular travel.
PERSON — Any person or persons or entity, including, but not limited to, a
corporation, partnership, unincorporated association or joint venture.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, including the shoulders thereto.
SIDEWALK — Any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians,
whether public or private.
STREET — All the area dedicated to public use for public street purposes
and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and
sidewalks.
§ 474-3. Location, placement and number of newsracks.
Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon or on any portion of
private property or a public right-of-way, including on the parking lots,
parkways, sidewalks, streets or roadways, or which projects onto, into or
over any part of a public right-of-way, shall be located in accordance with
the following provisions of this section:
A. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or
over any part of the roadway of any public street or which rests wholly
or in part upon, along or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
B. No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any
fixture located in the public right-of-way, except to other newsracks.
C. No more than three newsracks may be placed next to each other,
provided that no group of newsracks shall extend for a distance of more
than nine feet along a curb, sidewalk, parking lot, street, roadway or
otherwise, whether on public or private property, and a space of not less
than 18 inches shall separate each group of newsracks.
D. No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
(2) Within the curbed portion of the curb return of any unmarked
crosswalk.
(3) Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or
other emergency facility.
(4) Within three feet of any driveway, whether public or private.
(5) Within 10 feet to the rear of any sign or other demarcation marking
the beginning of a designated bus stop.
§ 474-2 PATERSON CODE § 474-3
474:1024
§ 474-4. Standards for maintenance and installation.
§ 474-5. Violations and penalties.
Violators are subject to a penalty of imprisonment for not more than 90
days, by a fine not exceeding $2,000, or by a period of community service
for not more than 90 days, or any combination thereof.
(6) Within three feet of any bus bench, except where the bench is
within a bus shelter, in which event this restriction shall not apply,
provided that the news dispenser is not placed within such bus
shelter.
(7) Within the public sidewalk curb ramp designed to accommodate
persons with disabilities or along the curbline within five feet of any
parking spot for disabled persons.
(8) Where the placement of the newspaper box would reduce the width
of the sidewalk to less than three feet.
A. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in
the event that the person is unable to receive the paid-for publication.
The coin-return mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.
B. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name
and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working
telephone service to call to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in
the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism or to give the
notices provided for in this chapter.
C. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all limes. Specifically, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so
that:
(1) It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;
(2) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in
the visible painted areas thereof;
(3) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon;
(4) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration;
(5) The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free
of tears, peeling or fading; and
(6) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
§ 474-3 NEWSRACKS § 474-5
474:1025
Chapter 483
ZONING AND LAND DEVELOPMENT

City of Paterson
Municipal Code: Chapter 483
Zoning and Land Development
April 2016
This document contains Chapter 483 of the Municipal Code of the City of Paterson
Articles I, II, III, and IV of this Chapter within this book have been taken from the original drafting of the
code in 2006. While efforts have been made to include all subsequent amendments to the ordinance,
the content of this document in regards to Articles I, II, III, and IV have not been verified to be
completely up to date. To verify the content of any of these sections, please review all relevant
ordinances adopted by the City Council, as amendments to these chapters, in the Office of the City
Clerk.
Article V (Zoning), as well as the zoning map, schedule of use regulations, and schedule of bulk
standards, of this book is a true copy of the amendments to the City’s Zoning Ordinance as adopted by
the City Council at a regular meeting on February 9, 2016

City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance General Provisions
TOC I
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
100-1 SHORT TITLE 1
100-2 STATUTORY AUTHORITY; PURPOSE 1
100-3 INTERPRETATION 2
100-4 SEVERABILITY 3
100-5 WORD USAGE 3
100-6 DEFINITION OF TERMS 3
ARTICLE II: PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
200-1 PLANNING BOARD 30
200-1.1 Establishment of the Planning Board 30
200-1.2 Powers, Duties, and Jurisdiction of the Planning Board 35
200-2 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 37
200-2.1 Establishment of the Zoning Board of Adjustment 37
200-2.2 Powers, Duties, and Jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment 41
200-2.3 Appeals 44
ARTICLE III: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
300-1 APPLICATION FOR A ZONING PERMIT, CONSTRUCTION PERMIT, AND 45
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
300-1.1 Zoning Permit, Construction Permit, and Certificate of Occupancy 45
300-1.2 Application Materials 45
300-1.3 Decision by Zoning Officer 45
300-2 REVIEWS BY APPROVING AGENCIES 46
300-2.1 Further Application 46
300-2.2 Direct Application 47
300-2.3 Pre-Submission Conference 47
300-2.4 Application Material 47
300-2.5 Proof of Payment of Taxes Required 48
300-2.6 Application Process 49
300-2.7 Zoning Permits 51
300-3 FEES 51
300-3.1 Fee Schedule 51
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance General Provisions
TOC II
300-3.2 Fee Collection 54
300-3.3 Additional Fees 54
300-3.4 Escrow Deposits for Development Applications 54
300-4 TIME LIMITS AND SCHEDULES 58
300-4.1 Time for Action by Planning Board on Site Plan, Subdivision, Conditional 58
Use, and General Development Plan Applications
300-4.2 Time for Action by the Zoning Board of Adjustment 59
300-4.3 Failure to Act; Extension of Public Hearing 60
300-4.4 Other Review Concurrent 60
300-4.5 Decisions 60
300-4.6 Effect of Approvals and Expiration of Approvals 61
300-4.7 Conformity with Application 65
300-5 PUBLIC HEARING AND PUBLIC NOTICE 65
300-5.1 New Jersey Open Public Meeting Law 65
300-5.2 Hearing Required 65
300-5.3 Public Notice 66
300-6 SITE PLAN REVIEW 68
300-6.1 Actions Requiring Site Plan Approval 68
300-6.2 Exemption from Site Plan Approval 68
300-6.3 Final Approval Required Prior to Issuance of a Building Permit 69
300-6.4 Non-Compliance 69
300-6.5 Requirements for Site Plan Approval 69
300-7 SUBDIVISION REVIEW 71
300-7.1 Review Standards 71
300-7.2 Improvements 73
300-7.3 Violations, Lien 74
300-8 VARIANCES 75
300-8.1 Authority for Variances 75
300-8.2 Jurisdiction 75
300-8.3 Section (d) Variances 75
300-8.4 Conditions of Approval 75
300-9 CONDITIONAL USE 76
300-9.1 Requirement 76
300-9.2 Approving Agency 76
300-10 APPLICATION FOR CHANGES IN ZONING MAP 76
300-10.1 Procedure for Amendment 76
300-11 FLOOD CONTROL REVIEW 76
300-11.1 Application for Approval 76
300-11.2 Determinations by the City Review Agency 77
300-11.3 Requirements 78
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance General Provisions
TOC III
300-11.4 Conditions Attached to Permits 78
300-12 SOIL EROSION CONTROL REVIEW 79
300-12.1 Statutory Authorization 79
300-12.2 Requirements 80
300-13 HISTORIC PRESERVATION REVIEW 81
300-13.1 Title 81
300-13.2 Definitions 81
300-13.3 Designation of Historic Preservation Professional 86
300-13.4 Paterson Register of Municipal Historic Places 86
300-13.5 Designation of Historic Sites, Landmarks, Objects, and Districts 86
300-13.6 Historic Marker Program 91
300-13.7 Historic Preservation Commission 92
300-13.8 Government Consultation 97
300-13.9 Actions Requiring Review; Permits Required 98
300-13.10 Actions Not Requiring Review 99
300-13.11 Emergency Repairs 99
300-13.12 Informal Review 100
300-13.13 Application Procedures 100
300-13.14 Commission Review of Development and Zoning Applications 101
300-13.15 Commission Review of Application for Permits 102
300-13.16 Standards for Review 103
300-13.17 Local Guidelines 108
300-13.18 Effect of Project Approval or Denial; Appeals 108
300-13.19 Enforcement 109
300-13.20 Preventive Maintenance 110
300-13.21 Municipal Responsibility 110
300-13.22 Rules of Interpretation 111
300-13.23 Injunctive Relief 111
300-14 PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES 111
300-14.1 Performance Guarantees 111
300-14.2 Maintenance Guarantees 114
300-14.3 Development in Stages 114
300-14.4 Utilities or Improvements of Other Governmental Agencies or Public 114
Utilities
300-14.5 Acceptance of Guarantee 114
300-15 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 115
300-15.1 Administration 115
300-15.2 Action Against Violators 115
300-15.3 Penalty 115
ARTICLE IV: DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDELINES
400-1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY 116
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance General Provisions
TOC IV
400-2 DESIGN STANDARDS 116
400-2.1 General Residential Design Standards 116
400-2.2 General Non-Residential Design Standards 119
400-2.3 Streetscape Design Standards 121
400-2.4 Landscape Design 122
400-2.5 Lighting Design 123
400-2.6 Design Standards for Signs 125
400-2.7 Off-Street Parking, Loading, Circulation, and Access Design Standards 126
400-2.8 Fences, Walls, and Screens 129
400-2.9 Public or Common Private Open Space Design Standards 130
400-2.10 Recycling Facilities for New Multi-Family Developments 130
400-2.11 Streets 131
400-2.12 Blocks 132
400-2.13 Lots 132
400-2.14 Public Use and Service Areas 133
ARTICLE V: ZONING
500-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 134
500-1.1 Zoning Map 134
500-1.2 District Boundaries 135
500-2 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 135
500-2.1 Purpose and Intent of Zoning Districts 135
500-2.2 Schedule of Permitted Principal, Accessory, and Conditional Uses 140
500-2.3 Schedule of Bulk and Dimensional Requirements 140
500-2.4 Relation to Redevelopment/Urban Renewal Plans 140
500-2.5 Design Standards for the IT District 140
500-3 GENERAL REGULATIONS 142
500-3.1 Conformity Required 142
500-3.2 Yard Regulations 142
500-3.3 Lot Frontage 144
500-3.4 Principal Buildings 144
500-3.5 Height Exceptions 144
500-3.6 Accessory Structures and Uses 145
500-3.7 Structures Above Roof Line. 150
500-3.8 Usable Open Space. 150
500-3.9 Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit. 150
500-3.10 Distance Between Buildings. 150
500-3.11 Building Length. 151
500-3.12 Floor Area Premiums. 151
500-3.13 Fences, Walls and Screens. 153
500-3.14 Temporary Use. 154
500-3.15 Basement and Cellar Apartments. 154
500-3.16 Subdivision of Lots. 154
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance General Provisions
TOC V
500-3.17 Continuance. 154
500-3.18 Requirements Applicable to All Development in the GFH District. 155
500-3.19 Access Requirement for Two-Family Dwellings. 155
500-3.20 Outdoor Storage. 155
500-4 CERTAIN PERMITTED USES 156
500-4.1 Mixed Residential and Commercial Uses 156
500-4.2 Community Residences and Community Shelters Housing not More than 157
15 Residents
500-4.3 Cemeteries. 157
500-4.4 Residential Uses in the B-1 and B-2 157
500-4.5 Tailoring Related Uses. 157
500-4.6 Dry Cleaning Establishments and Laundromats. 158
500-4.7 Drive-Through Banks. 158
500-4.8 Wholesaling Establishments. 158
500-4.9 Warehousing and Storage. 158
500-4.10 Public Utility Distribution Systems. 158
500-4.11 Temporary Offices. 159
500-4.12 Loft Dwellings and Joint Living-Working Quarters for Artists. 159
500-4.13 Light Industrial Uses. 159
500-4.14 Low and High-Rise Apartment Buildings in the GFH District 159
500-4.15 Certain Community Retail Businesses Permitted in the GFH District. 160
500-4.16 Commercial Establishments in the B-1 and B-2 160
500-4.17 Mixed Use Commercial Development 160
500-4.18 Child Care Centers in Non-Residential Districts 163
500-5 CONDITIONAL USES 163
500-5.1 General Requirements. 163
500-5.2 Hospitals in Residential Districts. 164
500-5.3 Places of Worship in Residential Districts. 164
500-5.4 Charitable Institutions in Residential Districts. 165
500-5.5 Public Recreation Establishments, Public Parks and Playgrounds in 165
Residential Districts
500-5.6 Libraries, Museums or Art Galleries in Residential Districts. 165
500-5.7 Schools in Residential Districts. 165
500-5.8 Community Residences and Community Shelters Housing Greater than 166
15 Persons.
500-5.9 Child Care Centers in Residential Districts. 166
500-5.10 Satellite Dishes Over 1 Meter in Diameter 167
500-5.11 Health Centers, Clinics, Assisted Living Facilities, Nursing Homes 169
500-5.12 Mortuaries and Funeral Homes. 169
500-5.13 Child Care Centers in Non-Residential Districts. 169
500-5.14 Professional Offices in the R-3 and R-4 170
500-5.15 Governmental Offices in the R-3 and R-4 170
500-5.16 Store Front Social Club or Fraternal Lodges. 170
500-5.17 Private Clubs. 170
500-5.18 Lodges. 171
500-5.19 Recreational Clubs. 171
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance General Provisions
TOC VI
500-5.20 Stand-Alone Convenience Stores. 171
500-5.21 Drive-Through Restaurants. 172
500-5.22 Commercial Recreational and Amusement Establishments. 172
500-5.23 Car Washing Establishments. 172
500-5.24 Gasoline Filling Stations. 173
500-5.25 Automobile Body Repair Facilities and Automobile Repair-Specialized 175
Services Facilities
500-5.26 Hospitals, Medical Testing Laboratories, Medical Supply Distributors, 176
Medical Offices, Pharmacies, Florists, and Professional Offices in the H-1 District
500-5.27 Sexually-Oriented Businesses. 176
500-5.28 Recycling Facilities. 177
500-5.29 Truck Terminals. 178
500-5.30 Motor Vehicle Junk Yards. 179
500-5.31 Junk Yards 179
500-5.32 Heavy Industrial Uses. 180
500-5.33 Wireless Telecommunication Services 180
500-5.34. Home Businesses. 187
500-5.35. Tattoo, Body Piercing and Skin Art Studios 188
500-5.36 Go-Go Bar. 189
500-5.37 Large-Scale Retail Facilities in the I-2 District 190
500-5.38 Mid-Scale Retail Facilities in the I-2 District 190
500-5.39 Liquor Store 191
500-5.40 Bars and Taverns 191
500-5.41 Neighborhood Retail in the R-3 District 192
500-5.42 Low Rise Housing in the B-4 District 192
500-5.43 Automobile Dismantling 192
500-5.44 Public Utilities in Residential Districts 193
500-5.45 Commercial Uses in the R/C-3 District 193
500-6 NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS 193
500-6.1 Intent. 193
500-6.2 Non-Conforming Lots of Record. 194
500-6.3 Non-Conforming Uses of Land, or Structure 194
500-6.4 Structures Non-Conforming for Reasons Other Than Use. 195
500-6.5 Repairs and Maintenance. 195
500-7 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 196
500-7.1 General Provisions for Off-Street Parking. 196
500-7.2 Supplementary Requirements for Off-Street Parking. 199
500-7.3 Schedule of Parking Space Regulations. 199
500-7.4 Off-Street Loading and Unloading. 203
500-8 SIGN REGULATIONS 204
500-8.1 Sign Permit Required. 204
500-8.2 Exempted Signs. 204
500-8.3 Signs Prohibited in all Districts. 205
500-8.4 Signs Permitted in all Districts. 206
500-8.5 Signs Permitted in all Residential Districts. 206
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance General Provisions
TOC VII
500-8.6 Signs Permitted in all Non-Residential Districts. 207
500-8.7 Discontinued Signs. 208
500-8.8 Non-Conforming Signs. 208
500-8.9 Removal of Unsafe Signs. 209
500-9 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 209
500-9.1 PUID Planned Unit Industrial Development District. 209
500-10 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 213
500-10.1 Intent and Applicability. 213
500-10.2 Noise. 214
500-10.3 Vibration. 214
500-10.4 Air Pollution. 214
500-10.5 Waste. 215
500-10.6 Heat Hazards. 215
500-10.7 Fire and Explosion Hazards. 216
500-10.8 Humidity and Glare. 216
500-11 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 216
500-11.1 Statutory Authorization 216
500-11.2 Findings of Facts. 216
500-11.3 Statement of Purpose. 217
500-11.4 Method of Reducing Flood Losses. 217
500-11.5 Definitions. 218
500-11.6 General Provisions. 220
500-11.7 Procedures. 221
500-11.8 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction. 225
500-11.9 Flood Hazard Area. 227
APPENDICES
Schedule of Permitted Uses – Residential Districts
Schedule of Permitted Uses – Non-Residential Districts
Schedule of Bulk and Dimensional Requirements
Schedule of Permitted Signs – Non-Residential Districts
Zoning Map
Street Functional Classification Map

1
ARTICLE I GENERAL PROVISIONS
§100-1 SHORT TITLE
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning and Land Development Ordinance of the
City of Paterson, New Jersey."
§100-2 STATUTORY AUTHORITY; PURPOSE
This Chapter is adopted pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (MLUL), (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), in
order to promote and protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. It is the purpose and
intent of this ordinance to effectuate the purposes of that act as they apply to the City of Paterson. The
purposes of this Chapter are as follows:
A. To plan and guide the appropriate use or development of all land in a manner that will promote
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare by means including the following:
1. By regulating the location of buildings and establishing standards of development;
establishing setback lines of buildings designed for residential, commercial, industrial,
office or other uses and by fixing reasonable standards to which buildings or structures
shall conform.
2. By prohibiting incompatible uses; and prohibiting uses, buildings or structures that are
incompatible with the character of development of the permitted uses within specified
zoning districts and surrounding areas.
3. By regulating alterations of existing buildings; and preventing such additions to and
alterations or remodeling of existing buildings or structures as would not comply with
the restrictions and limitations imposed hereunder.
4. By conserving the value of land and buildings throughout the City.
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and man-made disasters.
C. To provide adequate light, air, and open space.
D. To ensure that the development of the municipality does not conflict with the development and
general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the county and state as a whole.
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and concentrations that will
contribute to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities and regions and the
preservation of the environment.
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by the coordination of
public development and land use policies.
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of uses and open space, both
public and private, according to their respective environmental requirements.
2
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes that will promote the free flow of
traffic while' discouraging locations of such facilities and routes that result in congestion or
blight.
I. To promote a desirable visual environment through creative development techniques and good
civic design and arrangements.
J. To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural resources and to prevent the
degradation of the environment through improper use of land.
K. To encourage planned development that incorporates the best features of design and relates
the type, design and layout of various types of development to particular sites.
L. To encourage coordination of the various public and private procedures and activities shaping
land development, with a view to lessening the cost of such development and to the more
efficient use of land.
M. To control flooding, soil erosion and sedimentation precipitated by development and caused by
water runoff, soil disturbances, destruction or removal of ground cover or plant life, grading or
filling.
N. To provide, within the community's resources, for the future housing needs of the citizens of the
City of Paterson.
O. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction.
P. To promote utilization of renewable energy sources.
Q. To promote the maximum practicable recovery and recycling of recyclable materials from
municipal solid waste through the use of planning practices designed to incorporate the State
Recycling Plan goals and to compliment municipal recycling programs.
§100-3 INTERPRETATION
A. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be considered as minimum provisions.
B. Where the provisions of this Ordinance impose greater restrictions than those imposed by any
other law, ordinance, regulation or resolution, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
Where the provisions of any other law, ordinance, regulation or resolution impose a greater
restriction than this Ordinance, the provisions of such other law, ordinance, regulation or
resolution shall control.
C. The provisions and definitions of the Municipal Land Use Law shall guide the interpretation,
administration and enforcement of this ordinance. Matters not regulated herein shall be
governed by applicable provisions of the MLUL. In the event of any conflict between the
provisions of this ordinance and the MLUL, the MLUL shall control.
D. The requirements of this Ordinance shall be held paramount to any less restrictive provisions or
requirements established by deed restriction, private covenant or agreement. Without limiting
3
the foregoing, where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction or limitation upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or lot coverage, or requires greater lot
areas or larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are required by covenants or restrictions
imposed by deed or private agreement, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.
§100-4 SEVERABILITY
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid,
such adjudication shall apply only to the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged
and the remainder of this ordinance shall be deemed valid and effective.
§100-5 WORD USAGE
For the purposes of this Ordinance:
A. The term "shall" shall indicate a mandatory requirement, and the term "may" shall indicate a
permissive action.
B. Whenever a term is used in this ordinance that is defined in the Municipal Land Use Law (MLUL),
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.), as amended from time to time, such term shall have the meaning set
forth in the definition of such term found in said statute, unless a contrary intention is clearly
expressed from the context of this Chapter.
C. Any term that is not defined shall be understood in the context of standard usage.
D. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
E. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number; and the plural, singular.
F. The word "person" shall include a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation, as well as an individual.
G. The word "used" or "occupied" shall include the words "intended, designed, or arranged to be
used or occupied".
H. Whenever the term "structure" is used, it shall be construed to mean and include the term
"building."
I. The words "zone" and "district" are synonymous.
§100-6. DEFINITION OF TERMS.
The following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth, except where otherwise specifically
indicated. Words and terms not defined shall have the meaning indicated by Webster's Third New
4
International Dictionary of the English Language, unabridged (or the latest edition). Terms defined
herein are italicized in the text of the Ordinance.
ABANDONMENT : To cease or discontinue a use or activity without intent to resume, but excluding
temporary or short term interruptions to a use or activity.
ACCESSORY BUILDING : A building subordinate to the main building on a lot and used for purposes
customarily incidental to those of the main building. When an accessory building is attached in a
substantial manner by a wall or roof to a principal building or structure, it shall be considered a part
thereof.
ACCESSORY USE : A use of land or of a building or structure, or portion thereof, that is customarily
incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building conducted on a lot, and located on
the same lot as the principal use.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER : The City of Paterson Zoning Officer or such other individual designated by
the City Council.
ADULT MEDICAL DAY CARE: A facility that provides medical services, meals, and/or supervision for the
frail or elderly for a limited time during each day, but does not include 24-hour supervision. This may
include provisions for recreational activities or transportation for the frail or elderly.
ALLEY : A public or private way to the rear or side of property, which normally affords a secondary
means of access to abutting property. Frontage on any alley shall not be construed as satisfying the
requirements related to frontage on a dedicated street.
ALTERATION : As applied to a building or structure, an alteration is a change or rearrangement in the
structural parts or in the means of egress; or an enlargement or reduction, whether by extending on a
side or by increasing or decreasing in height; or the moving from one location or position to another.
ANTENNA : Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices, including but not limited
to satellite dish earth stations and TV/Radio antennas, used for the transmission or reception of
television, radio, microwave, satellite, or similar signals.
APPLICANT : An individual or entity submitting an application for development; where the applicant is
not the owner of the subject property, the developer and owner shall sign the application.
APPROVING AGENCY : The appropriate City agency given the authority under the New Jersey Municipal
Land Use Law to review and approve or deny a proposed Land Use Development, and includes the
Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Paterson, New Jersey.
ARTIST : A person who is regularly engaged on a professional basis in the fine arts such as painting and
sculpture, in the performing or creative arts including choreography and film making, or the composition
of music.
5
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY : Residence for the frail elderly that provides rooms, meals, personal care, and
supervision of self-administered medication and which may provide other services such as recreational
activities, financial services, and transportation.
AUTOMOBILE BODY REPAIR FACILITY : Any building or land area or portion thereof, used or intended to
be used for the purposes of repairing, removing, or installing integral component parts of an engine,
power train, chassis, or body of any automobile damaged as a result of a collision. The facility shall not
dispense gasoline for retail or wholesale purposes, nor shall it include the sale of junked automotive
equipment, parts or inoperable motor vehicles, nor shall it include or be part of an auto sales
establishment or dealership.
AUTOMOBILE DISMANTLING FACILITY : Any establishment or place of business which is maintained,
used, or operated for the primary purpose of storing, keeping, buying, or selling dismantled motor
vehicles, motorparts, or both.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SERVICES : Any building, land area or other premises or portion thereof, used or
intended to be used for the purposes of rendering specialized services associated with the operation of
automobiles, including, but not limited to: muffler repair and replacement; brake repair and
replacement; tune-ups; re-wiring; automobile lubrication and oil changes; transmission repair and
replacement; gasoline sales; auto glass installation and replacement, alternator and starter repair and
replacement; automobile detailing; and engine repair and replacement. Such uses shall not include
those uses that would qualify as automobile body repair facilities, as defined herein, nor shall such uses
dispense gasoline for retail or wholesale purposes
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD : See Junkyard.
BANK : A business establishment in which money is kept for savings or commercial purposes or is
invested, supplied for loans, or exchanged.
BANK, DRIVE-THROUGH : A business establishment in which money is kept for savings or commercial
purposes or is invested, supplied for loans, or exchanged, and which provides for customers to be
serviced through drive-through windows accessed via a vehicular circulation system on the property of
the establishment.
BAR : Any premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for consumption on the premises,
exclusive of establishments otherwise defined herein.
BASEMENT : That portion of a building which is partly below and partly above grade, and having at least
one-half (1/2) its height and more than 50% of its cubic volume above grade.
BED AND BREAKFAST : An owner-occupied single-family residence providing short-term lodging and
meals for travelers during visits to the City of Paterson. Any home used for such a purpose shall be
licensed by the City of Paterson and shall meet all local and state codes for health, safety, and zoning.
Any such uses shall be subject to regular inspection as provided in the Code of the City of Paterson.
6
BILLBOARD : A sign, freestanding or attached to a building or structure, of any size that directs attention
to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment sold or offered elsewhere than upon the premises
where such sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
BOARDING OR ROOMING HOUSE : Any dwelling in which 2 or more rooms or more than 5 persons rent
with or without meals exclusive of the family as defined herein.
BODY PIERCING & SKIN ART STUDIO : Any establishment where a body piercing artist conducts the
business of piercing the skin or other parts of the body.
BREW PUB : an establishment licensed to brew any malt alcoholic beverages, operated in conjunction
with a restaurant regularly and principally used for the purpose of providing meals to its customers and
having adequate kitchen and dining room facilities, located immediately adjoining the premises licensed
to brew malt alcoholic beverages as a restricted brewery.
BUFFER STRIP : Open spaces, landscaped area, fences, walls, berms or any combination thereof used to
physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to shield or block noise, lights or
nuisances.
BUILDING : Any covered structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals,
chattels, or movable property of any kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land. Such building
includes decks, open porches, open breezeways, and other roofed areas.
BUILDING AREA : The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal
building and all necessary buildings exclusive of steps. All dimensions shall be measured between the
exterior faces of walls.
BUILDING HEIGHT : The vertical distance from the average natural grade of the top of the highest roof
beams of a flat roof, or to the average level of the highest gable or slope of a hip roof. When a building
faces on more than one (1) street, the height shall be measured from the average of the natural grades
at the center of each street front.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL : A building in which the principal use of a lot is conducted.
BULK: A term used to indicate, but not be limited to, the size, setbacks, and location of buildings
BUSINESS SERVICES : Businesses primarily engaged in rendering services to business establishments on a
fee or contract basis such as: advertising and mailing; sign production; parking and crating services;
moving services; building services such as floor cleaning, electrical, heating, ventilation and air
conditioning, masonry, painting, plumbing and roofing; maintenance; printing, publishing or lithography;
linen, towel, diaper and other personal supply service; employment services; management services;
protective services; and commercial equipment rental and leasing.
7
CAR WASHING ESTABLISHMENT : An establishment where automobiles are washed as the principal use
on a lot, whether manually or through automatic processes, and which includes the interior cleaning and
treatments commonly referred to as "detailing".
CELLAR : That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade, and having at least onehalf
(1/2) its height and more than 50% of its cubic volume below grade.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY : A certificate issued by the Division of Community Improvements which
permits the use of property in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, and all applicable
governmental laws, ordinances and regulations.
CHANNEL : A water course with a definite bed and banks which confine or conduct continuously or
intermittently flowing water. (If in a riverine situation, a watercourse should be altered or relocated,
adjacent communities, appropriate state agencies, and the federal insurance administrator shall be
notified. Assurance will be given that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion
of the watercourse is maintained).
CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS : An organization, association, corporation, or other entity formed or
maintained for the purpose of performing or contributing to the performance of charitable, benevolent,
philanthropic, or goodwill acts or a portion thereof for the benefit of the public in general and not for
profit, gain or private advantage.
CHILD CARE CENTER : An establishment providing for the care, supervision, and protection of children
that is licensed by the State of New Jersey pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 492 (C. 30:5B-1 et seq.).
CIRCULATION : systems, structures and physical improvements for the movement of people, goods,
water, air, sewage or power by such means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways,
pipes, and conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals, stations,
warehouses, and other storage buildings or transshipment points.
CITY, THE : City of Paterson, New Jersey.
CITY PLANNING DIRECTOR : The Director of the Division of Planning and Zoning.
CLINIC, OUT-PATIENT : A professional office where the licensed services of more than 1 medical
practitioner can be obtained and where patients are examined or treated on an outpatient basis and
where no overnight accommodations are provided; and which complies with all applicable federal, state
and local laws, statutes and regulations.
CLINIC, IN-PATIENT : A facility where the licensed services of more than 1 medical practitioner can be
obtained, including persons treated on an in-patient basis for drug and alcohol abuse; where overnight
accommodations are provided; and which complies with all applicable federal, state, and local laws,
statutes and regulations.
8
CLUB, PRIVATE : A non-profit association of persons who are bonafide members paying annual dues,
which owns, hires, or leases a building or portion thereof; the use of such premises being restricted to
members or their guests.
CLUB, RECREATIONAL : A non-profit association of persons, who are bonafide members paying annual
dues, which owns, hires, or leases land or buildings or portions thereof, the use of such premises being
restricted primarily to the principal use, which is a generally recognized sport or recreational activity
serving primarily the neighborhood.
CO-LOCATION : The use of the same structure or telecommunications tower to carry two or more
antennas for the provision of wireless services by two or more entities.
COMMISSION, THE : The Historic Preservation Commission of the City of Paterson, New Jersey
established by City Ordinance.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED OR MENTALLY ILL PERSONS : Any
community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977, C. 448 (C.30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food,
shelter and personal guidance, under such supervision as required, to not more than 15
developmentally disabled or mentally ill persons, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in
order to live in a community, and shall include, but not limited to: group homes, half-way houses,
immediate care facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements and hotels. Such a residence shall
not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of the "Health Care Facilities Planning Act"
(P.L. 1971. C.136; C.26:2H-1 et seq.). In the case of community residences housing mentally ill persons,
such residence shall have been approved for a purchase of service contract or an application agreement
pursuant to such procedures as shall be established by regulation of the Division of Mental Health and
Hospitals in the Department of Human Services. "Developmentally Disabled Person" means a person
who is developmentally disabled as defined in Section 2 of P.L. 1977,. C.448 (C.30:11B-2), and "Mentally
Ill Person" means a person who is afflicted with a mental illness as defined in N.J.S.A. 30:4-23, but shall
not include a person who has been committed after having been found guilty of a criminal offense by
reason of insanity or having been found unfit to be tried on a criminal charge.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES : A community residential facility licensed
pursuant to P.L. 1977, c. 448 (C.30:11B-1 et seq.) providing food, shelter and personal guidance, under
such supervision as required, to not more than 15 persons with head injuries, who require assistance,
temporarily or permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but not be limited to,
group homes, halfway houses, supervised apartment living arrangements and hostels. Such a residence
shall not be considered a health care facility within the meaning of the "Health Care Facilities Planning
Act," 1971, c. 136.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE TERMINALLY ILL : Any community residential facility operated as a
hospice program providing food, shelter, personal guidance and health care services, under such
supervision as required, for not more than 15 terminally ill persons.
9
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE : Any shelter approved for a purchase of
service contract and certified pursuant to standards and procedures established by regulation of the
Department of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1979, C.337 (C.30:40-1-14) providing food, shelter,
medical care, legal assistance, personal guidance, and other services to not more than 15 persons who
have been victims of Domestic Violence, including any children of such victims, who temporarily require
shelter and assistance is order to protect their physical or psychological welfare.
CONDITIONAL USE : A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon showing that such use in a
specified location will comply with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in this Ordinance, and upon issuance of an authorization therefore by the Planning
Board.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL : The Officer of the Division of Community Improvements or his duly
authorized representative charged with the administration and enforcement of the Uniform
Construction Code Act and the regulations there under and Chapter 183 of the Code of the City of
Paterson.
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT : An official document issue by the Division of Community Improvements
authorizing the erection, alteration, repair, renovation, demolition or removal of any building or
structure, including excavation, filling and grading.
COUNTY, THE : The County of Passaic, New Jersey.
CUL-DE-SAC : A street with only a single means of ingress and egress, not longer than six hundred (600)
feet, and having a turnaround at the end.
CURB LEVEL : The level of the established curb in front of a building measured at the center of such
front. Where no curb elevation has been established, the lot grade immediately adjacent to a building
shall be considered the curb level.
DELICATESSEN : A shop that sells cooked or prepared foods ready for serving but not consumed on the
premises.
DENSITY : The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land area to be developed.
DEVELOPER : The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed to be included in a
proposed development, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person
having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT : The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, or the construction,
reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure,
or of any excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or other structure, or
land or extension of use of land for which permission may be required pursuant to this ordinance.
DISTRICT : A zoning district established pursuant to the zoning provisions of this ordinance.
10
DIVISION OF COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENTS : The Division of Community Improvements, Department of
Community Development of the City of Paterson, New Jersey.
DIVISION OF ENGINEERING : The Division of Engineering, Department of Public Works of the City of
Paterson, New Jersey.
DIVISION OF PLANNING AND ZONING : The Division of Planning and Zoning, Department of Economic
Development of the City of Paterson, New Jersey.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY : The lands required for the installation of sanitary and/or stormwater sewers
or drainage ditches or required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and
providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flooding or flood damage
DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENT : Any establishment where the mechanical cleaning of clothing, fabrics,
or other such garments is conducted on the premises for retail customers. This shall not include selfserve
washing and drying machines as would be found in a laundromat.
DWELLING, LOFT : A dwelling unit in a building designed, zoned and used for residential and commercial
purposes.
DWELLING UNIT : A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for 1 family including
permanent provisions of living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, which comply with all relevant
state and municipal laws, ordinances and regulations.
DWELLING : A structure or portion thereof that is used exclusively for human habitation. "Dwellings"
may include but are not limited to the following types:
A. DETACHED, ONE-FAMILY A building containing only 1 dwelling unit, intended and used by only
one family and that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
B. GARDEN APARTMENT - A multi-family dwelling building of not more than 3 stories in height on a
parcel which provides common open space, and which contains at least 8 dwelling units.
C. HIGH-RISE APARTMENT - A multi-family dwelling structure containing 10 or more dwelling units
with direct access to common hallways, foyers, or corridors and which is greater in height than 7
stories and no more than 21 stories.
D. LOW-RISE APARTMENT - A multiple-family dwelling structure containing three or more separate
dwelling units per structure, being greater than 3 stories in height but no more than 7 stories in
height.
E. MULTI-FAMILY - A building or portion thereof containing 3 or more units, each of which units is
intended and used by only one family, including units that are located one over another.
Rooming houses, boarding houses, hostels, lodging houses, college fraternity houses, hotels,
motels, and dormitories are specifically excluded by this definition as multi-family dwelling
structures.
F. TOWNHOUSE, ONE-FAMILY - A one-family dwelling in a row of at least two such attached
dwellings in which each dwelling has its own front and rear access to the outside, no dwelling is
11
located over another dwelling and each dwelling is separated from all other attached dwellings
by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls.
G. TOWNHOUSE, TWO-FAMILY - A two-family dwelling in a row of other attached dwellings. In a
two family townhouse, one dwelling unit is located above one other dwelling unit, but is
separated from all other dwellings by one or more vertical common fire-resistant walls.
H. TWO-FAMILY -A building or portion thereof containing 2 dwelling units.
EROSION : The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
FAMILY : One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit according to law.
FAMILY CHILD DAY CARE HOME : Any private residence approved by the Division of Youth and Family
Services or an organization with which the division contracts for family day care in which child care
services are regularly provided to no less than 3 and no more than 5 children for no less than 15 hours
per week. A child being cared for under the following circumstances is not included in the total number
of children receiving child care services: (a) the child being cared for is legally related to the provider; or
(b) the child is being cared for as part of a cooperative agreement between parents for the care of their
children by 1 or more of the parents, where no payment for the care is being provided.
FENCE : Any structure of wood, stone or other material erected for the purpose of enclosing or
screening a piece of land.
FILL : Sand, gravel, earth or other materials of any composition whatsoever placed or deposited by any
person or persons so as to form a level surface or an embankment or to raise the elevation of the land
surface.
FILLING STATION, GASOLINE : Premises where the principal business conducted thereon is the sale,
supply and dispensing of gasoline, oil, grease, batteries and tires. Automobile accessories may be
supplied and dispensed at retail. Normal automobile maintenance and minor repairs may be performed,
such as oil changes, brake repair, and tune-ups, exclusive of those permitted in an automobile repair
services facility, an auto body repair facility or an auto laundry.
FINAL APPROVAL : The official action of the appropriate board taken on an application for development
after all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been fulfilled, including the
installation of required improvements or posting of guarantees for their installation.
FLOOD : A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas
from overflow of river or stream, or unusual or rapid accumulation of surface water run-off.
FLOOD, BASE : The designated probability-of-occurrence flood which has a 1% chance of occurring in a
given year. It is hereby designated as the 100 year flood as defined and delineated on the flood
insurance rate map (firm) effective February 16, 1977 as prepared by the Federal Flood Insurance
Administration, Department of Housing and Urban Development.
12
FLOOD DAMAGE POTENTIAL : The susceptibility of a specific land use at a particular site to be damaged
by potential floods at that site, as well as increased off-site flooding or flood-related damage caused by
such land use.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA : The flood way plus additional portions of the flood plain required for the flow of
the designated base flood including the flood way and flood way fringe.
FLOOD HAZARD PROFILE ELEVATION : The water surface elevation that is reasonably expected from the
designated base flood discharge flowing down the river (Channel plus flood plains). It is measured at a
location along the river or stream in feet above mean sea level (MSL).
FLOOD PLAIN : The area adjoining the channel of the natural river or stream that has been or may be
inundated by flood water. For the purpose of this ordinance, the phrases "flood plain" and "flood hazard
area" are interchangeable.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION : A point at or above one foot above the flood hazard profile elevation
expected at a location within the flood hazard area. It is the elevation which is measured in feet above
mean sea level (MSL) to which all regulated uses are required to be elevated or, if permitted by use
regulation, to be flood-proofed.
FLOOD WAY (FW) : The Channel of a river or stream, and the adjacent land area which are reasonably
required to carry and discharge the base flood without accumulatively increasing the flood hazard
profile elevation at any point within the FW more than 0.2 foot, and without producing hazardous and
excessive velocities or conditions therein.
FLOOD WAY FRINGE (FF) : That portion of the flood hazard area not designated as the flood way which
may be completely and fully encroached without increasing the flood hazard profile elevation of any
point within the flood way more than 0.2 foot.
FLOODPROOFING MEASURES : A combination of structural provisions, changes, or adjustments to
properties and structures subject to flooding, primarily for the reduction or elimination of potential
flood damages.
FLOOR AREA : The sum of the gross horizontal areas of all floors of any building or buildings on a lot,
measured from the exterior walls or from the centerline of a common wall between two buildings. In
particular, the floor area shall include:
A. In dwellings, any basement space permitted to be used for residence purposes.
B. In other than dwellings, any basement or cellar space used for any purpose other than storage
of mechanical equipment or building services.
C. In all buildings, interior balconies, mezzanines, roofed porches or terraces, and all spaces other
than basement or cellar spaces with headroom of at least 7 feet 6 inches.
FLOOR AREA RATIO : The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or structures compared to the total
area of the site.
13
FOOTPRINT : The ground floor area of the periphery of a building/buildings that cover the ground under
the building.
FUNERAL HOME : See Mortuaries.
GARAGE, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL : A structure, or portion thereof, that is accessory to the residential use
of a building and that is used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by residents
thereof and that is not a separate commercial enterprise available to the general public.
GARBAGE DUMPSTER : A receptacle which is used for temporary storage of garbage refuse or any type
of waste material; which is emptied on the premises by means of a mechanical device that is part of the
collection vehicle.
GAS STATION : See Filling Station, Gasoline.
GO-GO BAR : An establishment where live dancing is performed by individuals other than patrons or
customers and which does not qualify as a sexually-oriented business as defined herein.
GRADE LEVEL : The mean elevation at the curb level opposite those walls of the building that are located
within 5 feet of the street line; or where all walls of the building are more than 5 feet from the street
line, the mean elevation of finished natural grade where such natural grade abuts the building.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS : Any material which is listed or defined by the N.J.D.E.P. and which is, or could
be, or tend to be harmful or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.
HEALTH CENTER : A public or private facility for persons requiring various medical, dental, visual,
psychotherapeutic or similar treatment, observation or advice, which complies with all federal, state,
and municipal statutes, laws, ordinances and regulations. Such use shall include the offices of licensed
medical professionals, limited to physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors, psychiatrists, psychotherapists,
podiatrists, and dentists.
HISTORIC SITE : Any real property, man-made structure, natural object or configuration or any portion or
group of the foregoing of historical, archeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance, as found
on one of either the National, State, or Municipal Registers of Historic Places
HISTORIC DISTRICT : One or more historic sites and intervening or surrounding property significantly
affecting or affected by the quality and character of the historic site or sites.
HOME BUSINESS : An occupation or business activity carried out as an accessory use in a dwelling, the
proprietor of which is a permanent full-time resident of the dwelling and that involves only a limited
number of non-resident customers, clients, business invitees or guests and that involves no more than 1
non-resident employee on the premises. Examples of such uses may include offices of physicians,
dentists, podiatrists, and lawyers residing on the premises on a permanent and full time basis.
Businesses operated by persons other than by permanent full-time residents of the dwelling shall not be
14
considered home businesses. Barber shops, beauty parlors, and kennels, and other similar businesses
shall not be deemed to be home occupations.
HOME OFFICE : An office activity carried on by a permanent full-time resident in a dwelling unit and
involving no non-resident employees, customers, clients, business invitees or guests. Such use shall
require no zoning approvals from the City provided it satisfies the criteria set forth in §500-3.6.D.10,
Home Offices.
HOSPITAL : An institution specializing in providing clinical, temporary, and emergency services of a
medical or surgical nature to human patients and injured persons, and licensed by state law to provide
facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics, and general medical practice. Such institution includes such
related accessory facilities as laboratories, emergency services, out-patient services, training services,
central services and staff offices that are integral parts of such institution.
HOSPITAL, ANIMAL : An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to
animals.
HOTEL : A lodging facility that contains 10 or more guest rooms and has sleeping facilities for 25 or more
persons and is kept, used, maintained, advertised as, or held out to be, a place where sleeping
accommodations are available to transient guests.
INDUSTRIAL USES, HEAVY : Any use in the operation of which there is a possibility of creating excessive
heat, glare, vibration, or noise as measured on any part of the lot line including, but not limited to, blast
furnace, boiler works, brick tile or terra cotta manufacture requiring furnace or kilns, coke ovens, forge
plant, or rock or stone crusher; or any use in the operation of which there is a possibility of becoming
noxious or offensive by reason of emission of odors, dust or smoke, as measured on any part of the lot
line or above it, including the manufacture of asphalt, petroleum and tar processing and products;
starch, glucose or dextrine manufacture or the storage or processing or animal matter including candle
or tallow manufacture; grease or lard manufacture; linoleum manufacture; raw hides or skins storage,
curing or tanning; slaughtering of animals, dead animals, offal or refuse; or soap manufacture.
INDUSTRIAL USES, LIGHT : Enterprises engaged in the processing, manufacturing, compounding,
fabrication, packaging, treatment and/or assembly of products, primarily from processed or previously
manufactured materials. Light industrial uses consist of those that are capable of operation in such a
manner as to control the external effects of the manufacturing process, such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt,
vibration, odor, etc. and thus do not qualify as heavy industrial uses, as defined herein.
INN: A commercial establishment providing lodging and meals for travelers during short-term visits to
the City of Paterson. Any structure used for such a purpose shall provide not more than 10 guest rooms
for travelers and shall have full occupancy by paying guests at not more than 25 persons. Such
structures shall be licensed by the City of Paterson and shall meet all local and state codes for health,
safety, and zoning. Any such use shall be subject to regular inspection as provided in the Code of the City
of Paterson.
15
JUNK : Any scrap, waste (organic or inorganic), reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or
used in conjunction with dismantled, processing, salvage, storage, bailing, disposal, or other use or
disposition.
JUNKYARD : Any yard, covered or uncovered, space or place in the City, used for the purpose of sale,
purchase, storage or exchange of rags, old metals, old bottles, old glassware, old tin ware, old paper, old
lumber, old plumbing fixtures, material from dismantled buildings, dismantled old automobiles, or parts
thereof, motor vehicle junk or any other old material commonly called junk. "Junkyard", however, shall
not be deemed to include a yard, space or place used for the storage of old material to be used for
manufacturing purposes by the person storing the same.
KENNEL : Any premises or portion thereof on which more than 4 dogs, cats, or other domestic animals
over 6 months in age are kept, boarded, bred, or cared for, in return for remuneration.
LAUNDROMAT : An establishment providing washing and drying machines on the premises for self-serve
rental use to the general public and may include wash and fold or drop off dry cleaning as an accessory
use, but shall not include on-site dry cleaning processing.
LIQUOR STORE : Any premises wherein alcoholic beverages are sold at retail for consumption off the
premises.
LODGE : A hall or meeting place of a local branch or the members composing such a branch of a
fraternal order or society, such as the Masons, Knights of Columbus, Moose, American Legion and other
similar association of persons that gather periodically for promotion of a non-profit common objective,
such as literature, science, politics, good fellowship, etc.
LONG-TERM CARE NURSING FACILITY : An institution or a distinct part of an institution which is licensed
by the New Jersey State Department of Health to provide health care under medical supervision for 24
or more consecutive hours to two or more patients who are not related to the governing authority or its
members by marriage, blood or adoption. A long-term care facility may be either:
A. A skilled nursing home, where patients receive at least 2.75 hours of nursing care daily; or
B. An intermediate care facility, which provides health care and services to individuals who do not
require the degree of care and treatment which a hospital or nursing home is designed to
provide, but who because of physical or mental conditions require care and services above the
level of room and board. In an ICF-level A facility, patients receive at least 2.5 Hours of nursing
care daily. In an ICF level B facility, patients receive at least 1.25 hours of nursing care daily.
LOT : A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or otherwise, as permitted by law
and to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit.
LOT, CORNER : A lot at the junction of, and abutting on, 2 or more intersecting streets when the interior
angle of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees.
LOT COVERAGE : The portion of a lot that is covered with buildings or structures.
16
LOT DEPTH : The average of the mean distances as -measured from the center of the front street line
and along each sideline of a lot to its rear line.
LOT FRONTAGE : The width of a lot abutting a public right-of-way.
LOT, INTERIOR : A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE : A property boundary line of any lot.
LOT OF RECORD : A lot that is currently recorded in the office of the county registrar of deeds, or a lot or
parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
LOT, THROUGH : An interior lot that fronts upon 2 parallel streets or that fronts upon 2 streets that do
not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH: The coverage of the straight-line distances measured at the street between the rear line
and at the points at which the required setback lines meet the side lot lines.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES : Any security which may be accepted by a municipality for the
maintenance of any improvements required pursuant to this chapter, including but not limited to surety
bonds, letters of credit under the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5 and cash.
MASTER PLAN : A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals for the development of the
City of Paterson, showing objectives, policies and standards for development, covering land use,
housing, circulation, utilities, community facilities, recreation, and conservation, written and adopted in
a manner determined by law.
MEDICAL TESTING LABORATORIES : See Research Laboratory.
MICROBREWERY : an establishment engaged in brewing any malt alcoholic beverages for sale and
distribution to wholesalers and retailers, licensed in accordance with the State Alcoholic Beverage Law,
that is licensed to operate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-10.
MIXED RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL USES : A building containing one or more commercial uses and
one or more dwellings.
MIXED USE : Two or more permitted principal and/or conditional uses located in one building and/or on
one lot.
MIXED USE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT : A development that contains two or more of the permitted
uses within the respective zoning district. Mixed Use Community Development may also include
residential units/apartments as stipulated in Subsection 500-4.17.B of this ordinance.
MORTUARIES : Any establishment with facilities to be used for the preparation of the dead for burial or
cremation. Such establishments may also include facilities for viewing of the body, such as a funeral.
17
MOTOR VEHICLE JUNKYARD : Any business and any place of storage which displays, or in/or upon which
there are displayed two or more unregistered motor vehicles which are unfit for reconditioning for use
for highway and road transportation or for used parts of motor vehicles or material which has been a
part of a motor vehicle, the sum of which parts or material shall be equal in bulk to two or more 'motor
vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES : The use of any building or land area for the display and sale of new or used
automobiles; trucks or vans; trailers; campers or recreational vehicles; or, motorcycles, all terrain
vehicles or snowmobiles.
MUNICIPAL LAND USE LAW : Chapter 291, Laws New Jersey, 1975, (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
MUSEUM : A non-profit, non-commercial establishment operated as a repository for collected natural,
scientific, historic or literary objects of interest or works of art that is open to the public and not
regularly engaged for profit in the sale or distribution of the objects collected.
NEWSSTAND : A small stand-alone structure no greater than 72 square feet in area, in which one or
more of the walls of the structure are open to allow for the sale of goods such as newspapers,
magazines, brochures, and other small pre-packaged items.
NONIONIZING ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION (NIER) : Electromagnetic radiation of such frequency that
the energy of the radiation does not dissociate electrons from their constituent atoms when an atom
absorbs the electromagnetic radiation.
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING : A building in which the size, dimension or location of which was lawful
prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NON-CONFORMING LOT : A lot having an area, dimension or location which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of this zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NON-CONFORMING USE : A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of this zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NURSING HOME : A facility licensed by the New Jersey Department of Health as defined in N.J.S.A.
30:13-2C.
OBSTRUCTION : Any structure, fill, excavation, channel modification, embankment, rock, grave, refuse or
matter along, across or projecting into any channel, watercourse or floor hazard area which may
impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by catching or collecting
18
debris carried by such water, or is placed where the flow of water might carry the same downstream to
the damage of life or property.
OFFICE, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL : A building or portion, public or private, wherein services are
performed involving administrative, professional, medical, dental, or clerical operations.
OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITY : Any facility, either a parking lot or structured parking garage, where the
intended primary purpose is the storage of automobiles for the general public.
OPEN SPACE : Any land or water area essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or
reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants
of land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that such areas may be improved with only
those buildings, structures, streets, off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the natural openness of the land.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON : An open space area within or related to a site designated as a development
and designed and intended for use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common
open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development.
OPEN SPACE, USABLE : Apartment balconies with a minimum usable space of 60 square feet and with a
minimum dimension of 6 feet shall be counted as part of the open space requirements. Usable open
space may include roofed area, the total area of which is less than 20% of the unroofed or uncovered
area of a lot, provided that such roofed area is devoted to recreational purposes and not enclosed on
more than one side, or on more than 10% of the perimeter of the roofed area, whichever is greater.
OWNER : Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation having sufficient
proprietary interest in the land subject of a development application to commence and maintain
development application proceedings regarding same under this ordinance.
PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET : An off-street parking space shall consist of an open or enclosed space on
a lot adequate for parking an automobile, with properly related access to a public street or alley
PAWN SHOP : Any establishment where the primary means of business deals with purchasing private
personal property with the intention of selling it back at a stipulated price, or providing loans or money
advances in exchange for goods.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE : Any security, which may be accepted by the City, including but not limited
to surety bonds, letters of credit under the circumstances specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5 and cash.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD : Standards: adopted by the Code of the City of Paterson regulating noise
levels, glare, earthborn or sonic vibrations, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic
matters, explosive and inflammable matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge, screening
of unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters as may be reasonably required by the
City; or required by other applicable City, State, or Federal Laws.
19
PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESSES : Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the
care of a person, such as hair care, nail and skin care, and other similar types of businesses.
PLACES OR WORSHIP : A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures, that by design and
construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services and associated accessory
uses.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT : Planned unit development, planned unit residential development, residential
cluster, planned commercial development or planned industrial development, as those terms are
defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-6.
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT : An area with a minimum contiguous or noncontiguous
acreage of 5 acres or more to be developed as a single entity according to a plan containing one or more
residential clusters, which may include appropriate commercial and/or office uses or public or quasipublic
uses all primarily for the benefit of the residential development.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT : An area of a minimum of 3 contiguous or noncontiguous acres
to be developed according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any other uses incidental to the
predominant use as may be permitted by ordinance.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT : An area of a minimum of 2 contiguous or noncontiguous acres
to be developed according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses or both and any residential and
other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by Ordinance.
PLANNING BOARD : The Planning Board of the City of Paterson, New Jersey established pursuant to
Section 14 of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.
PLAT : A map or maps of a subdivision.
PLAT, FINAL : The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is presented to the Planning
Board for final approval in accordance with the regulations outlined herein and which, if approved, shall
be filed with the Passaic County Planning Board and the Passaic County Register of Deeds office.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY : The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision which is
submitted to the Planning Board for consideration and tentative approval, meeting the requirements of
this chapter.
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER : Any box like container that is transported by truck or trailer to a
desired location for temporary drop-off and pick up of items to be permanently stored at an off-site
location.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL : The conferral of certain rights prior to final approval, after specific elements
of a subdivision or site plan have been agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
20
PRINCIPAL USE : The main purpose for which a lot or building is used.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY : A facility operated, managed or controlled by a public utility as that term is
defined in N.J.S.A. 48:2-13 whose primary function is the generation, creation or harnessing of natural or
man-made energy for essential services use or distribution off-site, including electrical sub- and
switching stations, or the disposal or treatment of water or wastes, but not including service yards or
storage or wireless telecommunication facilities.
RECREATIONAL COMMUNITY CENTER : Premises where classes, learning activities, services,
entertainment and /or recreation for seniors, adults, and youth is offered for profit or non-profit such as
meeting and conference rooms; banquet halls, swimming pools and whirlpools; saunas; tennis;
racquetball; basketball and volleyball courts; outdoor athletic fields/courts; fitness and exercise classes;
weightlifting and gymnastic equipment; locker rooms; and a restaurant or snack bar.
RECREATION AND AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENT, COMMERCIAL : Premises where entertainment
and/or recreation is offered for profit or non-profit such as a theater, public hall, billiard or pool room,
bowling alley, ice or skating rink, miniature golf course and all other similar places of amusement and
recreation. Such use shall not include drive-in theaters or video arcades, as defined and regulated by
municipal Ordinance.
RECREATION ESTABLISHMENT; PUBLIC : Premises where any tract of land or building, buildings or any
part of any buildings are used as a recreational establishment, the control of which is vested in the City,
a board or agent thereof.
RECREATION SPACE : Portion of a development specifically designed for active or passive recreation,
including but not limited to sitting areas, formal and informal sports fields, game rooms, court games,
pools, gazebos and pavilions.
RECYCLING FACILITY : Premises where materials containing paper, plastic, scrap metal and glass are
brought to be sorted, baled, or compacted and then shipped to another location to be recycled for use
in a substantially different form. A recycling facility does not include any use involving hazardous
materials or flammable materials or the exposure of merchandise for retail use at the site.
RESEARCH LABORATORY : A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific
research, investigations, testing or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESTAURANT : A commercial establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed
primarily at tables on the premises and served by waiters and waitresses. A restaurant may include a bar
for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, as an accessory use.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH : An establishment where food and/or beverages are sold in a form
ready for consumption, where all or a significant portion of the consumption takes place or is designed
to take place outside of the confines of the restaurant and where ordering and pickup of food takes
place from a motor vehicle.
21
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD : An establishment that offers quick food service, which is accomplished
through a limited menu of items already prepared and held for service, or prepared, fried, heated or
grilled quickly for consumption either within the restaurant building or for carry-out and where
customers are not served by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter where the items are
consumed; or the establishment includes a drive-through service facility.
RESUBDIVISION : Resubdivision means:
A. The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously
made and approved or recorded according to law; or
B. The alteration of any streets or the establishment of any new streets within any subdivision
previously made and approved or recorded according to law, but does not include conveyances
so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RETAIL BUSINESS, COMMUNITY : A fully enclosed retail establishment larger than 5,000 square feet in
size but no greater than 10,000 square feet in size that is engaged in the selling of goods or merchandise
to the general public for their personal or household consumption as well as the rendering of services in
association with the sale of such goods.
RETAIL BUSINESS, GENERAL : A fully enclosed retail establishment that is engaged in the selling of goods,
merchandise or services and that is larger in size than neighborhood retail businesses, community retail
businesses and personal services and which, as a result, generally results in a greater degree of traffic
and parking demands than experienced in association with neighborhood retail businesses, community
retail businesses and personal services.
RETAIL BUSINESS, NEIGHBORHOOD : A fully enclosed retail establishment no greater than 5,000 square
feet in size engaged in the selling of goods or merchandise primarily oriented towards residents of the
immediately surrounding neighborhoods for their personal or household consumption as well as the
rendering of services in association with the sale of such goods. Such businesses include the following:
neighborhood-scale food stores; delicatessens; bakeries that manufacture goods for on-premise sale
only; florists; pharmacies; confectionary stores; gifts shops; hardware stores; periodical and stationary
stores; variety stores; and similar retail establishments of such size primarily designed to sell goods to
patrons residing in immediately surrounding neighborhoods.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT : Business enterprises, not including wholesalers, selling good or commodities
directly to the general public for personal or households consumption and rendering of services
incidental to the sale of such goods.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS : Any apparatus, including structural supports, which is designed for the
purpose of receiving television, radio, microwave, internet, wireless cable, satellite or similar signals.
Such apparatus is commonly referred to as a dish antenna.
SCHOOL : A public or private facility licensed by the State of New Jersey Department of Education for
academic instruction that provides a full curriculum of elementary or secondary academic instruction,
22
including kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools and high schools, charter schools,
vocational high schools, and colleges; but not including trade or technical schools, driving schools or
other such places of instruction not providing a full curriculum of academic instruction as described
above.
SCHOOL, AUTOMOBILE DRIVING : A facility for the primary purposes of instructing persons in the legal
operation of an automobile or other such motor vehicle.
SCHOOL, TRADE OR TECHNICAL : A private facility for academic instruction that provides education and
training for a particular hobby, sport, or vocation.
SEDIMENTATION : The deposition of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water, ice,
wind, gravity or other natural means as a product of erosion.
SETBACK LINE : A line drawn parallel to a lot line and drawn through that portion or plane of a building
lying nearest to the street line or lot line.
SETBACK LINE, REQUIRED : That line to which a building must be setback from the street line or lot line.
SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS : Such term shall mean: (a) a commercial establishment which as one of
its principal business purposes offers for sale, rental, or display any of the following: books, magazines,
periodicals or other printed material, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other visual representations which depict or describe a "specified sexual activity" or "specified
anatomical area"; or still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices
which show images to one person per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
characterized by the depiction of a "specified sexual activity" or "specified anatomical area"; or
instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with a "specified sexual
activity"; or (b) a commercial establishment which regularly features live performances characterized by
the exposure of a "specified anatomical area" or by a "specified sexual activity," or which regularly
shows films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic representations which
depict or describe a "specified sexual activity" or "specified anatomical area." For the purposes of this
Ordinance, a "person" shall mean an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or
other legal entity. A "specified anatomical area" shall mean: (a) less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or (b) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if covered. A "specified
sexual activity" shall mean: (a) the fondling or other erotic touching of covered or uncovered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breast; or (b) any actual or simulated act of human
masturbation, sexual intercourse or deviate sexual intercourse.
SIGHT EASEMENT : At intersections, a triangular area in which nothing shall be erected, placed, planted
or allowed to grow in a manner as to obstruct vision between a height of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet
above the center line grade of either street.
23
SIGN : A name, identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or painted on, or
represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land and which directs attention
to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business.
SIGN, ADDRESS : A sign which bears only the name(s) of the individual building occupant(s) and/or the
property address(es) and post office numbers.
SIGN, AWNING : A sign on or attached to a temporary retractable shelter that is supported entirely by
the exterior wall of a building.
SIGN, BUILDING : A sign that is permanently attached to the facade of a building and consisting of either
a wall sign or projecting sign, as defined herein.
SIGN, BOX : A sign consisting of individually painted, plastic, metal, or wood letters or symbols applied to
or embossed in an enclosure containing interior illumination or an apparatus for interior illumination of
the background, the individual letters and/or symbols.
SIGN, BUSINESS : A sign which directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, service, or
entertainment offered or sold upon the premises where such sign is located or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, CANOPY : A sign on or attached to a permanent overhanging shelter which projects from the face
of a building.
SIGN, FLASHING : An illuminated sign on which the attached artificial light is not stationery and/or
constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use. All revolving illuminated signs shall
be considered a "flashing sign."
SIGN, FLAT : A sign consisting of individually painted, plastic, metal or wood letters applied, embossed or
engraved on a flat backing which is attached to a building facade, freestanding support, or other
structure.
SIGN, FREESTANDING : A sign that is supported by a structure (such as a pole, mast, frame or monument
structure) other than a building housing the business to which the sign pertains.
SIGN, GOVERNMENTAL AND PUBLIC UTILITY LOGO: Flags and insignia of any government and/or public
utility except when displayed as a commercial promotion.
SIGN, IDENTITY : A sign that identifies the name of a building, the primary occupant, or the principal use
of the premises not related to a business or any combination of the above.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED : A sign that is artificially lit by any interior or an exterior apparatus.
SIGN, INDIVIDUAL LETTER : A wall sign that consists of individual plastic, wood, or metal letter(s) and/or
symbol(s) that are attached directly to the facade of a building.
SIGN, INSTITUTIONAL AND PLACE OF WORSHIP BULLETIN BOARDS : A board or panel with means for
interchanging letters and/or messages which is erected and maintained by a place of worship, school,
24
governmental building, or other approved religious or institutional use for the purpose of announcing
events related to such institution or church.
SIGN, MARQUEE : A wall sign that is placed on or attached to a permanent overhanging shelter and that
projects from a face of a building and is entirely supported by said building.
SIGN, PROJECTING : A sign containing the sign message in a plane or planes which projects more than 12
inches from the building to which it is attached.
SIGN, ROOF : A sign located on the roof of a building or supported by the roof of a building.
SIGN, TEMPORARY : Any sign, banner, pennant or advertising display intended to be displayed for a
period of time no greater than 60 days and that is removed within 30 days after the use or function to
which such sign has been directed or related has terminated.
SIGN, WALL : A sign attached to a building in such a manner that the sign message is parallel to the face
of the building to which it is attached and which projects no more than 12 inches from the building.
SIGN, WINDOW : A sign placed on the inside or outside of a window in such a manner that it can be
viewed from the exterior of the building.
SIGN AREA : Sign area shall equal the entire face of a sign consisting of the square foot area of any
backing, material, sign box or color forming an integral part of the background of the sign and used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any
supporting framework, bracing or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets
zoning regulations and is clearly incidental to the sign itself, except that the sign area of individual letter
signs and awning/canopy signs shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle,
triangle or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, graphic
illustration, picture, symbol or other display. The sign area for a sign with two (2) faces shall be
computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one (1) point. When a sign
having two (2) faces is such that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, the sign
area shall be computed by the measurement of the larger of the two (2) faces. For purposes of
calculating window signs, a window shall be considered the glazed area. Name and property address
signs, governmental and public utility logo signs, signs which are required by county, state or federal
agencies, traffic, parking and directional signs shall not be considered in determining the sign area of a
building.
SIGN HEIGHT : The distance from the base of the sign to the top of the highest attached component of
the sign.
SIGN FACADE AREA : The area of a building facade upon which a sign is proposed to be placed. The sign
facade area shall be measured by multiplying the horizontal length of the building facade or tenant
space upon which a sign is to be located by the above ground height of the space occupied by such use
or tenant.
25
SILTATION BASIN : A temporary facility, designed in accordance with the standards of this chapter, to
collect silt and eroded soil resulting from grading the area of a subdivision for the purpose of limiting the
deposit of silt and eroded soil in streams, brooks and sewers.
SITE PLAN : A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown (1) the existing and proposed
conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, flood
plains, marshes and waterways; (2) the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping,
structures and signs, lighting, screening devices; and (3) other information required in this Ordinance
and (4) any other information that may be reasonably required in order to make an informed
determination pursuant to this Ordinance.
SOCIAL CLUB OR FRATERNAL LODGE, STORE FRONT : A fully or partially converted premises formerly
used for business or commerce which is primarily used as a meeting or gathering place for individuals
with similar interests, restricted to members and their guests, to which membership is required for
participation and is not operated for profit nor to render a service which is customarily carried on as a
business. While such facilities are generally used for non-commercial purposes, such facilities may
occasionally by used for commercial purposes and occasionally be open to members of the general
public.
STORAGE FACILITY : See Warehouse.
STORE, STAND-ALONE CONVENIENCE : A retail store that provides multiple types of neighborhood or
community retail uses as a single business use. Such retail convenience store may be a combination
pharmacy/ packaged food/dairy store or may consist solely of such use, or be a 7-11 type store that sells
both dry goods and perishable food stuffs. Convenience stores shall not include laundries, package
stores, bars, nor stores in combination with auto repairs or auto parts sales. In addition, such uses shall
not include neighborhood retail businesses as defined herein.
STORY : That portion of a building between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor
above it, or if there is no floor above it then the portion between the floor and the ceiling above it. That
portion of a building between the finished grade and a maximum of 3 feet above grade to the surface of
the finished floor immediately above grade shall not be considered a story.
STORY, HALF : A space under a sloping roof with a headroom of five (5) feet or less that occupies at least
forty (40) percent of the total floor area of the story directly beneath.
STREET : Any street, thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or other way which
is: an existing state, county or city roadway; or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law; or which is approved by official action as provided by this ordinance; or which is shown
on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the County recording officer prior to the appointment of
a planning board and the grant to such board of the power to review plats; and includes the land
between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
26
gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines. For the purposes of this
ordinance, "streets" shall be classified as follows:
A. ARTERIAL STREETS - Those which are used primarily for fast, heavy or through traffic.
B. COLLECTOR STREETS - Those which carry traffic from minor streets, including the principal
access and circulation streets within a development.
C. MINOR STREETS - Those which are designed to be used primarily for access to the abutting
properties.
D. MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS - Those which are adjacent to arterial streets and highways and
which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
STREET LINE : The street right-of-way line forming the dividing line between the street public right-ofway
and a lot privately or publicly owned.
STRUCTURE : A combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation
whether installed on, above, or below the surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVIDER : Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other
legal entity commencing proceedings under this chapter to affect a subdivision of land hereunder for
himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, parcels or
other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or development. The
following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning of this ordinance, if no new streets
are created: (1) divisions of land found by the planning board or subdivision committee thereof
appointed by the Chairman to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are 5 acres or
larger in size; (2) divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions; (3) divisions of property
upon court order, including but not limited to judgments of foreclosure (4) consolidation of existing lots
by deed or other recorded instrument and (5) the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or
parcels of land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which are found and certified by the
administrative officer to conform to the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are
shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or atlas of the municipality. The
term "subdivision" shall also include the term "re-subdivision".
SUBDIVISION, MINOR : Any subdivision which will result in not more than three (3) lots fronting an
existing accepted street, not involving: (1) a planned development; (2) any new street or road; or (3) the
extension of any off-tract improvement the cost of which is to be pro-rated pursuant to N.J.S.A 40:55D-
42.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE : A committee of at least three (3) but no more than five (5) Planning Board
members, appointed by the Chairman with approval of the Board, for the purpose of classifying
subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and such other duties as may be conferred
on this Committee by the Planning Board or state statutes.
27
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS : Any improvement or repair of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement is started or the
damage has occurred.
SWIMMING POOL : Private residential and public pools, permanently constructed, above or below
ground, having a depth of more than two (2) feet and/or a water surface of more than one hundred
(100) square feet, designed and maintained for swimming and bathing purposes. Pools include all
buildings, structures and equipment appurtenant thereto.
SWIMMING POOL; PORTABLE : A pool not permanently installed, lacking water filtration, circulation and
purification systems, without braces or supports, and having less than 2 feet of water in depth and less
than 100 square feet of water surface.
TAILORING : A personal service business establishment which conducts physical alterations of clothing,
fabrics, or other such garments on the premises for retail customers.
TATTOO PARLOR : Any establishment where a tattoo artist conducts tattooing on the premises.
TAVERN : See BAR.
TAXI CAB STORAGE : Any facility where the primary function is the temporary or long-term storage of
taxi cabs or other such vehicles when the vehicles are not in use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA: A device used to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic
waves, including but not limited to directional antennas, such as whip antennas, and parabolic antennas
as part of, or in conjunction with, a WTSF. Such waves shall include, but not be limited to, radio,
television, cellular, paging, personal telecommunications services (PCS) and microwave
telecommunications.
THEATER : An establishment with facilities that are intended to be used for live, or screen performances
of productions such as movies, plays, concerts, or other similar acts.
TRAILER (TRUCKING) : Any structure designed for the purpose of being mounted upon wheels, but
incapable of moving or travelling under its own power other than when attached to a motorized
trucking cab for the purpose of travelling or hauling.
TRUCKING CAB : A motorized vehicle used to pull a trailer.
TRAILER CAMP : Any premises on which are parked 2 or more vehicles designed, intended, arranged or
used for housekeeping and sleeping purposes, or any premises used or offered for the purpose of
supplying to the public a parking space for 2 or more such vehicles, whether such vehicles stand an
wheels or rigid supports.
TRUCK TERMINAL : Land and buildings used as a relay station for the transfer of a load from one vehicle
to another or one party to another. The terminal cannot be used for permanent or long-term accessory
28
storage for other facilities or uses. The terminal facility may include storage area for trucks, and
buildings or areas for the repair of trucks associated with the terminal.
VARIANCE : A departure granted by the appropriate authority from the literal requirements of this
ordinance.
VEHICLE RENTAL ESTABLISHMENT : Any establishment where the primary means of business is the
temporary leasing of vehicles such as automobiles, buses, tractors, or other such vehicles.
WAREHOUSE : Any building whose primary purpose is for the storage of goods and materials.
WHOLESALING ESTABLISHMENTS : Establishments primarily engaged in the selling of merchandise to
retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to wholesalers; or
acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or
companies.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES (WTS) : The provision of wireless telecommunication
services, including, but not limited to, those more commonly referred to as cellular telephones, which
services are regulated by the FCC in accordance with and as the term personal wireless services is
defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47
U.S.C. § 332 (c)(7)(C), or as hereafter amended.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES FACILITY (WTSF) : A facility or structure designed or
intended to be used or used to support and include antennas for WTS. A WTSF is a facility or structure
intended for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, paging or personal wireless
telecommunications services or microwave telecommunications, but excludes facilities or structures
used exclusively for fire, police and other dispatch telecommunications, private radio and television
reception, private citizens bands, amateur radios and other similar telecommunications. A WTSF
includes, without limit, antennas applied or affixed to the facade of a building or roof mounted
antennas, freestanding towers, guyed towers, monopoles, equipment shelters, and similar structures
that employ camouflage technology, and including, but not limited to, structures such as a church
steeple, water tower, flagpole, sign, or combination thereof or other similar structures intended to
mitigate the visual impact of an antenna or the functional equivalent of such.
YARD, FRONT : An open space extending along the full width of the lot between the street line and the
front-most point of the building.
YARD, REAR : An open space extending along the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and the
rear-most point of the building.
YARD, SIDE : An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard and lying between the side
lot line and the closest building point on either side.
29
ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT : The Zoning Board of Adjustment of the City of Paterson, New Jersey
established pursuant to Article 9 of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law (Chapter 291, Law of N.J.
1975).
ZONING OFFICER : An employee of the Division of Planning and Zoning charged with the administration
and enforcement of this and all other applicable land use ordinances.
ZONING PERMIT : A document signed by the Zoning Officer: (1) which is required by this ordinance or
N.J.S. 40:55D-7 as a condition precedent to commencement of an application of a use or the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building; and (2)
which acknowledges that such a use, structure or building complies with the provisions of this
Ordinance or variance therefrom by the duly authorized board pursuant to Sections 47 and 57
(C.40:55D-60, C.40:55D70) of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
30
ARTICLE II PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§200-1 PLANNING BOARD
§200-1.1 Establishment of the Planning Board.
A. Membership. The Planning Board shall consist of nine (9) members divided into, for convenience
of designating the manner of appointment, the following four (4) classes:
CLASS I: The Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor;
CLASS II: One (1) of the officials of the municipality other than a member of the City
Council to be appointed by the mayor;
CLASS III: A member of the City Council to be appointed by it; and
CLASS IV: Six (6) other Paterson residents to be appointed by the Mayor. The members
of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, except that one such member may be a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or a member of the Historic Preservation
Commission, and one such member may be a member of the Board of Education. Two
alternate members, Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2, shall be appointed from Class
IV. For the purpose of this section, membership on a City board or commission whose
function is advisory in nature, and the establishment of which is discretionary and not
required by statute, shall not be considered the holding of municipal office.
B. Alternate Members. Alternative members, appointed by the Mayor and meeting the
qualifications of Class IV members, may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may
not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. Alternate
members shall be designated by the Chairman as "Alternate No. 1." and "Alternate No. 2." In the
event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote. An alternate member shall not serve as Chairman or Vice-Chairman of the Planning Board.
C. Terms.
1. The existing nine (9) members of the Planning Board appointed under previous City
Ordinance and state statute shall retain their membership with a continuation of their
respective terms.
2. The terms of all members, unless otherwise indicated, shall conform to a fiscal year
starting July 1st and ending June 30th.
3. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond to his or her official tenure.
4. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for one (1) year or
terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs first.
5. The terms of the members composing Class IV shall be four (4) years. The term of a Class
IV member who is also a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, Board of
Education or the Historic Preservation Commission shall terminate whenever he or she
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
31
is no longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV term,
whichever occurs first.
6. Alternate members of Class IV shall serve for terms of two (2) years, provided, however,
that in the event that no alternate members of Class IV are appointed, the initial terms
of such members shall be one (1) and two (2) years respectively.
D. Substitute Members When Conflict Exists. In the event that the Planning Board lacks a quorum
because any of its regular or alternate members is prohibited from acting on a matter due to the
member's personal or financial interest, regular members of the Board of Adjustment shall be
called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Planning Board in order
of seniority of continuous service to the Board of Adjustment until there are the minimum
number of members necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without any
personal or financial interest. If a choice has to be made between regular members of equal
seniority, the Chairperson of the Board of Adjustment shall make the choice.
E. Vacancies and Removal.
1. If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of the Planning Board
term, it shall be filled by appointment, as above provided, for the unexpired term.
2. Any member other than a Class I member may be removed, by the City Council for
cause. If an accused member requests a public hearing on the charges, one shall be
granted before final action by the Council.
F. Organization.
1. The Planning Board shall be organized in conformity with the Code of the City of
Paterson, as amended or modified, and the Municipal Land Use Law (MLUL).
2. At its organization meeting in July of each year, unless adjourned to a later date, the
Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from the members of Class IV,
and shall select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of the Planning Board,
the Director of Planning or another municipal employee.
3. The following compensation is hereby established for the Members of the Planning
Board:
a. The Chairman shall receive $300 per year in addition to the per-meeting sum.
b. The sum of $75 per meeting shall be paid to each member.
G. Expense and Costs.
1. The City Council shall make provision in its budget and appropriate such funds as it may
deem necessary for the expenses of the Planning Board.
2. The Planning Board shall recommend to the City Council that a reasonable fee be
charged, as approved and established by the City Council, for all reviews and hearings,
which fees shall be incorporated and lawfully adopted by the City Council.
H. Staff and Special Services.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
32
1. Professional Staff Services.
a. The Planning Board shall use for professional staff services the Division of
Planning and Zoning, which is headed by the Director of Planning (Chief
Planner).
b. The nature of such professional planning staff services to the Planning Board
shall include but not be limited to those set forth in Section 5-85 of the Code of
the City of Paterson as amended and modified and shall include professional
planning services empowered under the Municipal Land Use Law, Chapter 291,
Laws of New Jersey 1975, as amended and specifically listed under C.40:551 D-
25.
c. The City Planning Director, who heads the Planning and Zoning Division, or
someone whom he appoints from the Planning Division staff, shall provide
professional planning services and attendance at the Planning Board evening
meetings. The City Planning Director or his designee shall be professionally and
appropriately compensated for such services and attendance beyond the
normal City work hours. The services rendered shall be in the form of technical
presentations on all matters coming before the Board for action, advice and
recommendations when requested. The City Planning Director shall also guide
and advise the Board in carrying out the requirements of C.40:55D-25.
2. Legal and Other Services. The Planning Board shall appoint an attorney, a secretary, a
certified shorthand reporter or provide for a tape recorder if it wishes, and shall provide
for a clerical assistant, whose duties, terms of office and salaries shall be as follows:
a. The term of office for the attorney and for the secretary shall each be for one
(1) year.
b. The duties of the attorney are to advise and consult with the Board on all legal
questions pertaining to the proper and efficient conduct of the Board in the
discharge of its statutory duties; to render formal written opinions to the Board
when requested to do so by the majority vote of the Board members at a public
meeting of the Board; to attend all workshop and public hearings of the Board;
to consult with the Planning Director and the City Corporation Counsel in
connection with all proposals for Ordinances, revision of Ordinances, the Master
Plan, revisions of the Master Plan, capital expenditure programs and any and all
references from the Municipal Council to the Planning Division staff and the
Planning Board; to coordinate in conjunction with the City Planning Director in
the preparation and formulation of all of the above assigned legal duties and
such other legal duties which may arise from time to time in connection with
the operation of the Planning Division in carrying out its mandated
responsibilities to the Board. The attorney's appointment and salary shall be
reflected in resolution form.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
33
c. The secretary shall attend each meeting of the Board, call the roll and record
the vote of each member of the Board, and perform all other duties required by
the Chairman or by the Board.
d. The certified shorthand reporter, if applicable, shall be an official reporter
appointed by the Supreme Court and assigned to the Trial Division of the
Superior Court. The reporter shall make a record of all public proceedings
before the Board and prepare and furnish suitable minutes thereof for each
member of the Board when requested by the Board as well as prepare verbatim
transcripts of any proceedings required by any participant or the Board in a
proceeding before the Board, at the expense of such participant. The certified
shorthand reporter shall be appointed by resolution.
e. The Clerical Assistant, if applicable, shall assist the members of the Board and its
other personnel in the performance of their respective duties. The Clerical
Assistant in assisting the City Planning Director as part of his/her duties within
the Planning and Zoning Division and in providing services to the Planning Board
shall also:
i. Receive all correspondence to the Board and shall at the discretion of
the Board answer same.
ii. Keep a record of each hearing or other official action of the Board.
iii. Review all applications preparatory to the meeting at which the same
are to be acted upon and prepare the agenda for each meeting of the
Board, under the direction of the City Planning Director.
iv. Attend each meeting of the Board.
v. Maintain a cross file card index of the addresses of properties affected
by application and names of owners thereof.
vi. Be in charge of the preparation of all bills and salaries of Board
personnel for payment.
vii. Be in charge of the keeping of all of the correspondence, notes, records,
applications, bills, data and other records which shall be comprehended
within the duties of Clerical Assistant in the physical custody of the City
Planning Director of the Planning and Zoning Division or such other
person as the City Planning Director may appoint for such purpose of
record keeping and coordinating responsibility and clearance of all data
between the Secretary, the Clerical Assistant and the Planning and
Zoning Division.
viii. Perform duties under the Planning Director's direction in officially
corresponding information to agencies implementing the Board's
actions.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
34
ix. Develop abbreviated minutes which reflect application details,
significant comments, Board actions and for use in transmitting the
Board's decision to the Zoning Officer for implementation. The Board
shall appropriately compensate the Clerical Assistant for this work and
attendance at night meetings and shall appoint her by resolution.
I. Rules and Regulations. The Planning Board shall adopt "Rules", not inconsistent with the
"Municipal Land Use Law" or with any other ordinance, as may be necessary to carry into effect
the provisions and purposes of this Ordinance, under Chapter 291 Laws of New Jersey 1975 as
amended, C.40:55D-8.
J. Meetings.
1. Regular Meetings. The Planning Board shall hold regular meetings as specified in its bylaws.
2. Special Meetings.
a. Applicants wishing to have special meetings/hearings on development
applications of timely importance separate and apart from the yearly
established calendar of meeting dates may request the Board Chairman to
conduct such special meetings. The Chairman may call for a special meeting on
his own or be requested in writing by any two Board Members.
b. Special meetings requested, in writing, by the applicant shall require compliance
with Article III regarding escrow deposits for development applications.
3. Call for Meeting. The Board may fix by rule the manner in which the Chairman shall
issue any such call for a meeting and the amount of notice required of any such call. The
Board may also fix by rule the manner, including the amount of notice, in which
meetings other than those at the call of the Chairman may be held.
4. Oath. The presiding officer or such person as he may designate, may administer oaths
and compel the attendance of witnesses.
5. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings, showing the vote of each member upon
each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Board shall also
keep records of its examination and other official action, all of which shall be a public
record.
6. Evidence. During a public hearing on each application for development, the technical
rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but the agency may exclude
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
7. Eligibility to Vote. When any hearing before a Planning Board shall carry over two (2) or
more meetings, a member of the Board who was absent for one (1) or more of the
meetings shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
notwithstanding his absence from one or more of the meetings; provided, however,
that such Board member has available to him a transcript or recording of the meetings
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
35
from which he was absent, and he has certified in writing to the Board that he has read
such transcript or listened to such recording.
K. Conflicts of Interest. No member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on any matter
in which he or she has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest.
L. Citizens Advisory Committee. After the appointment of a Planning Board, the Mayor may
appoint one or more persons as a Citizens Advisory committee to assist or collaborate with the
Planning Board in its duties, but such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take
other action required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor.
M. County Approval. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County Planning Board
is required by U.S.A. 40:27-6.3, in the case of a subdivision, or N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6, in the case of a
site plan, the Planning Board shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the County Planning Board or approval by the County
Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
§200-1.2 Powers, Duties and Jurisdiction of the Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall have the powers and duties as stated below.
A. Mandatory Powers. The Planning Board shall exercise its powers in accordance with the MLUL in
regard to:
1. Adoption or amendment of the City Master Plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28 and
periodic examination as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-89.
2. Review of subdivision and site plan applications pursuant to this Chapter.
3. Any official map adopted by the City Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
4. Administration of the Zoning Ordinance including conditional uses pursuant to this
Chapter.
5. Any capital improvements programs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29 et seq.
6. Variances and certain building permits in conjunction with subdivision, site plan and
conditional use approval pursuant to Section 200-1.2. C.1.a below.
7. Planned developments.
B. Other Powers. The Planning Board may:
1. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required by State or
Federal law or regulation.
2. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning process.
3. Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance or resolution of
the City Council.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
36
C. Ancillary Powers of the Planning Board.
1. Planning Board review in lieu of Board of Adjustment.
a. Whenever the proposed development requires approval of a subdivision, site
plan or conditional use, but not a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.d, the
Planning Board shall have the power to grant to the same extent and subject to
the same restrictions as the Board of Adjustment:
i. Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.c.
ii. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of a permit for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainage
way, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32.
iii. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a permit for a
building or structure not related to a street.
b. Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this section, notice of the hearing on
the application for development shall include reference to the request for
variances or direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
c. The applicant may elect to submit a separate application requesting approval of
the variance or direction of the issuance of a permit and a subsequent
application for any required approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional
use. The separate approval of the variance or direction of the issuance of a
permit shall be conditioned upon the grant of all required subsequent approvals
by the Planning Board. No such subsequent approval shall be granted unless the
approval can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
zoning ordinance.
d. Whenever an application for approval of a subdivision plat, site plan or
conditional use includes a request for relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the application within one
hundred twenty (120) days after submission by an applicant of a complete
application to the Planning Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. In the event that the applicant elects to submit
separate consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the
application for approval of the variance(s) or direction for issuance of a permit.
The period for granting or denying any subsequent approval shall be as
otherwise provided in this Chapter.
2. Review of capital project expenditures such as action by a housing, parking, highway,
special district, or other authority, development agency, school board or other similar
public agency, state, county or municipality.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
37
D. Referral Powers.
1. Prior to the adoption of a development regulation, revision, or amendment thereto, the
Planning Board shall make and transmit to the City Council within 35 days after referral,
a report including identification of any provisions in the proposed development
regulation, revision or amendment which are inconsistent with the master plan and
recommendations concerning these inconsistencies and any other matters as the Board
deems appropriate. For this Ordinance, a . "development regulation" means a "zoning
ordinance, subdivision ordinance, site plan ordinance, official map ordinance or other
municipal regulation of the use and development of land, or amendment thereto
adopted and filed pursuant to the MLUL. The City Council, when considering the
adoption of a development regulation, revision or amendment, shall review the report
of the Planning Board and may disapprove or change a recommendation by a vote of a
majority of its full authorized membership and shall record in its minutes the reasons for
not following such recommendations. Failure of the Planning Board to transmit its
report within the 35-day period provided herein shall relieve the City Council from the
requirements of this subsection in regard to the proposed development regulation,
revision or amendment thereto referred to the Planning Board.
2. The City Council may by ordinance provide for the reference of any matter or class of
matters to the Planning Board before final action thereon by a municipal body or
municipal officer having final authority thereon, except for any matter under the
jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment. Such reference shall not extend the time for
action by the referring body, whether or not the Planning Board shall have made a
recommendation regarding a matter authorized by the Ordinance to another municipal
body. Such recommendation may be rejected only by a majority of the full authorized
membership of such other body.
§200-2 ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§200-2.1 Establishment of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Membership.
1. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the
City Council.
2. Two alternate members shall be appointed by the City Council. Alternate members shall
be designated by the Chairman as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." Alternate
members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote except in
the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order
that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
38
3. No member, regular or alternative, shall hold any elective office or position under the
municipality.
4. All Board members and alternate members shall be citizens of the City of Paterson.
B. Terms.
1. The terms of all members, unless otherwise indicated, shall conform to a fiscal year
starting on July 1st and ending June 30th.
2. The terms of each member shall be four (4) years.
3. The term of each alternate member shall be two (2) years.
C. Substitute Members When Conflict Exists. If the Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum because its
regular or alternate members are prohibited by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 from acting on a matter due
to the member's personal or financial interest, Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be
called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members of the Board of Adjustment.
The Class IV members of the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve in order of seniority of
continuous service to the Planning Board until there is the minimum number of members
necessary to constitute a quorum to act upon the matter without any personal or financial
interest. If a choice has to be made between Class IV members of equal seniority, the
Chairperson of the Planning Board shall make the choice.
D. Vacancies and Removals.
1. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the
unexpired term only.
2. Any member of the Board may be removed by the City Council for cause. If an accused
member requests a public hearing on the charges, one shall be granted before final
action by the council
3. Any member of the Board who shall fail to be in attendance for three (3) consecutive
meetings shall be subject to immediate removal by the City Council.
E. Organization.
1. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be organized in conformity with the Code of the
City of Paterson and the MLUL.
2. At its organizational meeting in July each year, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
elect a Chairman and Vice-Chairman from its members and select a Secretary who may
or may not be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or a municipal employee.
F. Expenses and Costs. The City Council shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate such
funds as it may deem necessary for the expenses of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
G. Compensation of the Board Members. The following salaries are hereby established for the
members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment until amendment hereto.
1. Chairman - $300 per year in addition to the per-meeting sum.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
39
2. The sum of $75 per meeting to be paid to each member
H. Staff and Special Services.
1. Professional Staff Services. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall use for professional
staff services the Division of Planning and Zoning, which is headed by the Director of
Planning (Chief Planner).
2. Legal and Other Services. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall appoint an attorney,
secretary, certified shorthand reporter or provide for a tape recorder to record the
proceedings, and may appoint a clinical assistant whose responsibilities, duties, terms of
office and salaries shall be as follows:
a. The term of the attorney and secretary shall each be one (1) year.
b. The duties of the attorney are to attend the regular and special meetings of the
Board; to advise and consult with the Board on all legal questions pertaining to
the efficient operation of the Board in the discharge of its statutory duties; to
consult with Planning Division staff when necessary; and to render formal
written opinions to the Board when requested to do so by the majority vote of
the Board Members at a public meeting of the Board. The attorney's
appointment and salary shall be approved in resolution form.
c. The secretary shall keep a record of each hearing or other official action of the
Board; attend each meeting of the Board; call the roll call and record the vote of
each member of the Board; and perform other duties required by the Board.
Appointment and salary shall be in resolution form.
d. The certified shorthand reporter, if applicable, shall be an official reporter
appointed by the Supreme Court and assigned to the Trial Division of the
Superior and County Courts. The reporter shall make a record of all public
proceedings before the Zoning Board of Adjustment, prepare and furnish
suitable minutes thereof for each member of the Board, as well as prepare
verbatim transcripts of any proceedings required by a participant in a
proceeding before the Board, at the expense of such person. Appointment shall
be in resolution form.
e. Pursuant to the Code of the City of Paterson, the Planning Division shall, under
the Director of the City Planning Director, assist the Members of the Board and
its other personnel in the performance of their respective duties. The Planning
Division shall:
i. Receive and maintain all correspondence to the Board.
ii. Keep a record of each hearing or other official action of the Board
iii. Review all applications preparatory to the meetings at which the same
are to be acted upon and prepare the agenda for each meeting of the
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
40
Board, under the direction of the City Planning Director, or under the
direction of whomever he may assign on his staff.
iv. Maintain a cross file card index of the addresses of properties affected
by applications and names of owners thereof.
v. Prepare all bills and salaries of Board personnel for payment.
vi. Maintain all of the Board's correspondence, notes, applications, bills,
data and all other records.
vii. Review development applications and make recommendations for the
Board's consideration.
f. The Board of Adjustment may hire a professional planner from the Staff of the
Division of Planning and zoning to attend its night meetings, to convey technical
information, and to provide a report on each application developed by the
Planning and Zoning Division for Board consideration and action. The services
rendered by the Division of Planning and Zoning Staff Planner and compensation
thereof shall be reflected in a detailed resolution passed by the Board.
I. Rules and Regulations. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall adopt "Rules" as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this Ordinance.
1. Meetings.
a. Regular Meetings. The Board shall hold regular monthly meetings as specified in
its "Rules".
b. Special Meetings.
i. Applicants wishing to have special meetings/hearings on developments
of timely importance separate and apart from the yearly scheduled
calendar of meeting dates may request the Board Chair-man to conduct
such special meetings. The chairman may call for a special meeting on
his own or be requested in writing by any two Board members
ii. Special meetings requested, in writing, by the applicant shall require
compliance with Article XII regarding escrow deposits for development
applications.
c. Call For Meetings. The Board may fix by rule the manner in which the Chairman
shall issue any such call for a meeting and the amount of notice required of any
such call. The Board may also fix by rule the manner, including the amount of
notice, in which meetings other than those at the call of the Chairman may be
held.
d. Oaths. The presiding officer, or such person as he may designate, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
41
e. Minutes. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings, showing the vote of each
member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
The Board shall also keep records of its examination and other official action, all
of which will be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be a public
record.
f. Evidence. During a public hearing on each application for development, the
technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but the agency
may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
J. Conflicts of Interest. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to act on
any matter in which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
§200-2.2 Power, Duties and Jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall follow the provisions of this ordinance and the MLUL and
accordingly shall have the power to review and decide the following:
A. Appeals of Zoning Decision(s) by the Zoning Officer. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by
the Zoning Officer based on or made in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance.
B. Interpretations of Zoning Map and Zoning Ordinance. Hear and decide requests for
interpretation of the Zoning Map or Ordinance or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Board is authorized to pass by any Zoning or Official Map Ordinance in
accordance with the MLUL.
C. Bulk And Dimensional Variances:
1. Where: (i) by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece
of property; or (ii) by reason of exceptional topographic conditions or physical features
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property; or (iii) by reason of an extraordinary and
exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the structures
lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of any zoning regulation would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship
upon the developer of such property, the Board may grant, upon an application or an
appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict application of such
regulation so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship; or
2. Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of property the purposes of
zoning set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2 would be advanced by a deviation from the zoning
ordinance requirements and the benefits of the deviation would substantially outweigh
any detriment, the Board may grant a variance to allow departure from such zoning
requirements, provided, however, that the fact that a proposed use is an inherently
beneficial use shall not be dispositive of a decision on a variance under §200-2.2.C.1,
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
42
above, and provided that no variance from those departures enumerated in §200-2.2.D,
below, shall be granted under this subsection; and provided further that the proposed
development does not require approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan
or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has the power to
review a request for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a.
D. Use Variances. In particular cases and for special reasons, the Board may grant a variance to
allow departure from zoning regulations to permit (1) a use or principal structure in a district
restricted against such use or principal structure, (2) an expansion of a non-conforming use, (3)
deviation from a specification or standard pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 pertaining solely to a
conditional use, (4) an increase in the permitted floor area ratio as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4,
(5) an increase in the permitted density as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4 except as applied to the
required lot area for a lot or lots for detached one or two dwelling unit buildings which lot or
lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision or (6) a height
of a principal structure which exceeds by ten (10) feet or ten (10) percent the maximum height
permitted in the district for a principal structure. A variance under this subsection shall be
granted only by affirmative vote of at least five members.
E. Relief Not Enumerated In §200-2.2.D To Be Decided Under §200-2.2.C. If an application for
development requests one or more variances but not a variance for a purpose enumerated in
§200-2.2.D, the decision on the requested variance or variances shall be rendered under §200-
2.2.C
F. Requirement For Showing Of No Substantial Detriment. No variance or other relief may be
granted under the terms of this section, including a variance or other relief involving an
inherently beneficial use, without a showing that such variance or other relief can be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair the intent and
the purpose of the zone plan and zoning ordinance.
G. Referral Of Application To Other Agencies. An application under this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency for its report; provided that such reference shall not extend
the period of time within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
H. Additional Powers. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following additional powers:
1. To direct issuance of a building permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped
street or public drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved in the official
map, as permitted under N.J.S.A 40:55D-34, unless such request is made in the context
of an application for approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use not requiring
a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d), in which case such authority shall rest with
the Planning Board.
2. To direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure not related to street pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36, unless such request is made is made in the context of an
application for approval of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use not requiring a
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
43
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d), in which case such authority shall rest with
the Planning Board.
3. Whenever the proposed development requires approval by the Board of Adjustment of
a variance pursuant to §200-2.2.D of this ordinance (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d)), the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall have power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval or conditional
use approval. The developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance and a subsequent application for any required approval of a
subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The separate approval of the variance shall be
conditioned upon grant of all required subsequent approvals of a site plan or subdivision
by the Zoning Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent approval shall be granted
unless such approval can be granted without substantial impairment to the public good
and without substantial impairment to the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
zoning ordinance. The number of votes of Board members required to grant any such
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this Chapter for the approval in
question.
4. Whenever review or approval of the application by the Passaic County Planning Board is
required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, C. 285 (C. 40:27-6.3), in the case of a subdivision, or
Section 8 of P.L. 1968, C. 285 (C. 40:27-6.6), in the case of a site plan, the Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the Passaic County Planning Board or approval by
the Passaic County Planning Board by its failure to report thereon within the required
time.
I. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this Ordinance unless such
variance or other relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and will
not substantially impair the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance.
J. An application under this Section may be referred to any appropriate person or agency,
including the Planning Board, pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law, for its report; provided
that such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall act.
K. Annual Report On Variances Heard By Zoning Board Of Adjustment. In accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:44D-70.1, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review its decisions on
applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt by resolution a report of its
findings on zoning ordinance provisions which were the subject of variance requests and its
recommendations for zoning ordinance amendment or revision, if any. The Board of Adjustment
shall send copies of the report and resolution to the City Council and Planning Board.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
44
§200-2.3 Appeals.
A. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment by an interested party affected by any decision of
the Zoning Officer of the City based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance or
Official Map shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal with the Zoning Officer.
The notice shall specify the grounds of such appeal. All information pertinent to the matter shall
be transmitted immediately by said officer to the Division of Planning and Zoning as agent for
the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. An interested party may file an application for development with the Zoning Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application to a Zoning Officer. The
applicant shall specify the specific approval requested and any and all accompanying variances
requested. Such application shall be made through the Planning and Zoning Division, which
Division provides services to the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the
action, order, requirement, decision, interpretation or determination appealed from and to that
end, have all powers of the Zoning Officer from whom the appeal is taken.
D. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action in respect to which the decision appealed from was made unless the officer from whose
action the appeal is taken has certified to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal
shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certification a stay would, in
his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed other than by an Order of the Superior Court upon notice to the officer from whom the
appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
E. Appeals to the City Council. Any interested party may appeal to the City Council any final
decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment approving an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) of the MLUL. Such appeal shall be made pursuant to the regulations of
Article I of the MLUL (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17).
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
45
ARTICLE III ADMINISTRATION & ENFORCEMENT
§300-1 APPLICATION FOR A ZONING PERMIT, CONSTRUCTION PERMIT AND CERTIFICATE OF
OCCUPANCY
§300-1.1 Zoning Permit, Construction Permit and Certificate of Occupancy.
A. Zoning Permit. No building or structure shall be erected, moved, extended, or altered, nor shall
any excavation, demolition or other land improvement take place without a Zoning Permit
issued by the Zoning Officer. No Zoning Permit shall be issued in the City of Paterson unless that
action is in complete conformity with this, and all other applicable ordinances, statutes and
regulations. Application for the issuance of a Zoning Permit shall be made to the Zoning Officer.
B. Construction Permit. No Construction Permit shall be granted without submission of a Zoning
Permit issued by the Zoning Officer.
C. Certificate of Occupancy. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or to permit the use or occupancy
of any building, structure or premises, or both, or part thereof hereafter created, erected,
changed, converted, altered or enlarged in its use or structure unless a Zoning Permit has been
issued by the Zoning Officer certifying that the proposed use conforms to the requirements of
this Ordinance. The Director of Community Improvements is responsible for the issuance of
Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy following the issuance of a Zoning Permit by the
Zoning officer.
§300-1.2 Application Materials.
The following application materials shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer in support of a request for a
Construction Permit or a Certificate of Occupancy:
A. Two (2) copies of the appropriate application form, signed by the applicant.
B. Two (2) copies each of the following information on one or more drawings:
1. Survey of the property.
2. All materials required for issuance of a Construction Permit or Certificate of Occupancy,
as applicable.
3. A diagram of a proposed sign containing the information required for a sign permit as
specified in this Ordinance.
§300-1.3 Decision by Zoning Officer.
A. The Zoning Officer shall issue or deny a Zoning Permit within ten (10) business days of a request
therefor. The Zoning Officer is usually the first municipal official whom the typical property
owner meets in the process of making an application to do something with his property. The
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
46
Municipal Land Use Law requires applicants to file, with the Zoning Officer, for a Zoning Permit.
In this ordinance, the Zoning Permit is defined as a document signed by the Zoning Officer
which:
1. Is required as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use, change of a use, or
the erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a
structure or building and;
2. Acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of this
ordinance or variance therefrom duly authorized by the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
B. The basic purpose of a Zoning Permit is to assure that the proposed use, construction or
alteration will be in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. A Building Permit shall be
granted only following approval of a Zoning Permit. Certificates of Occupancy are also required
to indicate specific certification of compliance with the Uniform Construction Code of the State
of New Jersey following completion of construction. The Certificate of Occupancy is concerned
with construction details of the building and assurance that it is constructed and, in the case of
rental units, maintained in compliance with the State Construction Code or applicable state,
health and safety regulations. The Zoning Permit looks to the location and use of the building in
light of the requirements to the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance and certifies that such
location and use (1) is permitted or (2) that it exists as a non-conforming use and/or nonconforming
structure or (3) is permitted by the terms of a variance.
C. Upon the filing of a completed application for a Zoning Permit, the Zoning Officer shall
determine whether the proposed use is permitted or not, and whether a development
application is required to be submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. A
Zoning Permit application for a use not specifically listed as permitted in a particular zone
district shall be denied and it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to specify what sections of
the ordinance are involved and what approvals and/or variances would be required before a
Zoning Permit could be issued. Such specifications of approvals and/or variances listed on the
permit application shall be submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
applicable, for consideration of the development application.
§300-2 REVIEWS BY APPROVING AGENCIES
§300-2.1 Further Application.
If, after the receipt of a denied application for a Zoning Permit, the applicant wishes to pursue his
proposal for development, he shall make application to the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as applicable, through the Division of Planning and Zoning.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
47
§300-2.2 Direct Application.
An applicant may file an application for development directly with the Zoning Board of Adjustment or
the Planning Board through the Division of Planning and Zoning without prior application to the Zoning
Officer, provided that an application made under the provisions of this subsection shall make mention of
each and every type of review sought. This provision does not waive the requirement of obtaining a
Zoning Permit in the event the party is granted approval by either Board.
§300-2.3 Pre-Submission Conference; Informal Review.
A. Applicants are encouraged to participate in a pre-submission conference with a member of the
Division of Planning and Zoning, either in person, by agent or by attorney. The purpose of the
conference shall be to evaluate the proposal for the type of reviews required and to insure that
the developer applicant receives, and understands the requirements and expectations with
respect to, all proper application materials. No statement or representation by either the
applicant or the Division of Planning and Zoning at the time of pre-submission conference shall
be binding or final.
B. At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an informal review of a concept
plan for a development for which the developer intends to prepare and submit an application
for development. The amount of any fees for such an informal review shall be a credit toward
fees for review of the application for development. The developer shall not be bound by any
concept plan for which review is requested, and the planning board shall not be bound by any
such review.
§300-2.4 Application Material.
The following information shall be submitted for all types of approval sought. Checklist for submissions
to the Paterson Planning Board and Paterson Zoning Board of Adjustment for Site Plan, Minor
Subdivision, Major Subdivision, Conditional Use, "C" Variance and "D" Variance approvals are described
below:
A. General Requirements. No application for development shall be deemed complete unless the
items, information and documentation required in the General Requirements form (found in
Appendix A), where applicable, are submitted to the Paterson Planning and Zoning Division.
B. Site Plan Review. No application for site plan review and approval shall be deemed complete
unless the items, information and documentation required in the Site Plan Submission Details
and Requirements form (found in Appendix A) where applicable, are submitted to the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable.
C. Subdivision Review. No application for subdivision review and approval shall be deemed
complete unless the items, information and documentation required in the Sketch and Minor
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
48
Subdivision Plat Details and Requirements form, the Preliminary Plat Details and requirements
form, or the Final Plat Details and Requirements form (found in Appendix A), where applicable,
are submitted to the Planning Board of Zoning Board of Adjustment, as applicable.
D. Variances. No application for variance approval shall be deemed complete unless the items,
information and documentation required in the Variance Submission Details and Requirements
form (found in Appendix A), where applicable, are submitted to the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, as applicable, and in conjunction with other types of approvals sought. All
requirements under Section A, B and C, as applicable to the types of approvals desired shall be
submitted.
E. No application for Conditional Use review and approval shall be deemed complete unless all
requirements under Section A, B, C and D above, as applicable to the types of approvals desired,
are submitted to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, as applicable, and in conjunction
with other types of approvals sought.
F. An applicant for development may request in writing from the appropriate Board, a waiver or
elimination of specific checklist details or requirements. The Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall have the power and authority to waive or eliminate
specific checklist details and requirements that are not deemed necessary to make an informed
decision as to whether the requirements necessary for approval of an application have been
met. The applicant shall submit all materials and information as set forth herein and all other
applicable local and state ordinances and codes.
§300-2.5 Proof of Payment of Taxes Required.
Notwithstanding any potentially conflicting provisions of this Ordinance of the City of Paterson (Code of
the City of Paterson - Chapter 297), the applicant for any development application, at the time of filing
of said application, shall file with the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment a certification of the
Tax Collector that all municipal taxes and/or assessments have been paid and are current with respect
to the property for which the application is made. In the event taxes and/or assessments on the subject
property are unpaid, the applicant may submit a written request to the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment that any approval on said development application be subject to the payment of taxes
and/or assessments. For good cause, the appropriate Board may waive the requirement of proof of
payment as a condition of completeness of the application. However, in such instance, the Board shall
condition any approval of the development application upon prompt payment of the full amount of
unpaid taxes and/or assessments. In the event the Board shall condition any approval of the
development application upon prompt payment of the full amount of unpaid taxes and/or assessments,
the applicant shall have no right to proceed with the development until all such taxes and/or
assessments have been paid and are made current.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
49
§300-2.6 Application Process.
A. Determination of Complete Application.
1. Applications for development shall require the submission of all required application
forms together with all required accompanying documents and information in
accordance §300-2.4, Application Material.
2. An application shall be certified as complete in writing to the applicant by the City
Planning Director upon the applicant's meeting all requirements specified in §300-2.4,
Application Material, and shall be deemed complete as of the day it is so certified by the
City Planning Director, who shall be the Administrative Officer for purposes of the
commencement of the time period for action of the approving authority.
3. In the event that the City Planning Director does not certify the application to be
complete within 45 days of the date of its submission, the application shall be deemed
complete upon the expiration of the 45-day period for purposes of commencing the
applicable time period, unless: (a) the application lacks information indicated on a
checklist required in accordance with §3002.4, Application Material; and (b) the City
Planning Director has notified the applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the
application within 45 days of submission of the application.
4. The applicant may request of the approving board that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the approving board shall grant or deny the
request within 45 days from the date of such request.
5. Certain types of development proposals may require the submission of additional
application material as determined by the Division of Planning and Zoning and conveyed
to the applicant through an instruction sheet accompanying the application form. In all
cases, sufficient information shall be provided to permit the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment to consider all relevant facts concerning the application. However,
the application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional
information or any revisions in the accompanying documents so required.
6. The approving agency may subsequently require correction of any information found to
be in error and submission of additional information not specified in §300-2.4,
Application Material, or any revisions in the accompanying documents as are reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
consideration of the application for development have been met. However, the
application shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information
or any revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the approving
authority.
7. The Director of the Division of Planning and Zoning, or a member of his staff, may
require the submission of extra copies or additional information to complete the
application when such would aid the approving agency in it deliberations or when
required by law for review by other governmental agencies. However, the application
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
50
shall not be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
revisions in the accompanying documents so required.
8. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's obligation to prove, in
the application process, that he or she is entitled to approval of the application.
B. Schedule and Notification of Meeting. When an application is deemed to be complete, it shall be
scheduled for the next available meeting of the approving agency and the applicant shall be so
notified by the Division of Planning and Zoning.
C. Staff Review and Recommendation. All complete applications for development shall be
reviewed by a member of the staff of the Division of Planning and Zoning. The staff member
shall evaluate the proposal for conformance with the criteria for approval set forth in the
appropriate sections of this ordinance, make findings of fact thereon, and may recommend the
proposal for approval or denial by the approving agency. The staff review shall be in writing and
become part of the record at the public meeting or hearing on the application. In addition, a
staff member of the Division of Planning and Zoning may testify under oath before the
approving agency at the meeting or hearing.
D. Classification of Subdivision
1. The Planning Board, or its Subdivision Committee if so designated to said Committee,
shall review the plat prior to the regular meeting and shall classify the subdivision as a
minor or major subdivision.
2. Section 300-5.3.B notwithstanding, the Planning Board may require notice and public
hearing of minor subdivision applications
E. Interagency Review. If the proposal requires approval by other local, county or other agencies,
the applicant shall submit a copy of the application material to those agencies. The Division of
Planning and Zoning may assist an applicant in identifying when his proposal requires review or
approval by any county, state or federal agency, but the responsibility for determining the
appropriate non-City approvals and the cost of application to such agencies shall be borne by
the applicant.
F. Hearing and Notice. The approving agency shall hold a hearing open to the public on each
application for development in accordance with §300-5. Applications requiring formal public
notice shall not be heard unless public notice has been given in complete conformance with
§300-5 and the Municipal Land Use Law.
G. Time Limits for Review and Action. Action on completed applications shall be reviewed and
decided within the time limits as set forth in the Municipal Land Use Law as incorporated herein
in Section 300-4 or within such further periods as the applicant may consent to in writing. In the
event of a conflict between time frames as provided in the Municipal Land Use Law and this
Ordinance, the Municipal Land Use Law shall govern.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
51
§300-2.7 Zoning Permits.
A. Submission of Certified Zoning Permit to Obtain Building Permit and/or to Validate a Previously
Approved Non-Conforming Use or Bulk Condition.
1. All Building Permits and Certificates of Occupancy shall only be issued by the Director of
Community Improvements upon an applicant's first submitting a certified Zoning Permit
issued by the Zoning Officer. Such certified Zoning Permit shall be issued only if a Zoning
Permit application does not warrant Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
approval or if the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment has approved the
development application with or without conditions inherent in that approval.
2. Where this ordinance is violated, the Zoning Officer may file a complaint for the
violation in the Paterson Municipal Court. Upon conviction for the violation, the
defendant would be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 per day or imprisonment not
exceeding ninety (90) days or both.
B. The application for a Zoning Permit shall include all of the information specified in the required
in the Application for a Zoning Permit form (found in Appendix A) as well as applications for
development or wishing to obtain a Building Permit or a Certificate of Occupancy. C. The Zoning
Permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer and shall reflect the following information indicated
in the form included in Appendix A.
§300-3 FEES
§300-3.1 Fee Schedule
No application for development, involving the review of site plan, subdivision, variance conditional use
of combination thereof, shall not be consider complete until the fee indicated below has been paid. For
applications where two fees are applicable, the higher fee shall be charged.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
52
Application Type Non-Refundable Application Fees
A. Site Plan or Subdivision Application
1. Residential
a. One (1) dwelling unit $200
b. Two (2) or Three (3) dwelling units $325
c. Four (4) to Ten (10) dwelling units $725
d. Eleven (11) or more dwelling units $1,000 plus $45 per unit
2. Commercial and Industrial
a. Less than 2,500 square feet of proposed building space $350
b. 2,500 to 5,000 square feet of proposed building space $500
c. More than 5,000 square feet of proposed building space $500, plus $200 for each additional 2,000 square feet of
proposed building floor space or fraction thereof
3. Charitable and Institutional $250
4. Minor Subdivision and Site Plan for Existing Development $500
B. Use Variances
1. Residential $500
2. Commercial $700
3. Industrial $1,000
4. Multiple Uses $1,500
C. Conditional Uses $800
D. Other Variances $250
E. Signs $500
F. Official Map (street vacation, etc) $2,500
G. Appeals
1. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment $500
2. Appeals to City Council $500
H. Zoning Change Request $5,000
I. Street Vacation $2,500
J. Additional fee for list of adjoining owners $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater
K. Open Space Fee An open space fee of $100 per application shall be
collected from each applicant and dedicated for the
acquisition of property to be used for passive and active
recreational purposes. A separate fund shall be
established and all monies collected shall be placed in
this account for the purposes stated.
L. Review by Historic Preservation Commission 10% of the review fee for other aspects of the project,
or $25, whichever is greater
M. Informal Review before Planning Board $50
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
53
N. When deemed necessary by a Municipal Agency, escrow
fees shall be provided in accordance with the following:
Type of Application Escrow Fees
Site Plan
Preliminary Site Plan – Residential
Less than 10,000 sq. ft. GFA $1,000
10,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. GFA $2,500
Greater than 50,000 sq. ft. GFA $3,500
Preliminary Site Plan – Non Residential
Less than 1,000 sq. ft. GFA $1,000 if less than 1 acre; $2,500 if greater than 1
acre
1,001 to 10,000 sq. ft. GFA $2,500
10,001 to 50,000 sq. ft. GFA $3,500
Greater than 50,000 sq. ft. GFA $5,000
Final Site Plan 50% cost of Preliminary Site Plan escrow fee
Amended Site Plan Approval $1,000
Conceptual Site Plan $300
Subdivision
Minor Subdivision $500
Preliminary Major Subdivision
Fewer than 10 Lots $1,000
11 Lots or Greater $2,000
Final Major Subdivision 50% cost of Preliminary Minor Subdivision fee
Amended Subdivision Approval 50% cost of Preliminary or Final Major Subdivision
Escrow fee, as applicable
Appeals and Interpretations
Appeals and Interpretations as per NJSA 40:55D-70 a & b $1,000 (which may be waived or reduced when
deemed not to require staff time in excess of 5
hours)
‘c’ variance as per NJSA 40:55D-70(c)
For any project on lots under 3,000 sq. ft. $500
For any project on lots 3,000 sq. ft. and over $1,000
‘d’ variance as per NJSA 40:55D-70(d)
For any project on lots under 3,000 sq. ft. $1,000
For any project on lots 3,000 sq. ft. and over $2,500
Rezoning or Redevelopment Plan Amendment $3,000
Historic Preservation Review $750
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
54
§300-3.2 Fee Collection.
All fees will be collected by the Division of Planning and Zoning and transmitted to the proper account of
the City of Paterson in a manner as required by law.
§300-3.3 Additional Fees.
A. A charge of $50.00 for a copy of the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance of the City of
Paterson;
B. A charge of $50.00 for a copy of the Master Plan of the City of Paterson;
C. A charge of $1.50 for a 20" x 26" street index map, a charge of $3.00 for a 36" x 42" street index
map, and a charge of $.50 per page for reproducing any 3 " x 11 " sheet of text; and
D. A charge of $10.00 for a copy of the 36" x 42" Zoning Map of the City of Paterson.
§300-3.4 Escrow Deposits for Development Applications.
A. In the event an applicant seeks a special or expedited meeting for the consideration of his
development application, the applicant shall be responsible to reimburse the municipality for all
expenses of professional personnel and transcriber/stenographer services. No applicant shall be
responsible to reimburse the agency for attendance at such meetings of commissioners or
board members.
B. When deemed necessary by a municipal agency, an applicant shall be responsible to reimburse
the municipality for the costs of professional charges for review of applications, review and
preparation of documents, and inspections of developments under construction, by outside
consultants when an application is of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of the
professionals normally utilized by the City, and/or other purposes under the provisions of P. L.
1975 c. 291 et. seq.). The City shall be entitled to be reimbursed for the review of applications
by such outside consultants, both as to completeness and content; for the review and
preparation of documents such as, but not limited to: resolutions, developers agreements and
necessary correspondence with applicant or applicants professionals; meetings; and all
communication and all time spent reviewing the application submittals. The only cost that shall
be added to any such charges shall be actual out-of-pocket expenses of such professional or
consultants including normal and typical expenses incurred in processing applications and
inspecting improvements. The City shall not bill an applicant for any clerical or administrative
functions, overhead expenses, meeting rooms or any other cost or expenses not associated with
an application. The initial deposit to be made shall be as specified in the §300-3.1 Fee Schedule,
and shall be in addition to all other fees required by the City.
C. If an escrow account contains insufficient funds to cover the costs of charges approved by the
Chief Financial Officer against the escrow account, the Chief Financial Officer shall provide the
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
55
applicant with notice of the insufficient balance requesting that the applicant post a deposit to
the account in an amount agreed upon by the City or the approving authority and the applicant.
D. No Zoning Permits, Building Permits, Certificates of Occupancy or any other types of permits
may be issued with respect to any approved application for development until all bills for
reimbursable services have been received by the City from professional personnel rendering
services in connection with such applicant and payment has been made. However, the
appropriate maps or permits may be signed and permits released or issued, if the applicant shall
have deposited with the City an amount agreed upon by the applicant and the City likely to be
sufficient to cover all reimbursable items; and upon posting said deposit with the City. If the
amount of the deposit exceeds the actual costs as approved for payment by the governing body,
the developer shall be entitled to a return of the excess deposit, together with such interest as
allowed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1; but if the charges submitted and approved by the governing
body exceed the amount of the deposit, the developer shall be liable for payment of such
deficiency.
E. The following represents the amount of reimbursable expenses per special meeting for which an
applicant/ developer shall be responsible:
1. $850 for attorney's time;
2. Other professional personnel (outside consultants) at their normal hourly rate then in
effect;
3. For municipal professionals, an amount equal to 200% of the professional's hourly base
salary times the number of hours spent or anticipated to be spent by the professional;
4. $450 for the cost of a shorthand reporter plus $35 per hour after 11:00 P.M. unless the
developer/applicant arranges for his own reporter and so notifies the Board in advance
in writing. In either case, the shorthand reporter shall provide a full transcript of the
proceedings; and
5. Actual out-of-pocket expenses of outside professionals or consultants.
F. Deposits received from any developer in excess of $5,000 shall be deposited by the City's Chief
Financial Officer in a banking institution or savings and loan association in this State insured by
an agency of the federal government, or in any other fund or depository approved for such
deposits by the State, in an account bearing interest at the minimum rate currently paid by the
institution or depository on tine or savings deposits. The municipality shall notify the applicant
in writing of the name and address of the institution or depository in which the deposit is made
and the amount of the deposit. The municipality shall not be required to refund an amount of
interest paid on a deposit that does not exceed $100 for the year. If the amount of interest
exceeds $100, that entire amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him by
the municipality annually or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied to the purposes for
which it was deposited, as the case may be; except that the municipality may retain for
administrative expenses a sum equivalent to no more than 33-1/3% of that entire amount,
which shall be in lieu of all other administrative and custodial expenses. All sums not actually so
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
56
expended shall be refunded to the applicant within 90 days after the final decision by the
appropriate municipal agency with respect to such application, upon certification by the Board
Secretary that such application has been finally decided.
G. Each payment charged to the deposit shall be pursuant to a voucher from the professional
which voucher shall identify the personnel performing the service, and each date the services
were performed, the hours spent to one-quarter hour increments, the hourly rate and the
expenses incurred. All professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial officer. The
professional shall send an informational copy of all vouchers or statements submitted to the
Chief Financial Officer of the municipality simultaneously to (1) the applicant and (2) the
municipal agency for whom said services were performed.
H. The Chief Financial Officer shall prepare and send to the applicant a statement which shall
include an accounting of funds listing all deposits, interest earnings, disbursements and the
cumulative balance of the escrow account. This information shall be provided on a quarterly
basis if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis if monthly charges exceed
$1,000.
I. The following close out procedures shall apply to all deposits and escrow accounts established
under the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and shall commence after the approving
authority has granted final approval and signed the subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of
application review escrows and deposits, or after the improvements have been approved in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53, in the case of improvements inspection escrows and
deposits. The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the Chief Financial Officer of
the municipality and the approving authority and to the relevant municipal professional, that
the application or the improvements, as the case may be, are completed. After receipt of such
notice, the professional shall render a final bill to the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality
within thirty (30) days and shall send a copy simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief Financial
Officer of the municipality shall render a written final accounting to the applicant on the uses to
which the deposit was put within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the final bill. Any balances
remaining in the deposit or escrow account including interest in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1 shall be refunded to the developer along with the final accounting.
J. All professional charges for review of an application for development, review and preparation of
documents or inspection of improvements shall be reasonable and necessary, given the status
and progress of the application or construction. Review fees shall be charged only in connection
with an application for development presently pending before the approving authority or upon
review of compliance with the conditions of approval, or review of requests for modification or
amendment made by the applicant. A professional shall not review items that are subject to
approval by any State governmental agency and not under municipal jurisdiction except to the
extent consultation with a State agency is necessary due to the effect of State approvals on the
subdivision or site plan.
K. Inspection fees shall be charged only for actual work shown on a subdivision or site plan or
required by an approving resolution. Professionals inspecting improvements under construction
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
57
shall charge only for inspections that are reasonably necessary to check the progress and quality
of the work and such inspections shall be reasonably based on the approved development plans
and documents.
L. If the municipality retains a different professional or consultant in the place of a professional
originally responsible for development application review, or inspection of improvements, the
municipality or approving authority shall be responsible for all time and expenses of the new
professional to become familiar with the application or the project, and the municipality or
approving authority shall not bill the applicant or charge to the deposit or the escrow account
for any such services.
M. The cost of the installation of improvements for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 shall be
estimated by the Municipal Engineer based on documented construction costs for the public
improvements prevailing in the general area of the municipality. The developer may appeal the
Municipal Engineer's estimate to the County Construction Board of Appeals, established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127.
N. Disputed Charges
1. An applicant shall notify in writing the governing body with copies to the Chief Financial
Officer, the approving authority and the professional whenever the applicant disputes
the charges made by a professional. The governing body or its designee shall within a
reasonable time attempt to remediate any disputed charges. If the matter is not
resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the applicant may appeal to the County
Construction Board of Appeals established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127 any charge
to an escrow account or deposit by any municipal professional or consultant or the cost
of the installation of improvements estimated by the municipal engineer pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. An applicant or his authorized agent shall submit the appeal in
writing to the County Construction Board of Appeals. The applicant or his authorized
agent shall simultaneously send a copy of the appeal to the municipality, approving
authority, and any professional whose charges are the subject of the appeal. An
applicant shall file an appeal within forty-five (45) days from receipt of the informational
copy of the professional's voucher required by subsection N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2(c),
except that if the professional has not supplied the applicant with an informational copy
of the voucher, then the applicant shall file his appeal within sixty (60) days from receipt
of the municipal statement of activity against the deposit or escrow account required by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D53.2(c). An applicant may file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges
by a professional during a period not exceeding six (6) months to demonstrate that they
represent a pattern of excessive or inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of this
provision need not appeal each charge individually.
2. Appeals shall be taken in accordance with the Rules and procedures established by the
County Construction Board of Appeals.
3. During the pendency of any appeal, the municipality or approving authority shall
continue to process, hear and decide the application for development and to inspect the
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
58
development in the normal course and shall not withhold, delay or deny reviews,
inspections, signing of subdivision plats or site plans, the reduction or the release of
performance or maintenance guarantees, the issuance of construction permits or
certificates of occupancy, or any other approval or permit because an appeal has been
filed or is pending under this subsection. The Chief Financial Officer of the municipality
may pay charges out of the appropriate escrow account or deposit for which an appeal
has been filed. If a charge is disallowed after payment, the Chief Financial Officer of the
municipality shall reimburse the deposit or escrow account in the amount of any such
disallowed charge or refund the amount to the applicant. If a charge is disallowed after
payment to a professional or consultant who is not an employee of a municipality, the
professional or consultant shall reimburse the municipality in the amount of any such
disallowed charge.
§300-4 TIME LIMITS AND SCHEDULES
§300-4.1 Time for Action by Planning Board on Site Plan, Subdivision , Conditional Use and General
Development Plan Applications.
A. Action (i.e., approval, approval with conditions or denial) shall be taken on development
applications within the time limits indicated below. The time limits shall commence upon the
written certification by the City Planning Director that the application is complete in accordance
with §300-2.6.B. Upon the written certification by the City Planning Director that the application
is complete, the Planning Board has:
1. Forty-five (45) days for approval of a minor subdivision in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-47 or within such further time which may be consented to by the applicant;
2. Forty-five (45) days within which to act on an application for preliminary subdivision
approval for a subdivision of ten (10) or fewer lots in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-
48, or within such further time which may be consented to by the applicant;
3. Ninety-five (95) days within which to act on an application for preliminary subdivision
approval for a subdivision of more than ten (10) lots in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-
48, or within such further time which may be consented to by the applicant;
4. Forty-five (45) days within which to act on an application for final subdivision approval
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50, or within such further time which may be
consented to by the applicant;
5. Forty-five (45) days for an application for preliminary site plan approval which involves
ten (10) acres of land or less and ten (10) dwelling units or less in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, or within such further time which may be consented to by the
applicant;
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
59
6. Ninety-five (95) days for an application for preliminary site plan approval which involves
more than ten (10) acres or more then ten (10) dwelling units in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46, or within such further time which may be consented to by the
applicant;
7. Forty-five (45) days within which to act on an application for a final site plan approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-50, or within such further time which may be
consented to by the applicant;
8. Ninety-five (95) days for approval of an application for conditional use approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67a, or within such further time which may be
consented to by the applicant. The longest time period for action by the Board, whether
it be for subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval, shall apply.
9. When an applicant makes simultaneous application for a site plan, subdivision or
conditional use and for a variance(s) cognizable before the Planning Board, the Planning
Board must grant or deny approval of the application within 120 days, or within such
further time which may be consented to by the applicant, from the date of written
certification by the City Planning Director that the application is complete. An applicant
may elect, however, to file for the variance first and make subsequent application for
the approval of the subdivision, site plan or conditional use. The Planning Board would
then have 120 days to render a decision on the variance application and the time period
for review of subsequent applications for the subdivision, site plan or conditional use
approval would be as required in paragraphs (1) through (8), above.
10. Where a general development plan is submitted to the Planning Board, it has ninety-five
(95) days within which to grant or deny the plan. (N.J.S.A- 40:55D-45.3).
11. When reviewing several applications (e.g., subdivision and site plan, site plan and
conditional use) simultaneously, the Board shall be provided the longest period allowed
to the Board for action on any individual application comprising the proposal.
§300-4.2 Time for Action by the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120 days after the date:
(1) an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative official or (2) upon which the
application receives written certification by the City Planning Director that the application is
complete, or within such further time which may be consented to by the applicant.
B. If the applicant elects to file for the variance first and make subsequent application for the
approval of a subdivision, site plan and/or conditional use application, the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall have 120 days to render a decision on the variance application. The time
period for review of subsequent applications for subdivision, site plan or conditional use
approval would be as required in paragraphs (1) through (8), above.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
60
§300-4.3 Failure to Act; Extension of Public Hearing.
An applicant shall comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A.40:55D-10.4 whenever the applicant seeks to
claim that his application has been approved by reason of the failure of the municipal agency to grant or
deny approval within the time limits as set forth herein. Nothing in this section, however, shall prevent
an applicant from extending any time limit, for any reasonable number of days. All such extensions shall
be in writing and signed by the applicant, or his agent or attorney, and approved by the responsible
Board.
§300-4.4 Other Review Concurrent.
A. The Board may refer any development application under review to any appropriate agency or
individual for evaluation; provided, however, that the time limits of this section shall not be
extended as a result, without the written consent of the applicant.
B. County Approval. Whenever review or approval of a development application by the County
Planning Board is required by N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3 or 40:27-6.6, the Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
County Planning Board. The County Planning Board's failure to report thereon within the
required time period provided by law shall be considered a favorable response. Whenever
County Planning Board review or approval is required, the applicant shall be responsible for
filing all necessary applications, plans, reports and other documents directly with the County
Planning Board.
§300-4.5 Decisions.
A. The approving agency shall make a formal written decision on all applications for development,
including any conditions for approval, and shall include findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon. That decision shall be in the form of a resolution adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-
10g. A copy of this decision shall be mailed by the approving agency within ten (10) days of the
date of the decision to the applicant or if represented then to his attorney, to the Zoning Officer,
and to the Division of Planning and Zoning. The Division of Planning and Zoning shall file the
resolution and make it available for inspection or shall provide a copy of such filed resolution to
any interested party for a reasonable fee. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the
official newspaper of the City. Such publication shall be arranged by the applicant. The
municipality may make a reasonable charge for its publication. The period of time in which an
appeal of the decision may be made shall run from the first publication of the decision.
B. All conditions of preliminary and final approval shall be binding upon the applicant, all present
and future owners, tenants, users and occupants of the property and their respective successors
and assigns.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
61
C. The applicant and any successor in interest shall be responsible for installing and maintaining in
good order and condition all required improvements and landscaping, unless such
improvements in landscaping are to be installed by, and/or dedicated to and maintained by the
City, County or another party, under the terms of approval granted by the Board. Such required
improvements shall include, but not be limited to, parking improvements, buffer zones,
drainage facilities, exterior lighting and landscaping. Failure of any responsible party to install
and/or maintain required improvements or landscaping, shall constitute a violation of this
Chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement procedures set forth herein.
§300-4.6 Effect of Approvals and Expiration of Approvals.
A. After a proposal for development has received all necessary reviews and approval, and the
applicant has complied with all conditions of approval, a Construction Permit shall be issued by
the Construction Official and a Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued by the Director of
Community Improvements when the premises have satisfied all requirements therefor.
B. Effect and Expiration of Approvals for Minor Subdivisions.
1. Approval of a minor subdivision shall be deemed final approval provided that the Board
may condition such approval on the provision of improvements as may be required. The
zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether conditional or
otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was granted, shall not be changed
for a period of two (2) years after the date on which the resolution of approval is
adopted provided that any such approved minor subdivision shall have been duly
recorded in accordance with §300-4.6.B.2.
2. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire one hundred ninety (190) days from the
date on which the resolution of approval is adopted unless within such period a plat in
conformity with such approval and the Map Filing Law, N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq., or a
deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with
the County Register, the City Engineer and the City Tax Assessor. Any such plat or deed
accepted for such filing shall have been signed by the Board Chairperson and Secretary.
In reviewing the application for development for a proposed minor subdivision, the
Board may accept a plat not in conformity with N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.; provided that
if the developer chooses to file the minor subdivision as provided herein by plat rather
than deed such plat shall conform with the provisions of the said act.
3. The Board may extend the one hundred ninety (190) day period for filing a minor
subdivision plat or deed if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Board: (a) that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from filing
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental or
quasi-governmental entities; and (b) that the developer applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to
the period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as determined by the
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
62
Board or for a period not exceeding one (1) year from what would otherwise be the
expiration date.
4. The developer shall apply for the extension for filing a minor subdivision plat or deed
before (a) what would otherwise be the expiration date of minor subdivision approval;
or (b) the 91st day after the developer receives the first legally required approval from
other governmental entities, whichever occurs later.
C. Effect and Expiration of Approvals for Preliminary Subdivision and Site Plans.
1. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan, except as provided in this
section, shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a 3-year period from the
date on which the resolution granting preliminary approval is adopted:
a. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval was
granted shall not be changed, including, but not limited to, use requirements;
layout and design standards for streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot sizes; yard
dimensions and off-tract improvements; and in the case of a site plan, any
requirements peculiar to site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41,
except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the City from
modifying by ordinance such general terms and conditions of preliminary
approval as related to public health and safety.
b. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration
date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections of the
preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case may be.
c. That the applicant may apply for and the Board may grant extension on such
preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one (1) year but not to
exceed a total extension of two (2) years, provided that if the design standards
have been revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern,
d. In the case of a subdivision of or a site plan for a planned development of fifty
(50) acres or more, the Board may grant the rights referred to in paragraphs a, b
and c above for such period of time, longer than three (3) years, as shall be
determined by the Board to be reasonable taking into consideration: (1) the
number of dwelling units and non residential floor area permissible under final
approval, (2) economic conditions and (3) the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the Board may
thereafter grant, an extension of preliminary approval for such additional period
of time as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable taking into
consideration: (1) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under final approval, (2) the number of dwelling units and non
residential floor area remaining to be developed, (3) economic conditions and
(4) the comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design
standards have been-revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
63
e. Whenever the Board grants an extension of preliminary approval pursuant to
paragraphs c or d above and preliminary approval has expired before the date
on which the extension was granted, the extension shall begin on what would
otherwise be the expiration date. The developer may apply for an extension
either before or after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
f. The Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for a period
determined by the Board but not exceeding one (1) year from what would
otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly, from proceeding with the development because of delays in
obtaining legally required approvals from other governmental entities and that
the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required
approvals. The developer shall apply for the extension before: (1) what would
otherwise be the expiration date of the preliminary approval, or (2) the 91st day
after the developer received the last legally required approval from other
governmental entities, whichever is later. An extension granted pursuant to this
section shall not preclude the Board from granting an extension pursuant to
paragraphs c or d above.
D. Effect and Expiration of Approvals for Final Subdivision and Site Plans
1. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date of signing of the
plat unless within such period the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with
the county recording officer. The Board may for good cause shown extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the
plat. The Board may extend the 95-day or 190-day period if the developer proves to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Board that: (1) the developer was barred or prevented,
directly or indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities; and (2) the
developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals. The
length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the
required approvals, as determined by the planning board. The developer may apply for
an extension either before or after the original expiration date.
2. The subdivision plat shall be signed by the Chairperson and Secretary of the Planning
Board prior to its filing with the county recording officer. The Chairperson and Secretary
of the Planning Board shall not sign the plat unless it has been duly approved has been
duly approved by the Planning Board and until the developer has posted the required
performance guarantees. If the county recording officer records any plat without such
approval, such recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon request of the
municipality, the plat shall be expunged from the official records.
3. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted and all
other rights conferred upon the developer, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
64
be changed for a period of two (2) years after the date on which the resolution of final
approval is adopted; provided that in the case of a major subdivision the rights
conferred by this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the
time period required. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval and, in the case of subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as required, the
Board may extend such period of protection for extensions of one (1) year but not to
exceed three (3) extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance,
the granting of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval for any
section of the development that is granted final approval.
4. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development of fifty (50) acres or
more, conventional subdivision or site plan for one hundred fifty (150) acres or more, or
site plan for the development of nonresidential floor area of 200,000 square feet or
more, the Board may grant the rights referred to in paragraph 1 of this section for such
period of time, longer than two (2) years, as shall be determined by the Board to be
reasonable, taking into consideration: (a) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under final approval; (b) economic conditions; (c) he
comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may apply for thereafter, and
the Board may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such additional period
of time as shall be determined by the Board to be reasonable taking into consideration
the following: (a) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval; (b) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
remaining to be developed; (c) economic conditions; and (d) the comprehensiveness of
the development.
5. Whenever the Board grants any extension of final approval pursuant to paragraphs 1 or
2 above, and final approval has expired before the date on which the extension is
granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date. The
developer may apply for the extension either before or after what would otherwise be
the expiration date.
6. The Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a period determined by the
Board but not exceeding one (1) year from what would otherwise be the expiration
date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the
development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the developer applied promptly for and diligently
pursued these approvals. A developer shall apply for an extension before (a) what would
otherwise be the expiration date of final approval, or (b) the 91st day after the
developer receives the last legally required approval from other governmental entities,
whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this section shall not preclude
the Board from granting an extension pursuant to paragraphs 1 or 2 above.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
65
§300-4.7 Conformity with Application.
A. A Construction Permit or Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued only on the basis of the
information submitted by way of application therefor. Any addition, subtraction, extension or
alteration or other deviance from the conditions stated in said application material shall make
the Construction Permit or Certificate of Occupancy null, void and of no effect.
B. Whenever the Construction Official shall become aware of a building or structure or use
constructed, used or occupied in a manner not in conformity with the application materials
submitted to request the Construction Permit or Certificate of Occupancy, he shall promptly
notify the applicant that the said permit or certificate is no longer valid and that the use,
construction or occupancy is unlawful, and in addition, shall take any appropriate action under
Section 300- 15 of the Ordinance.
§300-5 PUBLIC HEARING AND PUBLIC NOTICE
§300-5.1 New Jersey Open Public Meeting Law.
The provisions of the "Open Public Meetings Law" (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.) shall govern all meetings and
hearings of the Planning Board and the Zoning Board of Adjustment
§300-5.2 Hearing Required.
A. The approving agencies shall hold a hearing open to the public on each application for
development. All applications for development shall be considered at regularly scheduled
meetings, unless, for good cause, the Chairman or, by written request, a majority of Board
members shall request a special hearing. Notice of such meetings shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of the "Open Public Meetings Law" (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq).
B. No application shall be considered by any less than a quorum of the full-authorized membership
of a Board. All board actions shall be taken by a majority vote of a quorum, except for the
approval of a use variance which requires the affirmative vote of five members of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
C. When reviewing several applications (e.g., subdivision and site plan, site plan and conditional
use) simultaneously, the Board shall not be required to hold further hearings. The longest time
period for action by the Board (whether it be for subdivision, site plan or conditional use) shall
apply.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
66
§300-5.3 Public Notice.
A. No application which requires formal public notice shall be heard unless public notice has been
given in complete conformance with this Ordinance and the Municipal Land Use Law. Any
decision on a development application which requires formal public notice and for which proper
public notice has not been given shall be void and of no effect, and the application shall be
reheard de-novo after proper public notice has been given
B. Public notice shall be required for all applications for development except for:
1. Conventional site plan applications.
2. Minor subdivision applications.
3. Final approval of major site plans and major subdivisions that have been given
preliminary approval and conforming to the conditions of such preliminary approval.
4. A continuance of any hearing for which proper public notice has already been given,
unless otherwise ordered by the approving agency.
C. Contents of Notice. The notice of hearing required by this section shall contain the following
information:
1. The date, time and place of the hearing.
2. A description of all types of approvals being sought and the nature of the matters to be
considered.
3. Identification of the property under review by street address and by tax map and block
number.
4. The location and times at which the complete application materials will be available for
public inspection.
D. Form of Notice. Public notice shall be given as follows:
1. By publication in the official newspaper of the City, at least ten (10) days prior to the
scheduled date of the hearing on the application, arranged and paid for by the City of
Paterson.
2. By the applicant serving a copy of the notice to the owners, at least ten (10) days prior
to the scheduled date of the hearing on the application, of all real property located
within 200 feet in all directions of the borders of the property under review, service to
be either by hand to the owner or his agent in charge of the property or by certified mail
to the property owner at the address as shown on the City's tax records.
3. Additional Notice. Additional notice, by personal service or certified mail, shall be made,
when required, at least ten (10) days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing on the
application, as follows:
a. To the clerk of any municipality that is located within 200 feet of the property
under review.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
67
b. To the County Planning Board when the application involves a property located
adjacent to an exiting County road or proposed road on the official county map
or on the county master plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200
feet of a municipal boundary.
c. To the State Commission of Transportation when the application involves a
property located adjacent to a state highway,
d. To the State Planning Commission when the application involves a property that
exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice shall be accompanied by a
copy of all maps or documents required to be on file with the municipal clerk
pursuant to N.J.S.A 40:55D-10.
e. To any public utility, cable television company or local utility, as defined in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3,5 and 6 if any of those entities possesses a right-of-way within
the municipality and has registered in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.1.
E. Notice to Partnership and Corporate Owner. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by
service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon its
president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to
accept service on behalf of the corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association, because of its ownership of
common elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the
hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit
owners, co-owners, or homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
F. Certified Mail. Any notice made by certified mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing.
G. List of Property Owners. A list of all owners of real property within 200 feet of the borders of the
property under review shall be prepared and certified by the office of the Tax Assessor of the
City of Paterson within seven (7) days of the receipt of a written request from the applicant,
which request shall include proof of payment of the fee required for the preparation of the list.
Any failure to give notice to any owner not on said list shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.
H. Affidavit. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the Division of Planning and
Zoning not less than three (3) days prior to the date of the hearing. Said affidavit shall show all
parties served and the manner of service employed.
I. Substantial Modification After Preliminary Approval.
1. If any substantial modification is proposed or required after preliminary approval has
been granted, an application for such a modification shall be submitted and proceeded
upon as in the case of the original application for development. Notice pursuant to this
Ordinance and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. shall as required for the original application and
shall state the nature of the proposed modification. A substantial modification shall
mean one which (1) increases density of development, (2) increased the square footage
of buildings, (3) proposes a different use, (4) would result in increased adverse impact
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
68
upon properties in the immediate area with respect to factors such as, but not limited to
noise, glare, and increased drainage runoff, or (5) materially changes a required element
of the development plan. Any modification which decreases the number of proposed
lots, dwelling units, number of square feet, density or intensity of use shall not be
considered a substantial modification so long as there is no proposed change of use and
no additional variances or exceptions are required.
2. If the Planning Board required any substantial amendment in the layout of
improvements proposed by the developer that have been the subject of a hearing, an
amended application for development shall be submitted and proceeded upon, as in the
case of the original application for development. The Planning Board shall, if the
proposed development complies with the ordinance and the Municipal Land Use Law,
grant preliminary approval.
§300-6 SITE PLAN REVIEW
§300-6.1 Actions Requiring Site Plan Approval.
Except as provided under §300-6.2, site plan approval shall be required for the following:
A. Applications involving the building, erection, extension, alteration, or enlargement of any
building or structure.
B. Applications involving the construction, alteration, or addition of parking facilities containing
five (5) or more parking spaces.
C. Applications involving a change of tenant of a building, structure, or premises from a single
tenant use to a multi-tenant use or from a residential use to a non-residential use.
D. In non-residential districts where changes of use(s) are proposed.
§300-6.2 Exemption From Site Plan Approval.
The following types of development shall be exempt from the requirements of site plan approval prior
to the issuance of permits:
A. Detached one-family dwellings.
B. Detached two-family dwellings.
C. Related accessory uses to the above, such as a private garage, toolhouse, private greenhouse or
barn.
D. With respect to paragraphs C and D in §300-6.1, above, a Certificate of Occupancy may be
granted, without the necessity of site plan approval, provided the applicant provides evidence to
the City Planning Director and the Zoning Officer that: (a) the proposed use on the premises is
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
69
the same as the previous type of use and is a permitted use; (b) that no need for a variance
would be created due to additional off-street parking requirements resulting from the change of
use; (c) that no need for a variance would be created due to additional off-street
loading/unloading requirements resulting from the change of use; (d) that in no other way
would the use change create a variance that was not previously granted by the Planning Board
and/or the Zoning Board of Adjustment; and (e) that the proposed use does not involve a
physical expansion of the existing structure(s) or the addition of parking facilities containing five
(5) or more parking spaces.
§300-6.3 Final Approval Required Prior to Issuance of a Building Permit.
For development requiring site plan approval, no Building Permit shall be issued prior to approval of the
site plan application. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any building or structure or use of
land unless the structure is completed or the land is developed or used in accordance with a site plan
given final approval.
§300-6.4 Non-Compliance.
Any failure of the applicant, any successors, assignees or heirs to construct, operate, or maintain any
building, structure, or use in a manner in conformance with the site plan as finally approved shall
constitute a violation of this Ordinance and, in addition, shall be grounds for the issuance of a stop order
or any other legal sanction at the disposal of the City of Paterson.
§300-6.5 Requirements for Site Plan Approval.
A. In considering and acting upon site plan applications, the approving agency shall take into
consideration the public health, safety and welfare, the comfort and immediate neighborhood
in particular, and may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards, including hours of
operation, as may be required in order that the result of its action shall, to the maximum extent
possible, further the expressed intent of this Ordinance.
B. Determination. No site plan shall be approved unless the approving agency makes the following
determinations:
1. All application materials shall have been submitted in conformance with this ordinance.
The proposed site plan shall be in conformance with all applicable ordinances and
statutes, including this ordinance, the Municipal Land Use Law, and the New Jersey Map
Filing Law, as applicable.
2. The proposed site plan shall be in keeping with the spirit of the City of Paterson's Master
Plan.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
70
3. The proposed site plan shall be so designed as to minimize the impact of additional
traffic and to avoid hazardous and congested traffic conditions. There shall be an
adequate but not excessive number of traffic access and egress ways all of a reasonable
width, grade alignment and visibility. No vehicular route shall be located too near street
corners or entrances to places of public assembly so as to create traffic congestion or
hazards.
4. Parking and loading spaces shall be provided of a design that is safe, easily accessible,
and well able to accommodate expected needs. Interior circulation shall be adequate.
5. The proposed site plan shall comply with all applicable City, County and State
requirements pertaining to drainage so as to avoid potential drainage problems.
6. Play or recreation space shall, if required, be arranged to insure the safety, welfare,
comfort and convenience of residents.
7. Landscaping and other screening shall be carried out to the extent necessary to insure
the public health, safety, welfare, comfort and convenience.
8. The location, projection and brilliance of all outdoor lighting shall be designed to
minimize objectionable glare on adjoining properties.
9. The proposed site plan shall be one that will not tend to depreciate the value of
adjacent properties, and in addition shall conform as much as possible to the existing
character of the neighborhood.
10. The proposed site plan and construction process shall protect and conserve soils at the
site from erosion by wind, water, excavation or grading.
11. If the proposal is for a property, part or of all of which lies in a designated flood way
fringe area, the site plan shall be designated so that the flood carrying capacity of the
area will not be impaired in order to avoid danger to life or property.
12. Hours of conducting business shall not constitute a nuisance or are detrimental to the
immediate neighborhood. The hours of conducting business may be specified as a
condition of approval if the hours may constitute a nuisance or are detrimental to the
immediate neighborhood.
13. The site plan shall involve adequate water supply, drainage, shade trees, sewerage
facilities and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and occupants.
14. The site plan shall involve adequate provision of necessary stormwater easements or
drainage and utility rights-of-way.
15. The site plan shall involve adequate water supply, drainage, shade trees, sewerage
facilities and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and occupants.
16. The site plan shall involve suitable size, shape and location for any area reserved for
public use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40.55.D-43..
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
71
17. Conformity with Article IV, Recycling, of Chapter 427, Solid Waste and conformity with
the model ordinance promulgated by the Department of Environmental Protection and
the Department of Consumer Affairs pursuant to section 2 of P.L 1993, c. 81 (C.13:1E-
99.13aa) regarding the inclusion of facilities for the collection or storage of source
separated recyclable materials in any new multi-family development.
18. Conformity with standards promulgated by the Commissioner of Transportation
pursuant to the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.) for
any airport safety zones delineated under that Act.
19. Conformity with any access management code adopted by the county with respect to
any county roads within the city or adopted by the city with respect to municipal
streets.
20. Conformity with the state highway access management code adopted by the
Commissioner of Transportation with respect to state highways within the city.
21. Protection of potable water supply reservoirs from pollution or other degradation of
water quality in accordance with siting, performance or other standards or guidelines
adopted by the Department of Environmental Protection.
22. Conformity with public safety regulating concerning stormwater detention facilities
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 and as reflected in stormwater management plans and
ordinances adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93 et seq.
23. Where applicable, the site plan shall contain streets of sufficient width and suitable
grade and suitably located to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide access for
firefighting and emergency equipment to buildings and coordinated so as ,to compose a
convenient system consistent with the official map and the circulation element of the
master plan (including adequate right-of-way widths for various classifications of streets
as indicated in the Master Plan and Official Map) and so oriented as to permit,
consistent with the reasonable utilization of land, the buildings constructed thereon to
maximize solar gain; provided that no street of a width greater than 50 feet within the
right-of-way lines shall be required unless said street constitutes an extension of an
existing street of the greater width, or already has been shown on the master plan at
the greater width, or already has been shown in greater width on the official map.
24. The site plan complies, to the greatest degree determined appropriate by the approving
authority, with the Development Design Standards contained in Article IV.
§300-7 SUBDIVISION REVIEW
§300-7.1 Review Standards.
A. In reviewing and application for subdivision approval, the Planning Board shall apply design
standards that encourage good development patterns within the city and ensure the following:
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
72
1. Consistency with the Zoning Ordinance.
2. Appropriate extension and/or realignment of existing and/or proposed streets.
3. Streets of sufficient width and suitable grade and suitably located to accommodate
prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting and emergency equipment to
buildings and coordinated so as to compose a convenient system consistent with the
official map and the circulation element of the master plan (including adequate right-ofway
widths for various classifications of streets as indicated in the Master Plan and
Official Map) and so oriented as to permit, consistent with the reasonable utilization of
land, the buildings constructed thereon to maximize solar gain; provided that no street
of a width greater than 50 feet within the right-of-way lines shall be required unless said
street constitutes an extension of an existing street of the greater width, or already has
been shown on the master plan at the greater width, or already has been shown in
greater width on the official map.
4. Elimination of reverse strips controlling access to streets.
5. Adequate street grades, intersection sight distances, appropriate length and treatment
of dead- end streets and avoidance of duplication of street names.
6. Appropriate and adequate block lengths and widths as related to zoning, and pedestrian
walks.
7. Appropriate and adequate lot sizes, shapes and frontages.
8. Protection and conservation of soil from erosion by wind or water or from excavation or
grading;
9. Provision of necessary stormwater easements or drainage and utility rights-of-way.
10. Adequate water supply, drainage, shade trees, sewerage facilities and other utilities
necessary for essential services to residents and occupants.
11. Suitable size, shape and location for any area reserved for public use pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40.55.D-43.
12. Appropriate and adequate treatment of land subject to flooding in accordance with
applicable flood damage control regulations in order to avoid danger to life or property.
13. Provision of appropriate and adequate buffer strips,
14. Proper design of cul-de-sac and street turnarounds;
15. Conformity with Article IV, Recycling, of Chapter 427, Solid Waste and conformity with
the model ordinance promulgated by the Department of Environmental Protection and
the Department of Consumer Affairs pursuant to section 2 of P.L 1993, c. 81 (C.13:1E-
99.13aa) regarding the inclusion of facilities for the collection or storage of source
separated recyclable materials in any new multi-family development.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
73
16. Conformity with standards promulgated by the Commissioner of Transportation
pursuant to the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning Act of 1983 (N.J.S.A. 6:1-80 et seq.) for
any airport safety zones delineated under that Act.
17. Conformity with any access management code adopted by the county with respect to
any county roads within the city or adopted by the city with respect to municipal
streets.
18. Conformity with the state highway access management code adopted by the
Commissioner of Transportation with respect to state highways within the city.
19. Protection of potable water supply reservoirs from pollution or other degradation of
water quality in accordance with siting, performance or other standards or guidelines
adopted by the Department of Environmental Protection.
20. Conformity with public safety regulating concerning stormwater detention facilities
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38 and as reflected in stormwater management plans and
ordinances adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-93 et seq.
21. The overall effect of the subdivision on the community, the city and the health, safety
and general welfare of the residents of the city.
B. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings, specifications and
estimates of the application for final approval conform to the standards established by
ordinance for final approval, the conditions for preliminary approval and the standards
prescribed by the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.). If the Planning Board approves the
final plat, a notation to that effect shall be made on each plat and shall be signed by the
Chairman and the Secretary of the Planning Board.
§300-7.2 Improvements.
A. Required Improvements. Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have
installed all improvements or shall have furnished performance guaranties for the ultimate
installation of all improvements, including:
1. Streets.
2. Street signs.
3. Curb and/or gutters.
4. Sidewalks.
5. Street lighting.
6. Shade trees, to be located on the street line so as not to interfere with utilities or
sidewalks.
7. Topsoil protection. No topsoil shall be used as spoil or removed from the site. Topsoil
moved during the. course of construction shall be redistributed so as to provide at least
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
74
six (6) inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding,
sodding or planting on slopes of less than twelve percent (12%) as shown on the final
grading plan and shall be stabilized by sodding on slopes of twelve percent (12%) or over
as shown on the final grading plan.
8. Monuments, to be of the size and shape required by N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11, as amended,
and shall be placed in accordance with said statute.
9. Water mains, culverts, storm sewers and sanitary sewers. All such installations shall be
properly connected with an approved system and shall be adequate to handle all
present and probable future development.
10. Grading.
11. Pavement.
12. Drainage structures, erosion controls and sedimentation control devices.
13. Public improvements of open space.
B. Inspection and Approval of Improvements; Costs. All of the above listed improvements shall be
subject to inspection and approval by the City Engineer who shall be notified by the subdivider
at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the start of construction. No underground installation
shall be covered until inspected and approved. The City may charge the subdivider an inspection
fee not to exceed the costs incurred in performing the inspection.
C. Completion of Improvements Prior to Final Approval. No final plat shall be approved by the
Planning Board until the completion of all such required improvements has been certified to the
City Council by the City Engineer, unless the subdivider shall have filed with the city a
performance guarantee as provided in §300- 14. The filing of such performance guarantee shall
be a condition of final approval and shall be filed prior to the endorsement of the final plat by
the Planning Board Chairman and Secretary.
§300-7.3 Violations, Lien
A. Violations and Penalties. If, before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or
sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on
final subdivision approval as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a subdivision on
which, by ordinance, the Planning Board is required to act, such person shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.), and each lot disposition so made may be deemed
a separate violation.
B. Civil Remedies. In addition to the foregoing, the city may institute and maintain a civil action:
1. For injunctive relief;
2. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a contract of sale if a
certificate of compliance has not been issued.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
75
C. Lien. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the
portion of the land, from which the subdivision was made that remains in the possession of the
subdivider or his assigns or successors to secure the return of any deposits made or purchase
price paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any.
Any such action must be instituted within two (2) years of the date of the recording of the
instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of said land, or within six (6) years if unrecorded.
§300-8 VARIANCES.
§300-8.1 Authority for Variances.
The Board of Adjustment, or, when it has jurisdiction, the Planning Board, shall be the approving agency
for the purposes of this section and shall have the power as provided below to grant variances pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 and order the issuance of a Construction Permit or Certificate of Occupancy where
the provisions of this ordinance, if strictly enforced, would not so allow.
§300-8.2 Jurisdiction.
Variances shall be heard and decided by the Zoning Board of Adjustment except that the Planning
Board, when reviewing applications for approval of subdivisions, site plans, or conditional uses, shall
have the power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c).
§300-8.3 Section (d) Variances.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant variances pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D70(d) but only by affirmative vote of at least five members of the full authorized membership of
the Board.
§300-8.4 Conditions of Approval.
Any variance granted under this Section shall run with land, regardless of changes or ownership.
However, any change in the use or physical development of the property from that violates the terms of
a variance constitute a violation of this Ordinance and shall render the offender subject to the
enforcement provisions of this Ordinance. Such violation may also result in the need for a new
Certificate of Occupancy or Construction Permit.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
76
§300-9 CONDITIONAL USE.
§300-9.1 Requirement.
If so required by any of the provisions of this Ordinance, conditional use approval by the appropriate
approving agency shall be obtained prior to the issuance of a Construction Permit by the Division of
Community Improvements. The review of a conditional use shall also include any required site plan
review.
§300-9.2 Approving Agency
The Planning Board shall act as the approving agency for all applications for conditional use approval,
except that the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant conditional use approval to
the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board whenever the Zoning Board
of Adjustment is reviewing an application for approval of a variance pursuant to Section 300-8.3 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(d)) of this Ordinance.
§300-10 APPLICATION FOR CHANGES IN ZONING MAP
§300-10.1 Procedure for Amendment.
The procedure for amendment of this Ordinance and of the Zoning Map that forms a part hereof shall
be as prescribed by the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26, NJ.S.A. 40:55D-62 and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-63).
§300-11. FLOOD CONTROL REVIEW
§300-11.1 Application for Approval.
A. Planning Board Review. Any conditional use in the flood plain as specified in §500-11.9.B.3 and
in §500-11.9.C.2 may be allowed only upon issuance of a conditional use permit by the Planning
Board or by the Board of Adjustment where applicable.
B. State Review. An applicant for all development activities within the flood way which require
conditional use permits shall be required to notify and receive approval from the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection of such activity prior to review by the appropriate City
agency.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
77
§300-11.2 Determinations by the City Review Agency.
The reviewing board shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in
§500-11, Flood Damage Prevention, and the following general review factors:
A. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
B. The danger to life and property due to flooding erosion damage;
C. The degree to which the natural, scenic, and aesthetic values at the proposed activity site could
be retained.
D. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage;
E. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems.
F. The importance of the service provided by the proposed facility to the community and the
degree to which the proposed use would serve the general public health, safety and welfare.;
G. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
H. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding or
erosion damage;
I. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
J. The relationship of the proposed use to the Master Plan and Flood Plan Management Program
of that area;
K. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
L. The degree to which archeological or historical sites and structures and endangered or rare
species of animals and plants would be degraded or destroyed;
M. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
N. The degree to which people, animals, and property would be evacuated in the expected time
available after flood warning.
O. Whether the proposed use would provide adequate facilities for the proper handling of litter,
trash, refuse, and sanitary and industrial wastes.
P. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
78
§300-11.3 Requirements.
In addition to the stated requirements for submitting site plan and conditional use applications and the
submittal requirements of §500-11, Flood Damage Prevention, the applicant shall further furnish the
following information:
A. Grade elevation at the exterior corners of all structures and the elevation of the lowest floor
level.
B. Location and elevations of streets, water supply, and sanitary facilities.
C. Specifications for building construction and materials, flood proofing, filling, dredging, grading,
channel improvement, storage of materials, water supply and sanitary facilities.
D. Relationship and proximities of the above to the location of the channel, flood way, and the
flood protection elevation.
§300-11.4 Conditions Attached to Permits.
In conjunction with those permitted pursuant to §500-11, Flood Damage Prevention, the municipal
review agency may attach conditions to the granting of permits. Among such conditions, without
limitation, shall be included:
A. Modification of waste disposal and water supply facilities so as to avoid impairment.
B. Imposition of operational controls, sureties, and deed restrictions.
C. Requirements for construction of storm water detention facilities, channel modifications, dikes,
levees, and other protective measures.
D. Installation of an adequate flood warning system.
E. Postponement of development until such time as protective measures are installed.
F. Flood-proofing measures shall be designed consistent with the flood protection elevation for the
particular area, flood velocities, durations, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces,
and other factors. The Planning Board shall require that the applicant submit a plan or
document certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing
measures are consistent with the flood protection elevation and associated flood factors for the
particular area, and a record of such certificates shall be maintained in the Planning Board files.
Flood proofing alone shall not be adequate for residences, hospitals, nursing homes, schools,
day care centers, and similar uses. The flood- proofing measures that shall be required include,
but are not limited to, the following:
1. Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movement.
2. Installation of watertight doors, bulkheads, and shutters, or similar methods of
construction.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
79
3. Reinforcement of walls to resist water pressures.
4. Use of paints, membranes, or mortars to reduce seepage of water through walls.
5. Addition of mass or weight to structures to resist flotation.
6. Installation of pumps to lower water levels in a structure.
7. Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems so as to prevent the
entrance of flood waters.
8. Installation of pumping facilities or comparable practices for substance drainage
systems for buildings to relieve external foundation wall and basement floor pressures.
9. Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water pressures or floating debris.
10. Installation of valves or controls on sanitary and storm drains which will permit the
drains to A be closed to prevent back ups of sewage and storm waters into buildings or
structures. Gravity drainage of basements may be eliminated by mechanical devices.
11. Location of all electrical equipment, circuits, and installed electrical appliances such that
they are not subject to flooding.
12. Location of any structural storage facilities for chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials,
flammable liquids, or other toxic materials, which could be hazardous to public health,
safety, and welfare, above the flood protection elevation or provision of adequate
flood-proofing to prevent flotation of or damage to storage containers which could
result in the escape of toxic materials into flood waters.
G. Specifically for subdivisions, the following requirements must be met:
1. All improvements shall be designed and constructed so as to minimize flood damage
potential.
2. All new utility lines and other public improvements shall be located and constructed so
as to - minimize or eliminate flood damage potential.
3. Adequate drainage shall be provided.
4. The water and sewer system shall be designed and constructed so as to eliminate or
minimize infiltration.
5. On-site waste disposal shall be designed so as to avoid impairment.
§300-12. SOIL EROSION CONTROL REVIEW.
§300-12.1 Statutory Authorization.
The City of Paterson is authorized to adopt and enforce regulations for soil erosion and sediment control
(pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 251, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.) which conform to standards promulgated by the
Soil Conservation Committee in the New Jersey Department of Agriculture.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
80
§300-12.2 Requirements.
For all land disturbance activities involving a minimum of 5,000 square feet of surface area for which a
Building Permit is required, with the exception of one family homes on individual lots, a soil erosion
control plan must be reviewed and approved as provided for in this Section.
A. Information. The applicant shall submit the following information in addition to any other
information that may be required under other provisions of this ordinance:
1. Location and description of existing natural and man made features on and surrounding
the site including general topography and soil characteristics.
2. Location and description of proposed changes to the site.
3. Measures for soil erosion and sediment control which shall be equivalent to or exceed
the "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control" adopted by the New Jersey State
Soil Conservation Committee.
4. A schedule of the sequence of installation of planned erosion and sediment control
measures as related to the progress of the project including anticipated starting and
completion dates.
5. Submission of other data deemed necessary by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment for review and for the development of a specific site.
B. Review Agency. All applications involving soil erosion review shall be presented in conjunction
with other required reviews to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to
this Ordinance. In addition to review by the Planning Board, an application shall be presented to
the Hudson-Essex-Passaic Soil Conservation District if the proposal involves land area with any of
the following characteristics:
1. The total lot area to be disturbed exceeds one-half (1/2) acre.
2. The existing or proposed slope of the land is greater than fifteen (15) percent.
3. The water table is within four (4) feet of the surface at anytime of the year.
4. Soil type is a "moderate" to "high" shrink-swell potential, especially if development of
road or building is involved.
5. Exposed surface area is to remain unprotected and unstabilized for six (6) months or
longer.
6. The site is within flood hazard area.
C. Approval.
1. In matters not requiring approvals by the Hudson-Essex-Passaic Soil Conservation
District, the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make the final
determination.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
81
2. In matters that require approval of the Hudson-Essex Passaic Soil Conservation District,
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall condition their approval on the
final determination made by the said soil conservation district.
§300-13 HISTORIC PRESERVATION ORDINANCE
§300-13.1 Title
This Chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the City of Paterson Historic Preservation Ordinance.
The membership, powers and duties of the Historic Preservation Commission (hereafter, Commission)
are set forth herein.
§300-13.2 Definitions
The following as used in this chapter shall have the meaning and scope herein given:
1. Administrative Officer shall mean the Historic Preservation Professional (HPP) appointed as per
the provisions of this Chapter. In the event that the Historic Preservation Professional is vacant,
the Principal Planner of the City of Paterson shall serve as the Administrative Officer of this
chapter.
2. Alteration shall mean any act or process that in any way effects a change in the design or outer
appearance of a building, structure, object or site, or any part thereof.
3. Application shall mean an application form and all accompanying documents submitted for
approval of a permit for alteration, repair, reconstruction, demolition or relocation of a
designated historic site, building, structure or object, or improvement within a designated
historic district or review of a development application concerning same.
4. Archaeological shall mean the science or study of the material remains of past life or activities
and the physical site, location, or context in which they are found, as delineated in the
Department of Interior's Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979.
5. Architectural shall mean relating or conforming to the rules of Architecture; having or conceived
as of having a single unified overall design, form, or structure.
6. Architectural Feature shall mean the architectural style, design, general arrangement and
components of all the parts and surfaces, including but not limited to the kind, texture and color
of the building material, and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs, cornices,
ornaments, brackets, parapets, roofs, foundations, cladding, framing and other features
appurtenant to the building, structure, object or improvement.
7. Architectural Survey shall mean a complete document of such similar title and intent that is
executed, compiled, drafted by qualified historic preservation professionals and/or New Jersey
licensed planning or building professionals in a methodology and format accepted and derived
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
82
by the State of New Jersey Historic Preservation Office. One example that is herein referenced is
the most current Architectural Survey of the City of Paterson.
8. Building shall mean any structure, part of a structure, extension thereof, or addition thereto
having a roof supported by columns, posts, piers, or walls and intended for the shelter, business,
housing or enclosing of persons, animals, or property.
9. Certificate of Appropriateness shall mean a document attesting that proposed work within a
historic district or affecting a landmark building, structure, object, site or landscape feature has
been reviewed and deemed appropriate and consistent with the purpose of this Chapter by the
City of Paterson Historic Preservation Commission or the Historic Preservation Professional as
provided herein.
10. Certificate of No Effect shall mean a document attesting that proposed work within a historic
district or affecting a designated landmark building, structure, object, site or landscape feature
has been reviewed by the Historic Preservation Professional and has been deemed not
detrimental to the historic district or landmark on which the work is to be done or neighboring
buildings, structures, objects, sites or landscape features.
11. Certified Local Government (CLG) shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, Natural & Historic Resources, Historic Preservation Office (HPO) program that offers
municipalities the opportunity to participate more directly in state and federal historic
preservation programs. Participation in the CLG program requires that a municipality execute a
Programmatic Agreement to have a historic preservation ordinance and a historic preservation
commission conforming to the specifications of both the Municipal Land Use Law and the
National Park Service approved CLG guidelines. As a CLG, the community is eligible to apply for
Historic Preservation Fund (HPF) grants for a variety of local preservation activities. The level of
funding is contingent upon the annual appropriation from the National Park Service. Grant
applications are available from the HPO annually.
12. Commission shall mean the City of Paterson Historic Preservation Commission.
13. Construction shall mean the act of: (a) adding an addition to an existing building or structure; (b)
the erection of a new principal or accessory building or structure on a lot or property; or (c) all
alterations to existing building or structure.
14. Days shall mean calendar days.
15. Demolition shall mean the dismantling or razing of all or part of any historic site or landscape
feature of or any improvement in a historic district.
16. Design Review shall mean the process to discuss a project or request a formal review of a
project by the Historic Preservation Commission. The project will be evaluated based upon the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties and any other
design guidelines established for the building, site or district, or through this ordinance.
17. Design Guidelines shall mean locally-developed criteria which assist property owners,
developers, architects, and others in making decisions about the appropriate treatment of
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
83
historic resources (i.e. buildings, structures, etc.) when planning repair, rehabilitation,
restoration, landscape, or new construction projects. These criteria are also used by the
Commission in evaluation of project proposals. Guidelines explain in more detail how to achieve
the goals of Design Standards.
18. Design Standards shall mean broad methodology that assist long-term preservation of a
property’s significance through the preservation of historic materials and features. The goals of
the standards are achievable by consulting the Guidelines.
19. Development shall mean any division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels, the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any
building or other structure, or of any mixing, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the
use of any building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which permission
may be required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
20. Great Falls National Historic Landmark District (a/k/a “Great Falls Historic District”) shall mean
the area depicted as such on the map entitled “Paterson Great Falls National Historical Park –
Proposed Boundary, numbered T3/80,001, and dated May 2008, and any maps which replace or
supplement said map.
21. Great Falls National Historic Park (a/k/a “National Park; Paterson Great Falls National Historical
Park; PAGR”) shall mean the area established by Congress as such 16 U.S.C. § 410lll(b)(1)(A) as
depicted on the map entitled “Paterson Great Falls National Historical Park – Proposed
Boundary, numbered T3/80,001, and dated May 2008, and any maps which replace or
supplement said map.
22. Historic District shall mean one (1) or more historic sites and intervening or surrounding
property significantly affecting or affected by the quality and character of the historic site or
sites.
23. Historic Preservation shall mean a) the application of strategies that promote the identification,
evaluation, documentation, registration, protection, treatment, continued use, and
interpretation of historic resources; b) the act or process of applying measures necessary to
sustain the existing form, integrity, and materials of a historic property. Work, including
preliminary measures to protect and stabilize the property, generally focuses upon the ongoing
maintenance and repair of historic materials and features rather than extensive replacement
and new construction. New exterior additions are not within the scope of this treatment;
however, the limited and sensitive upgrading of mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems
and other code-required work to make properties functional is appropriate within a
preservation project.
24. Historic Preservation Professional (HPP) shall mean an employee or consultant with a graduate
degree in Historic Preservation or a closely related field of study, plus a minimum of two years
of professional experience applying the theories, methods, and practices of Historic
Preservation that enables professional judgments to be made about the identification,
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
84
evaluation, documentation, registration, or treatment of historic properties in the United States
and its Territories.
25. Historic Landmark shall mean the same as Historic Site.
26. Historic Site shall mean any real property, building, man-made structure, object, lot, location,
park, monument, street, neighborhood, district, or any other feature of the environment that
can be situated collectively or individually of historical, archaeological, cultural, scenic or
architectural significance.
27. Improvement shall mean any building, structure, work of art or other object installed upon real
property or any part of such improvement
28. Local Landmark shall mean the same as Historic Site or Historic District as designated by City
Council pursuant to this ordinance or included within the Master Plan Historic Preservation Plan
element.
29. Major Work shall mean any external modification of the type that under the Uniform
Construction Code (UCC) would require a federal, state or local development approval or
permits, or any construction of new “structures” as defined by the UCC. On publicly-owned
lands, any work that may not require local development approvals or permits shall be
considered as major work if such work on private lands would require a local development
approval or permit.
30. Match shall mean either an exact or an approximate replication. If not an exact replication, the
approximate replication shall be so designed as to achieve a harmonious result which exhibits
the color, texture and dimensions of the original features(s).
31. Minor Application shall mean an application for approval of actions on a designated historic
building, structure or object that consists of ordinary maintenance and repair as defined herein.
In accordance with the UCC, a repair is confined to an area of less than 25% of the overall area
of that constituent element (i.e. roofing, brickwork, fascia boards, etc.)
32. NPS shall mean National Park Service.
33. Object shall mean anything constructed, fabricated or created, the use of which does not
require permanent or semi-permanent location on or in the ground.
34. Ordinary Maintenance shall mean the repair or renewal of deterioration, wear or damage to a
structure or improvement in order to return same as closely as possible to its condition prior to
the occurrence of such deterioration, wear or damage with materials and workmanship of the
same quality and appearance of the structure, replacement or improvement.
35. Paterson Register of Historic Places shall mean a listing of all historic sites, buildings, districts,
structures and objects within the City of Paterson as recorded by the City Clerk under Sec. IV of
this chapter.
36. PAGR shall mean Paterson Great Falls National Historical Park.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
85
37. Reasonable Return shall mean on the average rate of return for properties similar to and in the
same area as the improvement parcel under consideration for the purposes of this chapter for
the year preceding the application as arrived at through certified appraisals, records of sale, and
any other research.
38. Reconstruction shall mean the act or process of reproducing by new construction the exact form
and details of a vanished building, structure, or object or part thereof, as it appeared at a
specific period of time.
39. Rehabilitation shall mean the act or process of returning an improvement to a state of utility
through repair or alteration which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while
preserving those orations or features of the improvements which are significant to historical,
architectural and cultural values.
40. Relocation shall mean any removal or relocation of a structure or improvement on its site or to
another site.
41. Replacement shall mean the identical re-establish of a feature as an integral part of a
rehabilitation project based on the essential form and detailing of that feature from other
physical or historic evidence. Replacement of the entire feature with the same material is
preferable.
42. Responsible Person shall mean any person or persons having such right to, title to, or interest in
any property or improvement so as to be legally entitled, upon obtaining the required permits
and approvals from City agencies, to perform with respect to such property or improvement any
demolition, construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration or other work as to which such
person seeks the authorization or approval of the Commission.
43. Restoration shall mean the act or process of accurately recovering the form and details of an
improvement by the removal of later work and/or by the reconstruction of missing earlier work.
44. Stabilization shall mean the act or process of applying measures designed to reestablish a
weather-resistant enclosure and the structural stability of an unsafe or deteriorated building,
object, site, structure or landscape feature while maintaining the essential form as it exists at
present.
45. Streetscape shall mean the appearance or view of a street and its associated features.
46. Structure shall mean a combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy, use or
ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of a parcel of land. Structure
includes, but is not limited to, buildings, signs, fences, tanks, towers, poles, walkways,
driveways, streets and roads.
47. Temporary shall mean lasting, enduring or serving for a limited time by design, intent or fact.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
86
§300-13.3 Designation of the Historic Preservation Professional
1. The Director of the Division of Historic Preservation shall serve as the Historic Preservation
Professional (HPP), who is the Administrative Officer for the purposes of this Chapter.
2. The HPP must meet the minimum professional qualifications outlined in the Certified Local
Government (CLG) programmatic guidelines. These include a graduate degree in Historic
Preservation or a closely related field of study, plus a minimum of two years of professional
experience applying the theories, methods, and practices of Historic Preservation that enables
professional judgments to be made about the identification, evaluation, documentation,
registration, or treatment of historic properties in the United States and its Territories.
3. In the absence of a Director of the Division of Historic Preservation, the City of Paterson
Principal Planner shall serve as the Administrative Officer for the purposes of this Chapter.
§300-13.4 Paterson Register of Municipal Historic Places
1. The Municipal Clerk of the City of Paterson shall maintain a list of designated municipal historic
places, also known as Local Landmarks. The list shall be designated “The Paterson Register of
Municipal Historic Places.”
2. The Paterson Register of Municipal Historic Places (“Register”) shall include all historic sites and
historic districts within in the City of Paterson designated by the City Council or by the Planning
Board in the Historic Preservation Element of the Master Plan.
A. The list shall include all designations made by municipal ordinance.
B. The Register shall be available for public inspection both in hard copy and electronically.
C. Each entry in the Register shall include the effective date of adoption of the ordinance
or code provision which creates the historic designation, as well as a citing reference to
same.
3. Upon the designation of additional properties, the City of Paterson Municipal Clerk shall be
charged with the responsibility to add the locations to the list within 60 days of passage by the
City Council.
§300-13.5 Designation of Historic Sites, Landmarks, Objects, and Districts
1. Criteria for Designation
A. As stated in the U.S. Department of the Interior's National Register Criteria for
Evaluation, promulgated pursuant to 16 U.S.C.A. Sec. 470a, the following criteria shall
also be used by the Commission for its review for designation of historic sites, buildings
and districts: the quality of significance in National, State or municipal history,
architecture, archaeology, and culture if present in districts, sites, buildings, structures,
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
87
and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association and:
(1) That are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or
(2) That are associated with the lives of persons significant in the past; or
(3) That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic
values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or
(4) That has yielded, or may be likely to yield, archaeological information important
in prehistory or history.
B. The designation of historic districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects within the
boundaries of the City of Paterson by the Municipal Council represents that a district,
site, building, structure, or object:
(1) Is fifty (50) or more years of age; and
(2) Qualifies as "significant" according to the Criteria for Significance set forth in
this Section; and
(3) Possesses “integrity” of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship,
feeling, and association, meaning that its features (including its potential
archaeological deposits) have not been seriously disfigured or compromised at
the time of consideration by irreversible and/or inappropriate alterations.
C. For the purposes set forth herein, “significance” is determined in whole or part by the
site’s ability to meet one or more of these specific criteria:
(1) Possesses a high degree of historic, architectural, cultural, social, or aesthetic
value;
(2) Is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
patterns of national, regional, or state history, or of Paterson's history,
considered in international, national, regional, or local terms;
(3) Is associated with the lives of persons significant to the nation, state, or region,
or in Paterson's past;
(4) Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type of architecture or structure,
including a "local vernacular"; or of a cultural and /or architectural period in
which Paterson had a part; or exhibits the use of special materials or of
materials of special local origin;
(5) Represents the work of a master engineer, designer, architect, artist,
craftsperson, or other professional either by local or larger reputation;
(6) Possesses qualities of high artistic or aesthetic interest;
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
88
(7) Is a significant composite of elements, even if the individual parts may not be
distinguished by themselves;
(8) Has archeological potential, that is, has, or may yet yield important information
related to history or pre-history; or
(9) Is already listed or qualifies as eligible for listing on the New Jersey or National
Register of Historic Places.
D. Ordinarily cemeteries, birthplaces, or graves of historical figures, properties owned by
religious institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that have been moved
from their original locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily
commemorative in nature, and properties that have achieved significance within the
past fifty (50) years shall not be considered eligible for nomination; however, such
properties will qualify if they are integral parts of districts that do meet the criteria or if
they fall within the following categories:
(1) A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or artistic
distinction or historical importance; or
(2) A building or structure removed from its original location but which is significant
primarily for architectural value, or which is the surviving structure most
importantly associated with a historic person or event; or
(3) A birthplace or grave of a historical figure of outstanding importance if there is
not other appropriate building, structure or site directly associated with his or
her productive life; or
(4) A cemetery which derives its primary significance from graves of persons of
transcendent importance, from distinctive design features, or from association
with historic events; or
(5) A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable environment
and presented in a dignified manner as part of a restoration master plan, and
when no other building or structure with the same association has survived; or
(6) A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age, tradition, or
symbolic value has invested it with its own historical significance; or
(7) A property achieving significance within the past fifty (50) years if it is of
exceptional importance.
2. Procedures of Designation
A. Any person, including the Commission, may propose a historic for designation and
inclusion on the Register of Municipal Historic Places. The Commission may make
studies and surveys of sites, buildings and districts in order to determine if same meets
the criteria set forth herein for designation as historic sites or historic districts and may
make its own recommendations for designation and inclusion on the Register.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
89
B. Nominations for designation and inclusion on the Register of Municipal Historic Places
shall be presented to the Historic Preservation Commission, followed by consideration
for designation by the Municipal Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65.1 or action by
the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28b (10) indicating the location and
significance of historic sites and historic districts designated to the Register of Municipal
Historic Places or listed on, or eligible for, listing to the National or State Registers. In
the event that a nomination is passed by the Municipal Council before the Planning
Board, the Planning Board shall have thirty-five days from receipt pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26 to hear the nomination and to take formal action, otherwise the nomination
shall be deemed as passed.
C. No historic building, structure, site or district shall be so designated without first being
reviewed by the Commission. The recommendation of the Commission shall be secured
in accordance with the provisions herein.
D. All nominations shall be submitted in a form approved by the Commission including, but
not limited to, the State of New Jersey and the National Register of Historic Places
Nomination Forms.
(1) Nominations for designation of historic sites and historic districts shall be
submitted to the HPP, who will review the application for completeness.
(2) The completed applications shall be presented to the Commission at its first
meeting following receipt of the application. After having reviewed all
documents relating thereto, the Commission shall determine whether or not the
application should be accepted for its review.
(3) At the same meeting, the Commission shall set a date for a public hearing
(which may be a regularly scheduled meeting of the Commission) on all requests
that have been accepted for review.
(4) At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing, public notice by publication
in the official newspaper shall be given notifying interested parties that the site
or district has been nominated for designation. The notice shall include
information as to where and when the application may be reviewed, as well as
information regarding the consequences of the proposed designation and the
opportunity to be heard regarding such designation.
(5) At the scheduled public hearing, the Commission shall afford a reasonable
opportunity for the presentation of facts and the expression of views by
responsible persons and/or interested parties, and may take the testimony of
witnesses and receive evidence.
(6) After full consideration of the evidence brought forth at the hearing, the
Commission shall make a recommendation and issue a report recommending
designation or non-designation of historic site or historic district to the Planning
Board or the Municipal Council. In the case of the Planning Board, it shall review
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
90
the Commission's report and shall issue a final report recommending
designation or non-designation of the historic site or district on the zoning map
of the City of Paterson to the Municipal Council.
(7) The Commission's recommendation report shall include the following
information:
i. An explanation of the significance or lack of significance, integrity or lack
of integrity of the nominated site or district as it relates to the criteria
for designation.
ii. The relationship of the nominated site or district to the ongoing efforts
by the Commission to identify and nominate all potential areas, sites,
structures and buildings that meet the criteria for designation.
iii. A map showing the location of the nominated site or district and the
boundaries of same.
iv. An explanation of the criteria for designation applied and how the
proposed site meets those criteria.
(8) If the recommendation of the Planning Board is that the proposed site or district
not be designated in the ordinance, any new nomination for the same property
or district should be based upon a showing of substantial information in redress
of the Planning Board’s comments.
(9) Upon favorable action by the Municipal Council, the nominated historic site or
district shall be designated on the Zoning Map of the City of Paterson and the
Planning Board shall list it in the City of Paterson Register of Historic Places.
(10)Historic districts, site and landmarks listed on the National or State Register of
Historic Places shall automatically be designated to the City of Paterson Register
of Historic Places and shall be considered landmarks, historic sites or historic
districts under the provisions of this Chapter.
3. Uses of Designated Properties
A. Nothing contained herein shall affect the present legal use of the designated property.
B. Use classifications and bulk restrictions as to all such property shall continue to be
governed by the general zoning ordinance of the City of Paterson and the procedures
established therein.
C. In no case, however, shall any use be permitted which requires demolition, relocation,
or alteration of a designated historic building, structure, site or within a designated
district so as to adversely affect its character except upon compliance with the terms of
this Chapter.
D. Each designated historic site or district may be marked by an appropriate plaque in such
form as the Commission shall promulgate by regulation.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
91
4. Removal of Designation.
A. Upon recommendation of the Commission based upon new and compelling evidence
and negative evaluation according to the same criteria and following the same
procedures set forth herein for designation, a determination may be made by the
Commission to remove designation of a historic site or district
B. Such a determination must receive five (5) favorable votes, i.e., the majority of the
Commission membership.
C. A historic site, landmark or district shall not be removed from the City of Paterson
Register of Historic Places without consideration of the recommendation by the
Commission and must be affirmed by ordinance adopted by simple majority of the
Municipal Council.
§300-13.6 Historic Marker Program
1. The Paterson Historic Marker Program is hereby established to commemorate persons, events,
municipal historic landmarks and districts prominently identified with the history of the Nation,
State, or the City of Paterson.
2. A Historic Marker consists of an engraved bronze plaque or sign, erected at suitable historic
sites, denoting and describing locations, events and occasions of historic significance in the City
of Paterson.
A. Historic Marker shall be privately sponsored and not funded by the City
B. No Marker shall be erected to commemorate living persons.
C. Each proposed marker and location shall be reviewed and edited by the Historic Marker
Committee of the Paterson HPC and verified by the Executive Director of the HPC.
D. In order for an historic event to be eligible for commemoration with a marker, the event
must have occurred at least fifty years ago. Likewise, a person must have attained their
historic significance at least fifty years ago in the City of Paterson. There are exceptions
if the event or person is of extraordinary historic significance to the Nation.
E. Markers shall be erected in a safe location, at or close to the places being
commemorated, and where they will visible to the traveling public.
F. Any individual or group may nominate a location or occasion of historic interest for
historic marker commemoration.
3. The City of Paterson Historic Preservation Commission shall have the exclusive responsibility to
receive, review and approve or deny applications for historic markers in accordance with this
Ordinance and criteria, rules, regulations and standards promulgated by the Historic
Preservation Commission.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
92
§300-13.7 Historic Preservation Commission
1. Membership. The Commission shall be made up of seven (7) members and two (2) alternate
members, each appointed by the Mayor without confirmation of the Council, and shall consist
of the following:
A. Class A: At least two (2) members who may reside outside the City who are
knowledgeable in building design and construction, and possesses by completed
education, license, or significant professional practice and experience from the
disciplines of planning, folklore, cultural anthropology, curation, conservation,
landscape architecture, architecture, engineering, history, architectural history,
prehistoric, historic and industrial archaeology. The City can request from the HPO an
exemption from this requirement by demonstrating that a reasonable effort has been
made to appoint qualified professionals. However, when any of these disciplines is not
represented, the commission shall obtain professional expertise as outlined in the CLG
programmatic guidelines.
B. Class B: At least two (2) members who may reside outside of the city and have a
demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in historic preservation and local
history.
C. Class C: Two (2) members who are residents of the City of Paterson and who have
demonstrated knowledge or an interest in the history and heritage of the City of
Paterson. These members shall hold no other municipal office, position or employment
except for membership on the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
D. Two (2) alternate members whom shall possess the same qualifications as a Class C
member. At the time of their appointment, the Mayor shall designate regular members
by Class and the alternate members as "Alternate No. 1" and" Alternate No.2."
E. Of the regular members, a total of at least one less than a majority shall be of Classes A
and B.
2. Terms. Regular members shall serve for a period of four (4) years and the term of an alternate
member shall be two (2) years, except for the term of any member common to the Historic
Preservation Commission and the Planning Board, which shall be for the term of the
membership on the Planning Board; and the term of any member common to the Historic
Preservation Commission and the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be for the term of the
membership on the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
3. Vacancies.
A. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by the expiration of a term shall be filled for the
unexpired term only.
B. A member may only be removed, after a public hearing if he requests it, by the City
Council for cause.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
93
C. The Mayor shall fill any vacancy on the Commission within sixty (60) days of the position
becoming vacant. A vacancy occurring by the expiration of a term that is not
reappointed by the Mayor prior to the expiration date shall be considered reappointed
by hold over. In this circumstance only, the Mayor may replace a hold over within sixty
(60) days and the replacement shall serve for the remainder of the term. In the case that
a replacement is not made within sixty (60) days from the beginning of the held-over
term, the held-over commissioner cannot be replaced and shall be considered
reappointed; and shall continue to serve in full force and effect for the remainder of the
term.
4. Officers and Meetings.
A. Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson: At its first meeting and every year at the first
meeting after June 30, the Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson
who shall be Commissioners.
B. Secretary: The Commission shall select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of
the Commission or a municipal employee. The Secretary shall, at minimum, keep
minutes and records of meetings and proceedings, including voting records, attendance,
resolutions, findings, determinations, decisions and applications.
C. Meetings: The Commission shall meet not less frequently than once per month or as
often as required to meet the needs of its business, to handle emergencies, or to meet
time constraints imposed by law. Additional meetings may be called by the Chairperson
or Vice Chairperson when the regular meetings are inadequate to meet the needs of its
business or to meet time constraints imposed by law.
5. Staff and Special Services.
A. Professional Staff
(1) At its discretion, the Commission may utilize for professional staff services of
the Division of Historic Preservation, which is headed by the Director of Historic
Preservation. In any case the lead staff member, herein referred to as the
Historic Preservation Professional (HPP), to the Commission must meet the
minimum professional qualifications outlined in the Certified Local Government
programmatic guidelines.
(2) The HPP, or his designee, shall attend the Commission’s evening meetings and
other evening meetings and events as required from time to time in the conduct
of Commission business; The HPP shall be appropriately compensated for such
services and attendance beyond normal City work hours. The professional
services rendered include but are not limited to technical briefs, background
and presentations on matters coming before the Commission for advice, actions
and recommendations when requested; organization of and participation in
public events in representation of the Commission; and when requested,
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
94
delivery of testimony on behalf of the Commission either in person or in written
form.
B. Legal and Other Services
(1) The Commission shall obtain its legal counsel from the City of Paterson
Corporation Counsel unless the City Council, by separate appropriation,
provides funding for separate legal counsel for the Commission. The duties of
the attorney for the Commission are to advise and consult with the Commission
on all legal questions pertaining to the proper and efficient conduct of the
Commission in the discharge of its statutory duties; to render formal written
opinions to the Commission when requested to do so; to attend all workshops
and public meetings of the Commission; to consult with the HPP, Chairperson,
Corporation Counsel and other city attorneys in connection with all proposals
for Ordinances, revision of Ordinances, the Master Plan, revisions of the Master
Plan, capital expenditure programs and any and all references from the
Municipal Council to the HPP, staff and Commission; to coordinate in
conjunction with the HPP and the Division of Historic Preservation staff in the
preparation and formulation of all of the above assigned legal duties and such
other legal duties which may arise from time to time in connection with the
operation of the Commission in carrying out its mandated responsibilities.
(2) The Commission shall select a Secretary in accordance with this Section who
shall, at minimum, keep minutes and records of meetings and proceedings,
including voting records, attendance, resolutions, findings, determinations,
decisions and applications. The Secretary shall attend the Commission’s evening
meetings and other evening meetings and events as required from time to time
in the conduct of Commission business; organization of and participation in
public events in representation of the Commission. If the Secretary is not a City
employee, appointment, compensation and duties shall be reflected in
resolution form. If a City employee, the Secretary shall be appropriately
compensated for such services and attendance beyond normal City work hours.
(3) The Commission shall be empowered to accept gifts, bequeaths, or other
designations of funding or property to further its goals of preservation,
conservation, promotion, and rehabilitation.
C. If applicable, funding approval for staff and special services is subject to the existing
Memorandum of Agreement between the City of Paterson and the State of New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs. Funds shall not be expended without prior
commitment and approval by the State in accordance with said Agreement.
6. Voting
A. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall not be
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
95
delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In
the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
B. Four members shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of those present and voting
shall prevail.
C. No member of the Commission shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he has,
either directly or indirectly, and personal or financial interest.
7. Expenses and Costs.
A. The Commission may employ, contract for, and fix the compensation of experts and
other staff and services as it shall deem necessary, or elect to accept staff and services
assigned by the city Administration who may be employees. The Commission shall
obtain its legal counsel from the municipal attorney at the rate of compensation
determined by the City Council, unless the Council, by appropriation, provides for
separate legal counsel for the Commission.
B. The Council shall make provisions in the municipal budget and appropriate such funds as
it deems necessary for the expenses of the Commission, and expenditures pursuant to
this section shall not exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the Council for the Commission’s use.
C. The Commissioners shall be entitled to reimbursement of actual expenses reasonably
and necessarily incurred in the performance of their official duties, and other
compensation as referred to in this Article.
D. All members shall be required to attend a qualified historic preservation training event,
such as a workshop or conference, each year at the expense of the city, pursuant to the
requirements of the CLG programmatic agreement.
E. If applicable, funding approval for expenses and costs is subject to the existing
Memorandum of Agreement between the City of Paterson and the State of New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs. Funds shall not be expended without prior
commitment and approval by the State in accordance with said Agreement.
8. Rules and Regulations. The Commission shall adopt, and may from time to time amend, by-laws
concerning its administration, internal management, meeting schedules and procedures for
conducting meetings and processing applications, provided that all meetings are open to the
public as provided for in the "Open Public Meetings Law" (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.). The
Commission may elect a sub-committee made up of three (3) members, one of whom shall be
the Commission Chairman, or it may designate its staff, to perform the following:
A. Meet from time to time to review preliminary applications and determine, based on the
criteria in §300-13.2.C, whether review by the full Commission is required.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
96
B. If a preliminary application does not require full Commission review, the sub-committee
shall have the authority to recommend the approval, approval with conditions or denial
of the application.
9. Powers and Duties. The Commission shall have the power and duty to act according to the
provisions of this ordinance. Specifically, the Commission shall:
A. Review and make written recommendations to the Construction Official on all
applications for new construction, reconstruction, demolition, restoration, exterior or
interior replacement, alteration or other work which would change the exterior
appearance of any structure or site, including the erection or removal of signs and other
improvements in the Great Falls Historic District, Downtown Commercial Historic
District or within other historic districts or sites listed on the Paterson Register of
Historic Places, that are referred to it from the Construction Official pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-111 and other provisions of the City of Paterson Zoning Ordinance.
B. Review and make written recommendations on all applications for development and all
other improvements in any historic site or landmark or within any historic district that
are referred to it by the Zoning Officer, Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-110 and other provisions of the City of Paterson Zoning
Ordinance.
C. Develop and, from time to time, recommend amendment of specific regulations and
standards for reviewing and approving any changes to structures in any historic site or
landmark or within any historic district.
D. Develop, implement and, from time to time, amend criteria, rules, regulations and
standards for reviewing, approving and installing Historic Markers.
E. Undertake the necessary studies, surveys and prepare reports to identify, record and
maintain an inventory of all buildings, sites, places, structures, objects or landscape
features of significant historical or architectural value and significance in the City which
have the potential of being included as a historic district or historic landmark, including
such recommendations on the Historic Preservation Plan Element of the Master Plan.
Such findings and recommendations shall be presented to the City Council for action
thereon, and further to the Planning Board by referral as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26, and
also, where appropriate, to applicable County, State and Federal agencies, for the
recognition of historic districts and landmark buildings, places and structures upon other
registers of historic places.
F. Prepare a survey of historic sites and potential historic sites in the City of Paterson
pursuant to criteria identified in the survey report, and that is compatible and
coordinated with the statewide Inventory of the New Jersey State Historic Preservation
Office (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-109a).
G. Advise the Planning Board on inclusion of historic sites in the recommended capital
improvement program (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-109c).
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
97
H. Make recommendations to the Planning Board on the Historic Preservation Plan
Element of the Master Plan and on the implications for preservation of historic sites or
potential historic sites of any other master plan elements (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-109b).
I. Provide written reports to the Construction Official, Zoning Officer, Principal Planner
and other staff, officers and elected officials on the application of the Zoning Ordinance
provisions concerning historic preservation in the municipality, and to coordinate with
local, County, State, Federal or national societies, governmental bodies and
organizations to maximize their contributions to the intent and purposes of this Article.
J. Review all proposed National Register of Historic Places nominations in the city in
accordance with NJ CLG Guidelines.
K. Request the Corporation Counsel to seek injunctive or other relief for violations of this
Article or other actions contrary to the intent and purpose of this Article.
L. Refer to the Division of Community Improvements and the Construction Official to
inspect and enforce applicable codes and provisions of this Article.
M. Carry out such other advisory, educational and informational functions as well as
promote historic preservation in the municipality, and to maximize the City’s knowledge
and enjoyment of these historic resources and, as appropriate, promote these assets
beyond the boundaries of the City (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-109f).
N. The powers and duties of the Commission shall not conflict with the powers and duties
of any other Board or Commissions in the City of Paterson.
§300-13.8 Government Consultation
1. National Park Service – Congress authorized the establishment of the Paterson Great Falls
National Historical Park in 16 U.S.C. § 410lll (2009) and directed the acquisition of lands for the
creation of the National Park and the management of the future uses of the lands within the
Great Falls National Historic Landmark District. The goal of the PAGR is to address the historical,
cultural and natural resources associated with the Great Falls Historic District.
A. Review by the National Park Service
(1) All properties located within the Great Falls National Historic Landmark District
shall be subject to review by the Commission as set forth herein.
(2) Upon receipt of an application for review as required herein that is related to
land use development, proposed alteration to any historic resource, land,
building or structure that may affect the Great Falls National Historic Landmark
District, the Commission shall notify the NPS of same.
i. The Commission shall deliver, mail, fax or e-mail a copy of the
application and/or all materials received which relate to the proposed
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
98
project to the NPS within fourteen (14) days of its receipt of such
application.
(3) No real estate asset currently in public ownership shall be conveyed out of
public ownership without the Park Service first approving a management and/or
development plan.
i. In the event any real estate asset currently in public ownership within
the Great Falls National Historic Landmark District whose
redevelopment may impact the National Park is to be conveyed out of
public ownership, a management and/or development plan shall be
submitted by the Commission for review and approval in writing by the
NPS.
ii. Such submission shall be made by the Commission by certified mail or
other acknowledged form of transmission within 60 days of its receipt
of the said management and/or development plan.
iii. If approved by the NPS, the approved management plan shall be
included as a recorded restriction within the deed, as an attachment
thereto, or it shall be recorded with the County Registrar of Deeds
separately and incorporated by reference.
(4) The Commission shall work with the NPS to foster appropriate and compatible
uses and building treatments within the Great Falls Historic Landmark District
that will serve the objectives of preservation, education and visitor
accommodations.
2. State of New Jersey – The Commission shall coordinate with the State of New Jersey and all
applicable political subdivisions in ensuring compliance with historic preservation laws and
rehabilitation building codes.
3. County of Passaic – When applicable, the Commission will coordinate with the County of Passaic
and the Passaic County Historical Society to further the shared goals of preservation and
education.
§300-13.9 Actions Requiring Review; Permits Required
1. A permit issued by the Construction Official shall be required for any of the following actions to
proceed regarding a designated historic site or for any improvement within a designated historic
district:
A. Rehabilitation, restoration, reconstruction, repair or alteration or change to any part of
the exterior of a building, structure or site, including repainting and residing,
replacement of windows, doors, roofing and all other architectural elements;
B. Additions to a building, structure or site, or within a historic district;
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
99
C. Relocation of a historic site or within a historic district;
D. Demolition, partial demolition or removal of any portion or element of a historic site or
within a historic district;
E. New construction on a historic site or within a historic district;
F. Change in use of a historic site or within a historic district.
2. No building permit shall be issued or amended, nor shall any construction, reconstruction,
restoration, interior or exterior replacement, demolition, alteration, ordinary maintenance or
repairs, or any other work, including the erection or removal of signs, be started on a designated
historic building, structure or site, or within a designated historic district, prior to review by the
Commission.
3. All applications for permits pertaining to designated historic sites or improvements in historic
districts shall be referred to the Commission for a written report and decision on the application
of the provisions of this Article thereto.
§300-13.10 Actions Not Requiring Review
1. Changes to the interior of historic structures shall not require review except:
A. In cases that proposed interior changes are visible from the exterior of the structure;
B. In cases that the architectural significance of the historic structure is closely related to
the use and layout of its interior spaces (i.e. churches, courthouses, public buildings,
etc.) and/or the character defining features and finishes of the spaces.
§300-13.11 Emergency Repairs
1. In any instance in which the Construction Official certifies to the Commission that the work
proposed by the applicant is necessary to remove or rectify a condition dangerous to the safety
of the occupants or to the general public, the Commission shall schedule a special meeting to be
held within seven (7) days of receipt of the completed application. The Construction Official in
his or her certification shall indicate to the Commission what proposed work the applicant can
take which will rectify the condition dangerous to the safety of the occupants or the general
public. The Commission shall recommend that work, consistent with the certification of the
Construction Official, which will have the most minimal impact on the historic nature, quality or
character of the building. If the Commission determines that the Construction Official has
provided the requisite certification, the Commission shall issue a letter of recommendation of
approval or conditional approval to the Construction Official.
2. In the event an Act of God or any other unexpected event shall cause the responsible person the
need for immediate issuance of a permit to commence to stabilize, secure, repair or protect a
designated historic site or any improvement in a designated historic district damaged from such
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
100
event, and the Construction Code Official certifies the immediate necessity for such issuance, an
approval of a permit may be issued in accordance herewith. Upon notice to the Chairman or
Commission staff by telephone, personal contact or other appropriate means of communication,
at least three (3) members of the Commission shall convene immediately and such convening
members shall proceed to review the current conditions for which the emergency powers of this
Article have been invoked. Subsequent to review, an approval may be issued upon a majority
vote of the members convened. This approval will only apply to work which is deemed
necessary for stabilization, securing, repair or protection of the historic site or improvement in a
historic district.
3. All other work subsequent to this must be submitted for review by the Commission under the
application procedures found herein.
§300-13.12 Informal Review
If work is to take place on a building, structure or site, or within a district, which is listed on any
architectural survey or has already undergone a Commission hearing and has been recommended for
designation as a historic site or district, but has yet to be reviewed by the Municipal Council, the
applicant shall follow the same procedure herein set forth for property already designated, at which
point the Commission may make recommendations as to the appropriateness of the work and its impact
on this historic fabric of the site or district.
§300-13.13 Application Procedures
1. Persons seeking to undertake actions requiring review as per the provisions of this Section must
submit a completed application to the Commission which shall be accompanied by twelve (12)
copies of each of the following, or as otherwise outlined to the Applicant by the Commission
staff:
A. A completed application form, available at the Division of Historic Preservation, the
Division of Planning and Zoning and Division of Community Improvements.
B. Appropriate signed architectural/engineering drawings, site plans, sketches and
renderings delineated at a minimum of 1/8-inch scale unless otherwise agreed to by the
HPP. Professional scaled drawings must be submitted in 24x36 inch size on standard
bond paper. On each of these materials will be printed a title block to include: the
project name and address; scale and date of drawing; revision number or version;
delineator and firm name, address, license number and contact numbers; a directional
(north) arrow, if appropriate.
C. Current photographs of existing structure(s), objects, site, streetscape to include as
appropriate to the application: façades, elevations, ancillary structures, amenities,
streetscape, overall site setting, current conditions details and other pertinent details
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
101
and overviews. Photographs must be numbered and notated on a separate page
included with the application. Photographs may be digitally printed several to a page or
be standard photographic prints.
D. Available historic photographs and/or drawings from local public resources, including
but not limited to: the Local History Room of the Paterson Public Library; the Paterson
Museum; the Passaic County Historical Society; the New Jersey State Library and the
State Historic Preservation Office.
E. Existing professional consultation reports, studies, and written testimony, regarding the
proposal, to include findings of fact, opinions and recommendations, prepared by
appropriately accredited firms and/or individuals. Topics of interest include, for
example, as appropriate to the proposal and its issues: engineering, architecture and
planning, environmental assessment, cultural resources, archaeology and historical
analysis. Such reports and testimony shall be dated and identify the author, firm and
credentials, and shall document its referenced sources. Pursuant to fulfilling its Powers
and Duties to evaluate the application, the Commission may, at its discretion, require
submission of certain professional reports by the applicant if they do not already exist,
or if a preexisting report is expired, outdated or inadequate.
F. Specifications of materials to be used for all aspects of the proposal being reviewed,
including but not limited to: catalog cut sheets, sample paint chips, manufacturer
product specifications, plan notations, etc.
G. A detailed and complete proposal description explaining the proposed construction,
demolition, alterations, minor alterations, ordinary maintenance and repair or other
proposed changes.
H. Application fees as specified under Article III, 300-3.1.
I. The staff shall forward the complete application to the Commission for its report, except
in those instances described herein where the HPP or Chairperson may issue a
Certificate of No Effect.
§300-13.14 Commission Review of Development and Zoning Applications
1. The Planning Board and Board of Adjustment shall refer to the Commission every application for
development submitted to either Board for development in historic districts or on historic sites
designated on the zoning or official map or on the Paterson Register of Historic Places or
identified in any component element of the master plan.
2. This referral shall be made when the application for development is deemed complete or is
scheduled for a hearing, whichever occurs sooner.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
102
3. The Commission may provide its advice, which shall be conveyed through its delegation of one
of its members or staff to testify orally at the hearing on the application and to explain any
written report which may have been submitted.
4. If a recommendation of the Commission is rejected, the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, shall include the reasons for rejecting the recommendation in the findings of
its decision on the application.
§300-13.15 Commission Review of Application for Permits
1. At the request of any person seeking to undertake actions requiring review as per the provisions
of this Article, the Commission shall schedule a hearing on his or her application except if
otherwise provided for in this Section. The Applicant shall not be required to appear or to be
represented at the meeting in which the application is being considered.
2. Applications must be submitted to the Commission staff a minimum of twenty (20) business
days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting of the Historic Preservation Commission at which
the application is to be considered. The staff shall review the application for completeness and
notify the applicant within five (5) days of receipt as to completeness of the application. For the
purpose of scheduling, applications to the Commission must be deemed by staff to be complete
at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. At least ten (10) days prior to the hearing, the
applicant shall post a notice of the hearing on the property on a form provided by the Division of
Historic Preservation.
3. Upon an application being deemed complete, such minor applications for minor alterations and
ordinary maintenance and repair may be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Professional
who, at his or her discretion may issue a Certificate of No Effect, or may require additional
submittal information and/or may refer the application to the Commission upon being deemed
complete. In making such a determination, the Historic Preservation Professional shall consider
factors, including, but not limited to:
A. The effect of the proposed work in creating, altering, destroying or affecting the
architectural features of the landmark building, structure, object, site or landscape
feature upon which such work is to be done;
B. The relationship between the results of such work and the architectural features of
neighboring buildings, structures, objects, sites and landscape features.
In appraising such effects and relationships, factors of aesthetic, historical and architectural values and
significance, architectural style, design, arrangement, texture, material and color in addition to any
other pertinent matters shall also be considered.
4. Upon completion of the review, the HPP may suggest any changes or alterations to the
Applicant that would bring the application into appropriate parameters for issuance of a
Certificate of No Effect. The Applicant may decide to accept the conditions, by
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
103
A. Agreeing to an extension of time beyond the given 45-day period during which they will
provide for changed application documents and plans as required by the HPP, or
B. At the discretion of the HPP, in cases where changed documents are not required, the
Applicant may agree to changes and alterations that shall be listed on the Certificate of
No Effect.
If the Applicant rejects the proposed changes or alterations, the application will be scheduled for a
Commission review.
5. For all applications not issued a Certificate of No Effect, the Commission shall render a decision
within forty five (45) days from when the application is deemed complete. The Commission may
advise the Construction Code Official or the applicant, as the case may be, and make
recommendations with regard to the appropriateness of the proposed action. These
recommendations may become part of the conditions for approval of an application or the basis
for the rejection of an application. If approved, such approval shall be known as a Certificate of
Appropriateness.
6. Nothing herein shall prohibit an extension of time by mutual agreement between the applicant
and the Commission.
7. If the Commission should fail to act within forty-five (45) days, the application shall be deemed
approved, except in such cases where an extension of time by mutual agreement between the
applicant and the Commission is in effect.
8. If an application is approved with or without the imposition of conditions, the Commission staff
shall notify the Construction Code Official by issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness, which
shall also clearly stipulate any additional conditions to the application, who shall promptly issue
a permit after his review requirements have been also satisfied.
9. If an application is not approved, the Commission staff shall notify the Construction Code Official
by issuance of a Letter of Denial, and the Construction Code Official shall not issue the permit.
10. A permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of issue unless reasonable
extensions are granted by the Commission. Requests for extensions shall be made by written
request and shall rest in the sound discretion of the Commission.
§300-13.16 Standards for Review
1. General standards
A. The following standards, and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation
and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, promulgated pursuant to 16 U.S.C.A.
Sec. 470a, shall guide the Commission's and Planning Board's decision making
concerning all applications and approvals described herein.
(1) New additions, exterior alterations, or infill new construction shall not destroy
historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
104
differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale
and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its
environment.
(2) New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in
such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of
the designated historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
(3) Construction of historic designs that were never built shall not be undertaken.
(4) New additions, alterations or construction in a historic landscape shall be
visually differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the historic
character of the landscape.
(5) Replacement of missing historic plant material or vegetation features shall be
substantiated by documentary or physical evidence. The replacement plant
material or features shall match the historic appearance, function and where
possible, species or variety.
(6) A property shall be used for its historic purpose, or shall be placed in a new use
that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the property and
its environment.
(7) The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The
removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that
characterize a property shall be avoided.
(8) Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place and use.
Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding
conjectural features or historic features from other properties shall be avoided.
(9) Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic
significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
(10)Distinctive materials, features, finishes and construction techniques or examples
of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved.
(11)Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the
severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new
feature shall match the old in design, color, texture and other visual qualities
and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be
substantiated by documentary or physical evidence.
(12)Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to
historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if
appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
(13)Significant archaeological resources shall be protected and preserved. If such
resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
105
(14)The Development Design Standards in Article IV in the Land Use Ordinance to
the extent deemed appropriate by the Commission.
2. Standards for protection
A. Before applying protective measures, which are generally of a temporary nature and
imply future historic preservation work, an analysis of the actual or anticipated threats
to the property shall be made.
B. Protection shall safeguard the physical condition or environment of a property or
archaeological site from further deterioration or damage caused by weather or other
natural, animal or human intrusions.
C. If any historic material or architectural features are removed, they shall be properly
recorded, and, if possible, stored for future study or reuse.
3. Standards for stabilization
A. Stabilization shall reestablish the structural stability of a property through the
reinforcement of load bearing members or by arresting material deterioration leading to
structural failure. Stabilization shall also reestablish weather resistant conditions for a
property.
B. Stabilization shall be accomplished in such a manner that it detracts as little as possible
from the property's appearance. When reinforcement is required to reestablish
structural stability, such work shall be concealed wherever possible so as not to intrude
upon or detract from the aesthetic and historical quality of the property, except where
concealment would result in the alteration or destruction of historically significant
material or spaces.
4. Standards for new construction
A. In considering whether to approve or disapprove an application for new construction on
a designated historic site or in a designated historic district, the Commission shall be
guided by standards of the Secretary of the Interior and the following visual
compatibility standards.
B. New construction need not replicate historic older buildings or structures, but may
reflect contemporary design standards so long as the design and construction is
compatible with surrounding historic structures. Building height, width, mass and
proportion affect the degree of compatibility between the old and the new.
(1) Site and Setting: A developer intending to utilize historic resource as a part of a
development must consider the context of the resource's original site by
honoring the original historic intention of the resource and integrating it
respectfully into the new development
(2) Building Height: Height should be visually compatible with adjacent buildings.
The apparent physical size, scale and height should relate to existing resources.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
106
(3) Openings on Frontal Facades: The width and height of windows, doors, and
entries must harmonize in scale and proportion with the width and height of
windows, doors, and entries of buildings and structures of historic significance
in the surrounding environment.
(4) Relationship of Vacant Land to Buildings/Structures: The relationship of a
building or structure to the vacant land between and adjoining buildings or
structures should not violate the existing spatial relationship of historically
significant structures to the vacant land between said structural projects.
(5) Relationship of Major Exterior Building Materials: The major exterior building
materials on the facade of a building or on a structure should reflect the
predominant major building materials existent on the facades of historically
significant buildings and on structures in the surrounding environment.
(6) Roof Forms: The roof form and slope of a building or structure is a major
element in the visual image of the building. Therefore designers must take care
to honor the existing historic roof forms and slopes in consideration of new
construction so as not to violate the aesthetic harmony of the whole
streetscape.
(7) Continuity in Site Elements: site elements such as retaining walls, fences and
landscaping shall be aesthetically consistent with existing site elements in
adjacent historic structures.
(8) Scale of Buildings: Scale of buildings and structures shall be in scale with existing
adjacent buildings and structures.
(9) Signage: Signs which are out of keeping with the character of the existing
streetscape shall not be used. In addition to overall signage standards found
under Article V, additional signage standards for historic preservation review are
found under Article V, Section 500-8.6/E.
5. Standards for relocation
A. A permit to relocate a designated historic site or an improvement in a designated
historic district, must receive five (5) favorable votes, i.e., the majority of the
Commission membership.
B. In considering whether to approve or disapprove an application for a permit for the
relocation of a designated historic site or improvement in a designated historic district,
the Commission shall be guided by the following considerations:
(1) Whether the historic character and aesthetic interest in the building, structure
or object contributes to its present setting;
(2) Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect
of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be,
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
107
(3) Whether the building, structure, or object can be moved without significant
damage to its physical integrity; and
(4) Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and
architectural character of the building, object or structure.
C. Additional Requirements. If the Commission has approved the relocation of a historic
site, the Commission may also require archaeological and architectural documentation
and / or monitoring of either or both of the existing site and the new site where the
building is to be moved as a condition for approval. Copies of all professional reports
generated from these activities will be filed with the Commission, the City of Paterson
Free Public Library and the Passaic County Historical Society. The scope of services for
such a report will be determined by the Commission in consultation with its staff and
other qualified consultants.
6. Standards for demolition
A. A permit to demolish a designated historic site or an improvement in a designated
historic district must receive five (5) favorable votes, i.e., the majority of the
Commission membership.
B. In considering whether to approve or disapprove an application for a permit to demolish
a designated historic site or an improvement in a designated historic district, the
Commission shall be guided by the following considerations:
(1) Its historic architectural and aesthetic significance;
(2) Its use;
(3) Its importance to the City and the extent to which its historic or architectural
value is such that its removal would be detrimental to the public interest;
(4) The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design,
craftsmanship, texture or material that it could not be reproduced or could be
reproduced only with great difficulty;
(5) The probable impact of its removal upon the ambience of the historic district;
(6) The structural soundness and integrity of the building so as to comply with the
requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code;
(7) The effect on the remaining portion of building, structure, site, object or
landscape feature in cases of partial demolition.
(8) In the event that a structure is unsafe or unsound so as to pose a danger to
health or safety, the Emergency Powers section of this Section shall be used.
(9) If an application to demolish is denied, and the applicant desires to appeal the
decision, the applicant shall follow the appeal process detailed herein for denial
of a permit.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
108
(10)In cases of questionable structural integrity or soundness, whether
opportunities for investigation and remediation have been pursued and
exhausted.
C. Additional Requirements. If the Commission has approved a demolition for a historic
site, the Commission may require archaeological and architectural documentation and /
or monitoring of the demolition as a condition for approval. Such activities shall be
compliant with cultural resource and archaeological practices required for compliance
with the NJ State Historic Preservation Office standards for data recovery and
documentation, and shall culminate in a professional report of all activities, including
mapping, inventory and disposition of cultural resources discovered or collected. Copies
of all professional reports generated from these activities will be filed with the HPC, the
City of Paterson Free Public Library and the Passaic County Historical Society. The scope
of services for such a report will be determined by the commission in consultation with
its staff and other qualified consultants if required. The Commission may also request
the applicant to provide certain other documentation and professional reports to the
extent necessary to fulfill its considerations listed herein. Engineering reports shall be
conducted by and contain conclusions and recommendations certified by a licensed
engineer who has a clear understanding and experience with successful historic
preservation and rehabilitation projects in the typology of architecture in question for
demolition. The engineer’s experience and understanding shall be demonstrated in
writing and illustrations as well as in any oral testimony provided.
§300-13.17 Local Guidelines
In addition to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards and others applicable in this ordinance, the
Commission may promulgate and utilize locally-generated guidelines, literature, publications and
technical briefs in historic preservation best practices.
§300-13.18 Effect of Project Approval or Denial; Appeals
1. If a permit is approved, then the applicant may proceed to perform the work approved in the
permit in compliance with the conditions attached.
2. If a permit is denied, the applicant is precluded from undertaking the activity applied for.
3. An applicant dissatisfied with the action of the Commission relating to the issuance or denial of
a permit shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S. 40:55D-70a
within twenty (20) days after receipt of notification of such action.
4. The applicant shall be advised by the Clerk of the Board of Adjustment of the time and place of
the hearing at which the appeal will be considered, and shall have all rights defined under N.J.S.
40:55D-70a.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
109
5. If the Board of Adjustment affirms the Commission's denial, the applicant may seek legal
remedies as afforded by law.
6. If, in the case of an appeal, the Board of Adjustment determines there is an error in any order,
requirement, decision or refusal made by the Construction Code Official pursuant to a report
submitted by the Commission, the Board of Adjustment shall include the reasons for its
determination in the findings of its decision thereon.
§300-13.19 Enforcement
1. If any person shall undertake any activity vis-à-vis a historic building, structure or site, or within
a historic district, without first having obtained a permit to do so, such person shall be deemed
to be in violation of this Article.
2. Upon learning of the violation, the Construction Code Official, Subcode Official or his designee
shall serve upon the owner or responsible party of the lot whereon the violation is occurring, a
notice describing the violation in detail and giving the owner fourteen (14) business days to
abate the violation by restoring the historic site or improvement to its status quo ante. If the
owner cannot be personally served within the municipality, the notice shall be deemed to have
been officially served if a copy has been posted on site and a copy sent by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner or registered agent at his/her last known address as it appears
on the municipal tax rolls.
3. In the event that the violation is not abated within fourteen (14) days of service or posting on
site, whichever is earlier, the Construction Code Official shall cause to be issued a summons and
complaint, returnable in the Municipal Court, charging violation of this chapter.
4. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Historic Preservation Ordinance of the City of
Paterson shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalties set forth for violation of the
zoning ordinance.
5. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues.
6. Fines not paid within the time period set by law shall convert to a tax lien placed against the
property and shall be recorded with the City of Paterson Property Tax Office and the Passaic
County Register of Deeds and Mortgages.
7. The Construction Official or his designee shall inspect work approved by a permit and report to
the HPP or Commission the results of such inspections.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
110
§300-13.20 Preventive Maintenance
1. The structural integrity of all historic sites and improvements in historic districts shall be
preserved against decay and deterioration by being kept free from the following structural
defects by the responsible person:
A. Deteriorated or inadequate foundation.
B. Defective or deteriorated floor supports or any structural members of insufficient size to
carry imposed loads with safety.
C. Members of walls, partitions or vertical supports that split, lean, list or buckle due to
defective material or deterioration.
D. Structural members of ceilings and roofs, or other horizontal structural members, which
sag, split or buckle due to defective materials or deterioration or are of insufficient size
to carry imposed loads with safety.
E. Fireplaces or chimneys, which list, bulge or settle due to defective material or
deterioration or are of insufficient strength to carry imposed loads with safety.
F. Lack of weather protection.
G. The responsible person shall repair the improvement within a specified period of receipt
of a written order to correct defects or repairs to any improvement as provided in
paragraph a. above, so that such improvement shall be preserved and protected in
accordance with the purposes of this Chapter.
H. Any such order shall be in writing, state the actions to be taken with reasonable
particularity and shall specify dates for compliance which may be extended for a
reasonable period-of-time upon request to allow the responsible person to secure
financing, labor and/or materials. Any such order may be appealed to the Board of
Adjustment within twenty (20) days of receipt of same.
I. That taking of an appeal or the commencement of any court action hereunder shall not
operate to stay any order requiring structures to be secured or requiring temporary
support unless the Board of Adjustment or a court expressly stays such order.
§300-13.21 Municipal Responsibility
1. It is recognized that the intent and purposes of this Chapter would not be fully served if the City
were to control the actions of others but fail to apply similar constraints to itself. Accordingly, a
permit shall be required before final approval of any City actions on public as well as private
lands, streets, easements and rights-of-way for actions affecting designated historic sites,
buildings or districts.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
111
2. This requirement shall be deemed to include any action by any party which requires the
approval or concurrence of the City or any City agency and which is not otherwise covered by
the provisions of the Chapter.
§300-13.22 Rules of Interpretation
1. This Chapter shall be liberally construed to affect the purposes set forth herein. In the event that
this chapter conflicts with State law, State law shall take precedence.
2. In the event that any portion of this Chapter is found to be invalid for any reason by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be limited in its effect only to the portion of the
Article actually adjudged invalid and shall not be deemed to affect the operation of any other
portion hereof.
§300-13.23 Injunctive Relief
In the event that any action which would permanently and adversely change the historic building,
structure, site or district, such as demolition or removal, is about to occur without an approval having
been issued, the HPP or Chairperson shall apply to the Municipal Council for such injunctive relief as is
necessary to prevent the destruction.
§300-14 PERFORMANCE AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES
§300-14.1 Performance Guarantees.
A. As condition of final site plan approval or prior to the recording of a final subdivision plat, the
applicant shall file with the City a performance guarantee sufficient in amount not to exceed one
hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost of all required improvements or uncompleted
portions thereof as estimated by the City Engineer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 for
improvements deemed necessary or appropriate, including streets, grading, pavement, gutters,
curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees, surveyors monuments, water mains, culverts,
storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewerage disposal, drainage structures,
erosion control and sedimentation control devices, and public improvements of open space and
in the case of site plans only, on-site improvements and landscaping. The City Engineer shall
prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements covered by the performance guarantee,
which itemized cost shall be appended to each performance guarantee posted by the obligor.
The City shall not require that more than ten percent (10%) of said guarantee shall be made in
cash. The form and sufficiency of the guarantee shall be subject to approval of the City Attorney.
Performance guarantees shall be expressly conditioned upon the developer's full compliance
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
112
with all City ordinances and regulations governing the installation of improvements and utilities
and faithful performance of the terms of any developer's agreement with the City.
B. The time allowed for installation of improvements may be extended by resolution of the City
Council. As a condition or as part of any such extension, the amount of any performance
guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to exceed one
hundred twenty percent (120%) of the cost of the installation, as determined by the Municipal
Engineer according to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
C. If the required improvements have not been installed or corrected in accordance with the
performance guarantee, the obligor and surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the City for the
reasonable cost of the improvements not installed or corrected and, either prior to or after
receipt of the proceeds thereof, the city may complete such improvements. Such completion or
correction shall be subject to the public bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
D. Approval of a reduction in the performance guarantee
1. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements (except top course)
and appurtenant utility improvements and the connection of the same to the public
system, the obligor on the performance guarantee may request of the governing body,
in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the City Clerk, that the City Engineer
prepare, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer
and appended to the performance guarantee, a list of all uncompleted and
unsatisfactorily completed improvements. If such a request is made, the obligor shall
send a copy of the request to the City Engineer. The request shall indicate which
improvements have been completed and which improvements remain uncompleted in
the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon, the City Engineer shall inspect all
improvements covered by the request and shall file a detailed list and report in writing,
with the governing body and shall also send a copy thereof to the obligor not later than
forty-five (45) days after receipt of the obligor's request.
2. The list prepared by the City Engineer shall state in detail with respect to each
improvement determined to be incomplete or unsatisfactory the nature and extent of
the incompleteness or the nature and extent of and remedy for the unsatisfactory state
of each completed improvement determined to be unsatisfactory. The report prepared
by the City Engineer shall identify each improvement determined to be complete and
satisfactory together with a recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be made
in the performance guarantee relating to the completed and satisfactory improvement
in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee.
E. Approval of complete and satisfactory improvements.
1. The City Council, by resolution, shall either approve the improvements determined to be
complete and satisfactory by the City Engineer or reject any of these improvements and
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
113
shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance
guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate prepared by the City Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee.
This resolution shall be adopted not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the
list and report prepared by the City Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the
City Council, the obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance
guarantee with respect to those approved improvements except for that portion
adequately sufficient to secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet
approved, provided that thirty percent (30%) of the amount of the performance
guarantee posted may be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all
improvements. For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability pursuant to its
performance guarantee, the amount of the performance guarantee attributable to each
approved improvement shall be reduced by the total amount for each such
improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the municipal
engineer and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to subsection a. of this
section, including any contingency factor applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of
the approved improvements would exceed 70 percent of the total amount of the
performance guarantee, then the municipality may retain 30 percent of the amount of
the total performance guarantee to ensure completion and acceptability of all
improvements, as provided above.
2. If the City Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report as requested by the
obligor within forty-five (45) days from receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to a
court in a summary manner for an order compelling the City Engineer to provide the list
and report within a stated time. If the city fails to approve or reject the improvements
determined by the Municipal Engineer to be complete and satisfactory or reduce the
performance guarantee for the complete and satisfactory improvements within fortyfive
(45) days from the receipt of the City Engineer's list and report, the obligor may
apply to the court in a summary manner for an order compelling, within a stated time,
approval of the complete and satisfactory improvements and approval of a reduction in
the performance guarantee for the approvable complete and satisfactory improvements
in accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by the City Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee.
3. In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with the city or approving agency
as part of the performance guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the
performance guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the cash deposit
in the same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full amount of the
performance guarantee.
F. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving agency may require the
obligor to complete or correct such improvements and, upon completion or correction, the
same procedure of notification, as set forth in this section, shall be followed.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
114
G. To the extent that any of the improvements have been dedicated to the City on the subdivision
plat or site plan, the City Council shall be deemed upon the release of any performance
guarantee required, to accept dedication for public use of streets or roads and any other
improvements made thereon according to site plans and subdivisions plats approved by the
Board, provided that such improvements have been inspected and have received final approval
by the City Engineer.
§300-14.2 Maintenance Guarantees.
A. As condition of final site plan approval or prior to the recording of a final subdivision plat, the
applicant shall post a maintenance guarantee with the City Council for a period not to exceed
two (2) years after final acceptance of the improvements, in an amount not to exceed fifteen
percent (15%) of the cost of the improvements, which cost shall be determined by the Municipal
Engineer according to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4.
B. The form and sufficiency of the maintenance guarantee shall be approved by the City Attorney.
The maintenance guarantee for an improvement shall be posted upon final release by the City
Council of the performance guarantee for that improvement and shall be expressly conditioned
upon the maintenance by the developer of such improvement for a period of two (2) years, and
particularly shall guarantee the remedy of any defects in such improvement which occur during
that period.
§300-14.3 Development in Stages
In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development, the provisions of this section
shall be applied by stage or section.
§300-14.4 Utilities or Improvements of Other Governmental Agencies or Public Utilities
In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities will automatically own the utilities to be
installed or the improvements are covered by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another
governmental agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required
by the City.
§300-14.5 Acceptance of Guarantee
The City Council shall accept a performance guarantee or maintenance guarantee which is an
irrevocable letter of credit if it:
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Administration and Enforcement
115
A. Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer running solely to the City for an
express initial period of time in the amount determined pursuant to subsection A;
B. Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do and doing business in this State;
C. Is for a period of time at least one year; and
D. Permits the City to draw upon the letter of credit if the obligor fails to furnish another letter of
credit which complies with the provisions of this section thirty (30) days or more in advance of
the expiration date of the letter of credit or such longer period in advance thereof as is stated in
the letter of credit.
§300-15 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§300-15.1 Administration.
It shall be the duty of the Director of the Division of Community Improvements, including the sub-code
officials, to enforce all of the provisions of this ordinance and, unless clearly stated otherwise, to act as
required by the provisions of this ordinance or any other applicable law.
§300-15.2 Action Against Violators.
If the Zoning Officer or his designee, including the sub-code official shall find any of the provisions of this
ordinance are being violated, he shall notify the person responsible for such violations in writing,
indicating the nature of the violation, and shall order the action necessary to correct it. He shall order
discontinuance of the illegal use of land, building, additions, alterations, or structural changes;
discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by law to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
§300-15.3 Penalty.
Any agent, architect, building contractor, owner, tenant or any other person who commits, takes part or
assists in any actions in violation of this Ordinance, shall for each and every violation be imprisoned in
the Passaic County Jail for a period not to exceed ten (10) days or be fined an amount not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) or both. Each day that a violation continues or is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
116
ARTICLE IV DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS
§400-1 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
A. This Article is intended to encourage future development in the City that contributes in a
positive manner to the character of the City's built environment. The development design
standards contained in this Article supplement the minimum zoning requirements (e.g., use,
building setback, building mass, lot coverage, etc.) set forth in Article V, Zoning, in that they
address the appearance, character, layout and design of future development in a more detailed
manner than is addressed by minimum zoning requirements. The standards are intended to
result in better designed and more attractive development in the City; to provide applicants a
better understanding of acceptable design in the City; and to provide the City's land use review
boards (Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment) with an objective set of standards upon
which to review the appearance, design and site layout of future development proposals.
B. Development proposals shall follow the development design standards contained in this Article
to the greatest extent possible. The reviewing board shall review all development proposals
against these development design standards to ensure compliance therewith. Deviations from
requirements of this Article shall be permitted via design waiver granted by the reviewing
board.
C. Where applicable, the Residential Site Improvement Standards, as amended from time to time,
shall apply.
§400-2 DESIGN STANDARDS
§400-2.1 General Residential Design Standards.
A. The design and layout of buildings shall provide an aesthetically pleasing design that is
compatible with the character of surrounding development, unless the existing pattern is
contrary to other standards in this Article. To the extent possible, new residential development
within an existing neighborhood shall be consistent and compatible with the housing units in the
adjacent area in terms of building proportions and mass, building height, building materials and
color, roof designs, porch design, entrance design, window design and placement, and
architectural style. New development within existing neighborhoods shall incorporate any
distinctive architectural characteristics of the neighborhood.
B. A clear and attractive architectural design theme shall be established and shall be continued
throughout the development. Groups of related buildings shall be designed to present a
harmonious appearance in terms of building silhouette, architectural style and scale; massing of
building form; surface material, finish and texture; decorative features; window and doorway
proportions, entry way placement and location, signage and landscaping.
C. Infill development shall continue the prevailing site layout of properties in the surrounding
neighborhood unless the existing pattern (e.g., parking in the front yard) is contrary to other
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
117
standards in this Article. For example, infill development shall follow the existing pattern of
parking lot locations (e.g., parking to the rear of the building) that is characteristic of the
neighborhood.
D. All additions, alterations and accessory buildings shall be compatible with the principal structure
in terms of design and material and shall share a common architectural theme.
E. All buildings shall be designed so as to have attractive, finished appearances visible from all
public spaces and streets. Where sides and rear of a building would be visible from a public
space or street, such side and rear elevations shall present a finished and attractive architectural
appearance. Such rear and side elevations shall incorporate the design theme and architectural
features (e.g., windows, siding, shutters and other facade treatment) of the primary or front
facade. Such sidewalls shall have consistent proportion of openings (doors and windows) to
solid wall as the front and rear walls. However, to the extent possible, the front of buildings (i.e.,
the side that offers the primary access into the building) shall face the street. Positioning
buildings so that the side or rear of buildings are oriented towards the street shall be
discouraged.
F. Monotonous uninterrupted expanses of walls shall be avoided. Recesses, projections, columns,
openings, ornamentation materials and colors shall be used as texture and detail.
G. Buildings shall be set back from the street in a manner that is consistent with that existing in the
area. For example, large setbacks that are inconsistent with the existing street wall shall be
avoided.
H. Building entries, porches, windows and other openings shall be compatible in location, scale and
pattern to other structures on the street.
I. A clear differentiation of public-vs-private space shall be encouraged along the street line. The
use of low decorative steel, tubular steel, wrought iron or brick fencing shall be encouraged to
accomplish this. The use of chain-link, board-on-board or other such unattractive and/or solid
fencing shall not be encouraged. As required in Article V, no fencing in the front yard shall
exceed 4 feet in height.
J. Entries shall be well-defined and visible from the road, right-of-way or parking area serving the
building. All entryways shall be properly illuminated so as to provide appropriate security, and to
allow easy identification of each individual unit address.
K. Fences or walls enclosing individually owned or controlled outdoor space shall be consistent
throughout the development and shall compliment the architecture and design of the buildings.
L. Mechanical equipment whether mounted on the roof or ground shall be screened from view. All
screening devices shall be compatible with the architecture and color of the structures. If roof
mounted, mechanical equipment shall be located below the highest vertical element of the
building where feasible.
M. Window security grates shall be as inconspicuous and as complementary to the facade as
possible and shall be encouraged only on first floor windows.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
118
N. The types and arrangements of units shall be varied to allow the maximum range of building
configurations within the development. Not more than 1/3 of the buildings shall have identical
floor plans.
O. Fire escapes shall be constructed only against the side or rear wall of a building and shall be
located and/or screened so as not to distract from the appearance of such buildings.
P. No more than 50% of the first floor facade that is facing the street shall be devoted to garages
or carports. Where garages must be located facing streets, they shall be minimized by recessing
the garage entrance within the building facade or through the use of other architectural
techniques to make the garage entrance less conspicuous.
Q. All roofs on principal buildings in association with one, two-story, multi-family, garden
apartment and townhouse developments shall be pitched. Flat roofs shall not be permitted.
Roof design shall be consistent with that exhibited in the existing block or neighborhood where
appropriate. Roof design shall be an integral part of the overall building design. Hipped or
gabled roofs are encouraged with roof slopes comparable to surrounding structures.
R. To the extent feasible, off-street parking shall be placed to the rear and/or side of buildings.
However, where conditions dictate otherwise or where the reviewing board determines that
parking in the front yard would be appropriate, off-street parking and/or interior drives
associated therewith may be placed in a required front yard provided that such parking and/or
interior drives is separated from the front line street distance of 3 feet and screened from the
street by a solid natural screen, high decorative wall, or combination thereof, at least 2 feet but
no more than 4 feet in height. As required in Article V, off-street parking areas in association
with one and two family dwellings shall not be permitted in the required front yard.
S. Private outdoor space in the front yard shall be fenced or otherwise separated from public
space. The use of decorative steel, tubular steel, wrought iron or brick fences shall be
encouraged in lieu of standard chain-link or board-on-board fencing in front yards.
T. Where entire or significant portions of blocks are being redeveloped, or where elsewhere
feasible, shared parking and the use of alleys for access to off-street parking spaces and/or
garages shall be pursued.
U. Trash containers and outdoor storage areas shall be screened from public streets, pedestrian
areas and neighboring properties. The screen shall be designed to be compatible with the
architectural character of the development and shall be constructed as durable material and
shall have solid walls and doors.
V. To the extent possible, all public utilities and related facilities shall be located underground. In
such event that they cannot be installed underground, facilities such as pumping stations or
transformers shall be enclosed in buildings or effectively screened with an evergreen hedge
and/or fencing as approved by the Board.
W. Exposed concrete block (cinder block) or other such masonry units shall not be permitted as an
exposed surface in residential zones. Split face, ribbed, scored and glazed masonry units, or an
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
119
approved equal, with integral color, are permitted. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
to limiting brick, brick face, stone or other similar materials.
X. Plumbing vents, dryer vents, rooftop vents and all other protrusions shall be finished, coated or
painted to blend in with the general color of the roof and/or siding as the case may be.
Y. Provisions shall be made for stormwater drainage, sanitary sewage and utilities. All such
installations shall be connected with an approved system and shall be adequate for all present
and probable future development and shall be made according to the standard requirements
and specifications of the city.
Z. Residential development shall also comply with the applicable design standards (e.g., off-street
parking, landscaping, lighting, signage, etc.) enumerated below.
§400-2.2 General Non-Residential Design Standards.
A. Unless the existing pattern in the surrounding area is contrary to other standards in this Article,
the design and layout of buildings shall provide an aesthetically pleasing design that is
compatible with the character of surrounding development. To the extent possible, new
commercial development within an existing commercial area shall be consistent and compatible
with buildings in the adjacent area in terms of building setbacks, building mass, building height,
building materials and color, roof designs, entrance design, window design and placement, and
architectural style. New development within existing commercial areas shall incorporate any
architectural characteristic distinctive of the area.
B. Infill development shall continue the prevailing site layout of properties (e.g., building
placement, parking lot placement) in the surrounding area unless the existing pattern is contrary
to other standards in this Article (e.g., buildings setback a distance from the street with parking
in front yard along the street).
C. The architectural design of non-residential uses shall, to the maximum extent possible, avoid the
appearance of clutter by integrating mechanical, electrical, storage structures, loading facilities,
chimneys, smokestacks, etc., into the general architectural concept for the site.
D. Non-residential developments consisting of two (2) or more buildings, whether individually
owned or owned by separate entities, shall maintain a consistent design theme including
building silhouette, architectural style and scale; massing of building form; surface material,
finish and texture; decorative features; window and doorway proportions, entry way placement
and location, signage and landscaping) throughout the development. Within this overall design
theme, individual buildings may be differentiated by size, shape, detailing and fenestration.
E. Buildings shall be designed so as to have attractive, finished appearances from all public spaces
and streets. Where sides and rear of a building would be visible from a public space or street,
such side and rear elevations shall present a finished and attractive architectural appearance.
Such rear and side elevations shall incorporate the architectural features of the primary or front
facade.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
120
F. Blank walls shall be avoided. Facade articulations such as windows, trellises, recesses, arcades,
openings, ornamentation, changes of material, landscaping and/or other such features shall be
used to lessen the impact of blank walls.
G. All rooftop equipment shall be screened from view by materials of the same nature as the main
structure. If feasible, mechanical equipment shall be located below the highest vertical element
of the building.
H. All additions, alterations and accessory buildings shall be compatible with the principal structure
and design and material and shall share a common architectural theme.
I. In commercial structures, at least 50 percent of the ground floor facade area shall be fully or
partially transparent for visibility from the sidewalk, with at least 30% fully transparent glass. On
corner lots, the secondary storefront facade shall be consistent with the alignment, location and
amount of glazing of the primary storefront window facade.
J. Building entrances shall be clearly defined and highly visible. Primary access to buildings shall be
from the front, facing the street. Where necessary and appropriate, the rear and/or side of the
building shall be enhanced to provide public access from parking lots and service alleys.
K. Where entire or significant portions of blocks are being redeveloped, or where elsewhere
feasible, shared parking shall be pursued.
L. In developments providing loading areas, service and loading areas shall be separated from
main circulation and parking areas and away from public streets.
M. Window security gates shall be encouraged to be placed on the inside of the entrance door and
display window panels. Window security gates shall be of open mesh design except the lowest 1
foot which may be of solid design and shall be as inconspicuous and as complementary to the
facade as possible. The use of decorative designs in store front security gates shall be
encouraged.
N. Fire escapes shall be constructed only against the side of the rear wall of the building and shall
be located and/or screened so as not to distract from the appearance of such buildings.
O. All public utilities and related facilities shall be located underground. In such event that they
cannot be installed underground, facilities such as pumping stations or transformers shall be
enclosed in buildings or effectively screened with an evergreen hedge and/or fencing as
approved by the Board.
P. Recycling and solid waste disposal areas shall be enclosed. Trash enclosures shall be screened
from public streets, pedestrian areas and neighboring properties through the use of landscaping
where feasible. Trash enclosures screen shall be designed to be compatible with the
architectural character of the development and shall be constructed of durable materials.
Locations shall be conveniently accessible for trash collection and maintenance and shall not
block access drives during loading operations, to the extent feasible.
Q. Provisions shall be made for stormwater drainage, sanitary sewage and utilities. All such
installations shall be connected with an approved system and shall be adequate for all present
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
121
and probable future development and shall be made according to the standard requirements
and specifications of the city.
R. Non-residential development shall also comply with the applicable design standards (e.g.,
streetscape, off-street parking, landscaping, lighting, signage, etc.) enumerated below.
§400-2.3 Streetscape Design Standards.
A. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be at least 5 feet wide, except where located in proximity to high
pedestrian generators such as schools, places of worship and other community facilities where
sidewalks shall be 8 feet in width. Sidewalks shall be at least 12 feet in width in proximity to
pedestrian-oriented commercial areas.
1. Concrete sidewalks will be required on all street improvements and shall be constructed
in accordance with applicable city specifications.
2. Sidewalks shall be provided along the frontage of all properties and along both sides of
the street.
3. Sidewalks and sitting areas shall be surfaced so that they will be easily maintained and
properly illuminated if in use after sunset. Walks along the frontage of property shall be
in accordance with City standards.
4. Private pedestrian walks shall have a minimum paved width of 4 feet.
5. Handicap ramps shall be provided at all intersections and points of required pedestrian
crossing.
B. Street Furniture. Street furniture and amenities such as phone booths, benches, bike racks, trash
receptacles, bus shelters and landscaping planters shall be provided at regular intervals to
create a more comfortable, attractive and convenient environment for pedestrians. Such
elements shall be made of the same or similar materials to ensure design continuity and be
appropriate to the particular use.
C. Street Trees. Street trees shall be placed between 25 and 40 feet apart and not closer than 25
feet from any existing or proposed streetlight or street intersection. Trees shall be nursery
grown stock of not less than 3 inches in caliper at breast height (dbh), with branches
commencing not less than 7 feet above grade when planted and staked in an approved manner.
Species that provide shading and aesthetic benefit, conform to prevailing street tree patterns in
the City and take branching pattern and hardiness into consideration, are recommended. In
higher-density areas with high pedestrian traffic and a preponderance of on-street parking such
as commercial zones, street trees shall be planted in planters. In lower density such as in
residential neighborhoods, street trees shall be placed within a 2foot wide planting strip located
between the sidewalk and the curb.
D. Street Name Signs. Appropriate street name signs shall be installed at all street intersections.
E. Street Lights. Appropriate streetlights shall be installed where designated by the Planning Board.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
122
§400-2.4 Landscape Design
A. All areas not occupied by buildings, parking areas, patios, walkways and/or any other impervious
surface shall be suitably landscaped with ground cover, lawn and other landscape materials as
approved by the reviewing board. Landscaping shall be provided in public areas, to accentuate
buildings, to enhance driveway and building entrances, to screen parking and loading areas,
provide buffering between low density residential uses and more intensive land uses, to provide
privacy screenings within required side and rear yard areas and to mitigate adverse impacts.
B. Landscaping shall be of sufficient and appropriate size to accomplish its intended purpose:
1. Deciduous trees shall be at least 3-inch caliper in size. Evergreen trees used for
screening purposes shall be at least 5 feet tall upon installation. All trees shall be balled
and burlapped and be of specimen quality as established by the American Association of
Nurserymen.
2. All deciduous and evergreen shrubbery shall be from a minimum 5-gallon container.
C. Plants in containers shall be used for enhancement of sidewalk shops, plaza and courtyards.
D. Plant and other landscaping material shall be selected with regard to aesthetic and functional
considerations. With regard to aesthetics, the landscape design shall create visual diversity and
contrast through variation in size, shape, texture and color. With regard to functional, the
selection of plants shall take into account susceptibility to disease and insect damage, wind and
ice damage, habitat (wet site, drought, sun and shade tolerance), soil conditions, growth rate,
longevity, root pattern and maintenance requirements. All species selected shall have proven
resistance to the urban environment.
E. Foundation plantings shall be placed around multi-family, commercial or industrial structures
and shall be of suitable size in proportion to the building structure and shall be planted in beds
not less than 3 feet in width around the structure.
F. Landscaping within sight triangles shall not exceed a mature height of 30 inches. Shade trees
shall be permitted within sight triangles but located 40 feet from the intersecting curbline and
pruned up to a seven (7) foot branching height above grade. The placement of plants within
sight triangles that will eventually grow to obstruct sight distances shall be avoided. The
landscaping of parking areas, such as within landscape islands at the end of parking rows, shall
similarly take into consideration sight lines for motorists traversing the parking area.
G. Natural features such as trees, hilltops and views, natural terrain, open waters, natural drainage
ridge lines and natural drainage channels shall be preserved whenever possible in designing any
development on a lot containing such features. Existing trees of larger caliper shall be saved to
the extent possible.
H. Except in conservation easements and areas specifically designated to remain in their natural
state, the developer shall selectively thin or remove all dead or dying vegetation, either standing
or fallen, from the site including grubbing out stumps and all undesirable trees and
undergrowth. Tree stumps, portions of tree trunks and/or limbs shall not be buried at any
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
123
location on-site. All dead or dying trees, either standing or fallen, shall be removed from the
site.
I. Landscaping of area of cut/fill and terraces in multi-family, commercial or industrial sites shall be
sufficient so as to prevent soil erosion. All slopes are to be a maximum one (1) foot vertical for
every three (3) horizontal feet and planted with suitable cover plants combined with grasses
and/or sodding for the purpose of soil retention.
J. Any landscaping which dies within two (2) years of planting, for any reason, shall be replaced by
the developer(s) at their expense at the beginning of the next immediately following growing
season.
K. The hole in which a tree is to be planted shall be one (1) foot larger in width and six (6) inches
larger in depth than the rootball of the tree to be planted, and shall contain proper amounts of
top soil and peat moss at a 5:1 ratio. Said material shall be free of acidic marl, sticks, large
stones, debris or other material which will interfere with the growth of the tree.
L. Evergreen and deciduous shrub plantings shall be mulched with wood chips, peat, cedar mulch,
or approved material four (4) inches thick, extending to the branch limits.
M. All trees four (4) feet or greater in height shall be staked for a period of one year.
N. Reserved
O. Utility areas, mechanical equipment, transformers and meters shall be screened from adjoining
lots and street lines with landscaping. Open access to the equipment shall be maintained.
§400-2.5 Lighting Design
A. The style of all light fixtures and light standards within nonresidential and multi family
developments shall be consistent with the architectural style of the principal building and,
where appropriate, the architectural character of the surrounding area and all light fixtures and
light standards within a development shall be consistent in design and appearance.
B. All lighting shall be designed in accordance with minimum standards of safety and suggested
lighting levels as specified herein and in the standards of the Illuminating Engineering Society
(I.E.S.).
C. All fixtures, light sources, standards and lighting levels shall be consistent throughout the site.
D. Lighting shall be provided within nonresidential and multi family developments at building
entrances, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks and loading areas. The following intensity in
footcandles shall be maintained:
1. Multi-family residential parking lots: a minimum of 0.25 footcandles throughout,
maintained with established depreciation factor calculated into lighting level at a
maximum to minimum illumination ratio not to exceed 15:1.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
124
2. Commercial parking lots: a minimum of 0.5 footcandles throughout, maintained with
established depreciation factor calculated into lighting level at a maximum to minimum
illumination ratio not to exceed 15:1.
3. Sidewalks: a minimum of one (1) footcandle entire length.
4. Maximum at property lines: one-tenth (0.1) footcandle.
E. Lighting Standard (Poles)
1. The maximum height of freestanding lights shall not exceed the height of the principal
building or twenty-five (25) feet, whichever is less, except that the maximum height of
freestanding lights in the I-1 and I-2 Districts shall be 35 feet.
2. All poles shall be aesthetically compatible with the lighting fixtures and architectural
style of the principal building.
3. All poles shall be of an approved type, able to withstand wind loads typical to the region
and supplied by a reputable manufacturer.
4. Pole bases shall be designed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations and
approved by a licensed Professional Engineer as to structural stability.
5. All wiring is association with such lighting shall be underground,
6. Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected to avoid being damaged by
vehicles. Freestanding lights shall be aligned with parking stall striping and located a
minimum of 2 1/2 feet from the edge of curb
F. Lights shall be appropriately placed, shielded and directed so that the lighting, to the extent
possible, shall not spill over onto adjacent properties. Lights shall be so arranged and designed
so that the direct source of light is not visible off the site. Glare from bright light bulbs shall be
eliminated through the use of diffusers or the equivalent.
G. During non-operating hours, lighting that is not necessary for safety and security shall be
extinguished.
H. Lighting Fixtures:
1. All lighting fixtures, whether affixed to poles or a building, shall utilize maximum 75
degree cutoff luminaire type reflectors so as to minimize glare or shielded to restrict the
maximum apex angle of the cone of illumination to seventy-five (75) degrees from
vertical.
2. Where determined to be required by the Board, a house side shield (internal or
external) shall be provided to minimize glare and light intrusion onto adjacent
properties.
3. All fixtures shall be aesthetically compatible with the lighting standard (poles),
contiguous fixtures, and development on the site and surrounding area.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
125
4. The light lens shall be flush with, or recessed within, the fixture housing and parallel to
the ground.
5. Lights placed under a canopy of gasoline filling stations or under eaves of a building shall
be flush or recessed into such canopy or eave. No such light shall protrude below the
surface of the canopy of eave.
I. Plan Submissions. The lighting plan shall include the following information: Fixture manufacturer
literature showing fixture type, color, etc.; fixture photometrics as furnished by the
manufacturer; lighting standard (poles) literature showing pole type, height, etc.; site lighting
plans showing fixture locations and photometric data (isolux diagrams) indicating footcandle
intensities along fixture output distribution drawn to plan scale; design criteria containing
lighting source utilized, footcandle level, type of light source, wattages of lamps, and all other
data deemed necessary to make an informed decision on the application.
§400-2.6 Design Standards for Signs.
A. All signs in association with a development shall be in harmony and consistent with the
architecture of the building(s) involved in the development and shall to relate to the features of
the building(s) in terms of location, scale, color, lettering, materials, texture and depth. Signs
shall not be dominant but shall be proportionate and shall complement the buildings, existing
signs and surroundings.
B. All signs in association with a development shall convey a consistent sign design (including style
of lettering, colors, construction material, size and illumination).
C. Freestanding signs shall be integrated with the landscaping on site.
D. Signs that are affixed to buildings (including wall signs, projecting signs and the canopies and
awnings onto which signage is placed) shall not obscure, conflict with, or cover any architectural
element or window and must be aligned with major building elements such as windows, trim
and structure lines.
E. Canopies or awnings upon which signage is placed shall relate in scale to the facade of the
building, shall be placed over doors or windows consistent with the intent of canopies and
awnings, and shall not obscure, conflict with, or cover any architectural element of a building or
window. Canopies or awnings upon which signage is placed shall be less than 6 feet in vertical
dimension (and required in Article V, the signage shall be no greater than 4 feet in vertical
dimension). The use of angled awning and canopies shall be encouraged. The use of "waterfall"
awnings and canopies, particularly those that run the length of the facade, regardless of window
or door locations, shall be discouraged. Storefronts along the same street shall be encouraged
to adopt a uniform or compatible color scheme.
F. No electric wiring associated with a sign shall be visible to public view.
G. Illuminated Signs
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
126
1. Signs lit by external sources shall be allowed but shall be located in such a manner so as
to avoid any glare on adjacent property. Sources of sign illumination shall be completely
shielded from the view of vehicular traffic using the road or roads abutting the lot on
which the sign is located.
2. External lights used for the illumination of any sign on a building whether or not such
light fixtures are attached to or separate from the building, shall not extend above the
highest elevation of the front wall of the building.
H. Lettering on signs shall be simple, legible and well-proportioned for clear communication.
§400-2.7 Off-Street Parking, Loading, Circulation and Access Design Standards.
A. There shall be adequate provisions for safe and convenient ingress and egress to all parking
areas. Each off-street parking, loading or service area shall be connected to a public street rightof-
way by means of a driveway, and each parking space shall connect to an aisle providing
access thereto.
B. To the extent feasible, off-street parking shall be placed to the rear and/or side of buildings.
However, where conditions dictate otherwise or where the reviewing board determines that
parking in the front yard would be appropriate, off-street parking and/or interior drives
associated therewith may be placed in a required front yard provided that such parking and/or
interior drives is separated from the front lot line a distance of 3 feet and is screened from the
street by a solid natural screen, high decorative wall, or combination thereof, at least 2 feet but
no more than 4 feet in height.. As required in Article V, off- street parking areas in association
with one and two family dwellings shall not be permitted in the required front yard.
C. A screen at least 4 feet in height shall be provided along all other property lines, except where
superseded by §500-3.12.C.
D. In parking lots containing more than 25 parking spaces, the interior of any parking area shall
contain a curbed landscape island equal to 5 percent of the area of the parking facility. In
parking lots containing more than 100 parking spaces, at least 8 percent of the interior parking
area shall be so landscaped. Curbed landscape islands at least 6 feet in width shall be placed at
the end of each parking bay. Curbed landscape islands at least 8 feet in width shall be provided
to separate opposing parking bays exceeding 20 spaces in each row. Such areas shall be
distributed throughout the parking area in order to break the view of parked cars in a manner
not impairing visibility (e.g., planting with low growing shrubs and trees with a high-branching
pattern). Landscaping of such parking areas shall include 1 shade tree, measuring a minimum of
3-inch caliper, for every 10 parking spaces.
E. All parking and loading areas in association with multi-family or non-residential uses that abut
mixed- uses, or public, semi-public or residential uses shall be landscaped about their periphery,
shall be set back from the property line separating it from such uses a distance of at least 3 feet
and shall be screened in accordance with §500-3.12.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
127
F. Off-street parking and loading areas shall be coordinated with the public street system serving
the area in order to avoid conflicts with through traffic, obstruction to pedestrian walkways and
vehicular thoroughfares. Shared parking among mixed-uses shall be encouraged.
G. All off-street parking areas, interior driveways and loading/unloading areas shall be surfaced
with a permanent long-wearing surface which is adequately pitched to provide proper drainage
and shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
H. All parking areas shall be graded for proper drainage and provided with an all-weather surfacing
maintained at all times in such a manner as to prevent the release of dust and to be free of dust,
trash and debris.
I. Each entrance or exit driveway (one-way drives) shall have a minimum unobstructed width of
not less than 10 feet nor a width greater than 20 feet. Every combined entrance and exit
driveway (two-way drives) shall have a minimum unobstructed width of 20 feet nor a width
greater than 30 feet with the exception of combined driveways serving one or two-family
dwellings, which shall have minimum width of 12 feet and a maximum width of 20 feet.
J. Driveways shall be located at least 25 feet from a street intersection measured along the
property line from the intersection of corner property lines, except that such distance may be
increased at the discretion of the Board in the event that local conditions dictate such increased
distance.
K. No driveways shall be closer than 20 feet measured along the curb line to another driveway. No
curb cut permit shall be issued unless either a site plan has been previously approved by the
local approving agency or the Division of Planning and Zoning determines the use of the
driveway is in compliance with the intent of the Ordinance.
L. All entrance and exit driveways shall be located to afford maximum safety to traffic, provide for
safe and convenient ingress and egress to and from the site, and to minimize conflict with the
flow of traffic.
M. Where uses would involve a significant amount of drop-off and pick-up of persons, sufficient
provision for such drop-off and pick-up should be incorporated into the site design of the use.
N. Adequate lighting shall be provided for parking lots in operation between the hours from dusk
until dawn and so designed as to eliminate glare to nearby residents and moving traffic as
specified in this Article.
O. The landscaping of parking areas, such as within landscape islands at the end of parking rows,
shall take into consideration sight lines for motorists traversing the parking area. Landscaping
within such sight triangles shall not exceed a mature height of 30 inches and shade trees within
sight triangles shall be pruned up to a seven (7) foot branching height above grade. The
placement of plants within sight triangles that will eventually grow to obstruct sight distances
shall be avoided.
P. Except for one and two family dwellings, all parking spaces within any parking area shall be
clearly delineated by means of pavement markings to show the parking arrangement within the
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
128
parking areas. Such markings shall be depicted on site plans, with numbered spaces shown as
well as handicapped spaces. The stalls shall be clearly marked and so designed, maintained and
regulated such that no maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public street, walk or
alley, and so that any automobile may be parked and un-parked without moving another. The
Board shall require certain areas to be maintained for firefighting, handicapped or other
emergency purposes, pursuant to direction of the appropriate officers of the City.
Q. Any access/exit driveway or driveway lane shall be so designated in profile and grading and
located in such a manner as to provide a sight distance commensurate with the design speed of
the road to which it connects.
R. No entrance or exit driveway shall be located on a rotary, ramp of an interchange or within 20
feet of the beginning of any ramp or other portion of an interchange.
S. The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to adequately accommodate the volume and
character of vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily onto the site.
T. The vertical curve of a driveway shall be so designed to prevent the dragging of any vehicle
undercarriage.
U. All parking lots and all loading areas shall have concrete or Belgian block curbing around the
perimeter of the parking and loading areas in conjunction with an overall grading and drainage
plan. Curbing between vehicular and pedestrian ways shall be designed with periodic ramps
from the street or parking grade to the sidewalk.
V. Sites shall be designed to provide safe and convenient pedestrian access and circulation. Where
pedestrians must cross service roads to reach parking areas, crosswalks shall be clearly
designated by pavement markings or signs and shall be slightly raised to designate them to
drivers. Sidewalks between parking areas and principal structures, along aisles and driveways,
and wherever pedestrian traffic would occur shall be raised 6 inches or more above the parking
area, except when crossing streets or driveways, guardrails, and wheel stops permanently
anchored to the ground shall be provided in appropriate locations. Parked vehicles shall not
overhang or extend over sidewalk areas, unless an additional sidewalk width of 21/2 feet is
provided to accommodate such overhang. Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of 4 feet of
passable area, unless such sidewalk is a continuation of an existing sidewalk of greater width in
which case the sidewalk shall match the width of such sidewalk. The use of pedestrian
pathways, delineated through the use of brick or concrete pavers, within parking lots shall be
encouraged.
W. All required off-street loading areas shall be provided with sufficient turning space and access.
X. In case of structured parking, the facades of parking structures shall, to the greatest degree
possible, incorporate architectural features that diminish its appearance as a parking structure,
or otherwise be finished with a decorative open screen of masonry, metal or other appropriate
material. When associated with a particular use, the exterior of the parking structure shall
incorporate to the greatest degree practicable, the design theme (including building silhouette,
architectural style and scale; massing of building form; surface material, finish and texture and
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
129
decorative features) of the building(s) associated with it. The incorporation of ground floor retail
uses along the perimeter of parking structures shall be encouraged, particularly where such
parking decks front on commercial streets.
§400-2.8 Fences, Walls and Screens.
A. Fences must compliment the architectural character of the principal building to which it is
accessory.
B. The finished side of all fences shall face out from the property upon which said fence has been
erected. All structural supporting members of the fence shall face the interior portion of the lot.
C. All fences shall be symmetrical in appearance. Posts shall be separated by equal distances and
constructed of fencing material conforming to a definite pattern in size.
D. The use of razor coil on fencing is prohibited. No fencing abutting a residential use shall use
barbed wire on any fencing. Fences topped with barbed-wire shall be discouraged elsewhere.
However, where provided, all barbed wire shall be faced into property. In lieu of barbed-wire or
razor coil topped fences, "Fortifier'-type fences or similar such fences, shall be encouraged.
E. The following types of fencing are recommended: decorative steel, tubular steel, wrought iron
or brick. Such fences are encouraged in lieu of standard chain link fences, particularly forward of
the building line facing the street. Such fences are particularly encouraged in residential
districts, where the placement of chain-link or board on board fencing in front yards is
particularly discouraged.
F. All gates shall be identical in material, design, type, height and color to the fence they are
attached. However, gates may and are encouraged to incorporate a special design feature such
as, but not limited to, a convex or concave curve at the top, or a more ornate design.
G. Gates shall be designed so as not to swing outward into a public right-of-way or onto another
property.
H. Fences that are non-climbable or which discourage climbing shall be encouraged.
I. Fences located along the front lot line shall align with the predominant fence line on the street.
J. No fence shall be erected that would create a hazard either by the manner or construction or
the materials used or that may cause injury due to jagged end surfaces, spikes or points.
Speared or spiked fence tops shall be permitted only when the top of said fencing is more than 6
feet above grade adjacent to the fence.
K. Solid, perforated, corrugated or flat sheet metal shall be prohibited for use as a fencing material.
L. Mechanical gates with overhead bars shall be discouraged.
M. No fence shall be erected of nonstandard materials that may be considered makeshift, create an
eyesore or cause an annoyance.
N. Fences must be maintained and kept in good repair.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
130
§400-2.9 Public or Common Private Open Space Design.
A. All open space shall incorporate elements such as shrubbery, attractive paving materials, street
furniture, lighting, low walls, fountains and other architectural and artistic amenities so as to
produce and provide a pleasant environment at all levels and to complement the surrounding
buildings. All open space shall be designed to invite and attract the public.
B. Adequate lighting shall be provided to promote a sense of security in the open space.
C. Open spaces shall be so located as to provide for maximum usability and to create a harmonious
relationship between buildings.
§400-2.10 Recycling Facilities for New Multi-Family Developments
A. There shall be included in any new multi-family housing development that requires subdivision
or site plan approval an indoor or outdoor recycling area for the collection and storage of
residentially generated recyclable materials. The dimensions of the recycling area shall be
sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers that are of adequate size and number
and which are consistent with anticipated usage and with current methods of collection in the
area in which the project is located.
B. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for the disposition of source-separated
recyclable materials by residents of the multi-family housing development, preferably near, but
clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
C. The recycling area shall be well lit and shall be safely and easily accessible by recycling personnel
and vehicles. Collection vehicles shall be able to access the recycling area without interference
from parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be taken to protect the
recycling area, and the bins or containers placed therein, against theft of recyclable materials,
bins or containers.
D. Any bins or containers that are used for the collection of recyclable paper or cardboard and that
are located in an outdoor recycling area shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as
to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
E. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials accepted therein shall be posted
adjacent to all points of access to the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be
equipped with signs indicating the materials to be placed therein.
F. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be provided around any outdoor recycling area and shall be
developed in an aesthetically pleasing manner.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
131
§400-2.11 Streets.
A. The arrangement of streets shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing
streets.
B. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic
C. Widths.
1. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and shall be not less
than the following: Arterial/principal streets: sixty (60) feet; Collector/minor streets:
fifty (50) feet; Local streets: forty (40) feet.
2. The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multi-family, commercial and
industrial developments shall be determined on an individual basis and shall, in all cases,
be of sufficient width and design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking
and loading needs and maximum access for fire-fighting equipment.
3. No street shall have a width greater than sixty (60) feet within the right-of-way lines
unless said street constitutes an extension of an existing street of greater width.
D. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be approved except
where the control and disposal of land comprising such strips has been placed under city
jurisdiction under conditions approved by the Planning Board.
E. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to the street width
requirements of this chapter shall dedicate additional width along either one (1) or both sides of
said road. If subdivision is along one (1) side only, one-half ('/2) of the required extra width shall
be dedicated except when the Planning Board determines that existing conditions make it
unfeasible.
F. Grades of arterial, major thoroughfares and collector streets shall not exceed four percent (4%).
Grades on other streets shall not exceed ten percent (10%). No streets shall have a minimum
grade of less than one-half of one percent (1/2 of 1%). Within fifty (50) feet of an intersection of
any street with a collector street, major thoroughfare, arterial street or controlled access
highway, the maximum grade shall be limited to two percent (2%).
G. Street intersections shall be a nearly at right angles as is possible and in no case be less than
sixty degrees (60 degree). The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline
with a curve having a radius of not less than twenty (20) feet for collector and arterial streets
and fifteen (15) feet for minor and marginal streets.
H. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be
prohibited.
I. A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on
arterial and collector streets.
J. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one (1) point by more than ten
degrees (10 degree) and not more than forty-five degrees (45 degree), they shall be connected
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
132
by a curve with a radius of not less than one hundred (100) feet for minor streets and three
hundred (300) feet for arterial and collector streets.
K. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient radius to provide a
smooth transition and proper sight distance.
L. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall be not longer than six hundred (600) feet and shall provide a
turnaround at the end with a radius of not less than fifty (50) feet and tangent, whenever
possible, to the right side of the street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar
turnaround shall be provided and provisions shall be made for future extensions of the street
and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
M. No streets shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate as to be confused with
the names of existing streets. The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name.
N. All streets shall be paved the full width between the curblines as determined by the Planning
Board. The minimum width of pavement will be thirty (30) feet. In residential sections, the
pavement type shall be six (6) inches dense graded aggregate, four (4) inches bituminous
stabilized base, mix I-2, and two (2) inches bituminous concrete, mix I-5. In commercial and
industrial sections, the pavement type shall be eight (8) inches dense graded aggregate, six (6)
inches bituminous stabilized base, mix I-2, and three (3) inches bituminous concrete, mix I-5,
unless, in the opinion of the City Engineer, local conditions require a more durable pavement.
O. Straight concrete curb or combined concrete curbs and gutters will be required in all street
improvements. They shall be constructed in accordance with the standard plans and
specifications of the city and the applicable provisions of this chapter.
§400-2.12 Blocks.
A. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such as to accommodate the
size of the lot required in the area by the Zoning Ordinance of the city and provide for
convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
B. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be sufficient to meet all area
and yard requirements for such use.
C. In blocks over one thousand (1,000) feet long, pedestrian walkways may be required in locations
deemed necessary by the Planning Board. Such walkway shall be ten (10) feet wide and be
straight from street to street.
§400-2.13 Lots.
A. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance of the
city.
City of Paterson, Land Development Ordinance Development Requirements and Design Standards
133
B. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight streets and radial to curved
streets.
C. Each lot must front upon an approved street.
D. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets, lots shall begin at such
extra width line, and all setbacks shall be measured from such line.
E. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use due to
factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or similar circumstances, the Planning Board
may, after investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
§400-2.14 Public Use and Service Areas.
A. Easements for utility installation may be required where no utility lines presently exist. Such
easements shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide and located in consultation with the utility
company and the city departments concerned.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall
be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the
lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate
for the purpose.
C. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be preserved whenever possible
in designing any subdivision containing such features.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
134
ARTICLE V ZONING
§500-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the City of Paterson is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
Residential Districts
R-1 - One Family Residential District
R-2 - Low Medium Density Residential District
R-3 - High Medium Density Residential District
R-4- High Density Residential District
Business Districts
B-1 - Neighborhood Business District
B-2 - Community Business District
B-3 - General Business District
B-4 - Central Business District
Industrial Districts
I-1 - Light Industrial District
I-2 - Heavy Industrial District
Special Purpose Districts
MU - Mixed Use District
GFHD - Great Fall Historic District
H-1 - Hospital Zone-1
PUID - Planned Unit Industrial Development District
I-T Industrial Transition District
R/C-3 High Medium Density Mixed Use District
§500-1.1 Zoning Map
The location and boundaries of the above zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the
Zoning Map which accompanies this Ordinance and which, with all notations, references, and other
information shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this Ordinance as if fully described herein and
shall be known as the Zoning Map of the City of Paterson. Such map may be amended periodically by an
ordinance duly adopted according to law.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
135
§500-1.2 District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning Map, the following
rules shall apply:
A. The zone boundary lines are intended generally to follow street center lines, existing lot lines,
center lines of railroad right-of-way, waterways, sewer and utility easements or as otherwise
shown on Zoning Map. In cases of uncertainty or disagreement as to the true location of any
zone boundary line, the determination thereof shall be with the Board of Adjustment.
B. In all cases where a district boundary is located not farther away than 10 feet from a lot line of
record, the boundary shall be construed to be along such line.
§500-2 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§500-2.1 Purpose and Intent of Zoning Districts.
In addition to the general purposes of this Ordinance as set forth in §100-2, the following specific intent
for the establishment of each of the City's zoning districts are set forth below:
A. R-1 One Family Residential District: The intent of the R-1 One Family Residential District is to
provide for low-density single-family residential development, together with other uses such as
places of worship, recreational facilities, schools and other such permitted uses that are typically
located in residential neighborhoods. Certain accessory uses that are customarily incidental to
single-family residences and that are compatible with low density residential surroundings are
permitted as well.. All other uses, including higher density residential uses (i.e., townhouses,
two family dwellings and all multi-family dwellings), and business, industrial and other nonresidential
uses are strictly prohibited. No new construction of such prohibited land uses, nor
conversion of residential dwellings into such prohibited land uses, is permitted to occur with the
R-1 District. In-fill development consisting of single-family homes and/or other permitted uses
that preserve the low-rise and low-density character of the existing neighborhood is
encouraged.
B. R-2 Low Medium Density Residential District: The intent of the R-2 Low Medium Density
Residential District is to permit single and two family dwellings at the low to medium densities
permitted in the district, together with such uses as places of worship, recreational facilities,
schools and other such permitted uses that are typically located in residential neighborhoods.
Certain accessory uses that are customarily incidental to one and two-family residences and that
are compatible with low to medium density residential surroundings are permitted as well. It is
the further intent of this district to preserve the existing neighborhood character and the quality
of the physical environment in these areas of the City. In keeping with this intent, higher density
residential uses (i.e., townhouses and all kinds of multiple-family dwellings), as well as business,
industrial and other non-residential uses are strictly prohibited. No new construction of such
prohibited land uses, nor conversion of residential dwellings into such prohibited land uses, is
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
136
permitted to occur with the R-2 District. In fill development consisting of single-family homes,
two-family homes and/or other permitted uses that preserve the existing density, pattern, scale,
and building height of the existing neighborhood is encouraged.
C. R-3 High Medium Density Residential District: The R-3 High Medium Density Residential District
is designed to permit more intensive residential use of land than permitted in the R-1 and R-2
Districts, with various types of dwellings being permitted, including townhouses, garden
apartment developments and low rise apartment buildings. Population is maintained in the
medium range, while building height is kept low enough to be generally compatible with oneand
two-family residential development (i.e., high-rise apartment building are strictly
prohibited). Certain low-intensity, nonresidential uses that are not permitted in the lower
density residential districts, but that are appropriately located in higher density residential area
(e.g., funeral homes, long term care facilities, and small scale professional offices) are permitted
in the R-3 District. In addition, neighborhood retail and personal service uses that are located on
corner lots along major roads are permitted in order to serve the needs of the surrounding
neighborhoods. However, all other business, industrial and other non-residential uses are
strictly prohibited from this district. No new construction of such prohibited land uses, nor
conversion of existing buildings into such prohibited land uses, is permitted to occur with the R-
3 District. In-fill development consisting of the permitted residential and non-residential uses
and that preserve the character, density and scale of the existing neighborhood is encouraged.
D. R-4 High Density Residential District: The R-4 High Density Residential District is designed to
permit high-rise apartment buildings as well as the residential uses permitted in the R-3 District.
Various types and sizes of residential accommodations, for ownership or rental, would thereby
be provided to meet the needs of the different age and family groups in the City. This district
should be located near major thoroughfares for good accessibility. Like the R-3 District, certain
low-intensity, non-residential uses that are not permitted in the lower density residential
districts, but that are appropriately located in higher density residential area (e.g., funeral
homes, long-term care facilities, and small-scale professional offices) are permitted in the R-4
District. However, all other business, industrial and other non-residential uses are strictly
prohibited. No new construction of such prohibited land uses, nor conversion of existing
buildings into such prohibited land uses, is permitted to occur with the R-4 District. However, infill
development consisting of the permitted residential and non-residential uses that preserves
and/or improves the character, density and scale of existing development is encouraged.
E. B-1 Neighborhood Business District: The intent of the B-1 Neighborhood Business District is to
provide low-intensity, neighborhood scale retail and personal service businesses that supply the
everyday needs of residents in immediately surrounding neighborhoods. The district permits
operations that provide a convenience to area residents, such as neighborhood-scale food
stores, personal service businesses, delicatessens, pharmacies and similar retail establishments
designed to sell goods to patrons primarily residing in immediately surrounding neighborhoods,
as opposed to larger-scale businesses and industrial uses that are prohibited in this district, in
order to maintain a neighborhood atmosphere and prevent traffic congestion.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
137
F. B-2 Community Business District: The intent of the B-2 Community Business District is to provide
sufficient space in appropriate locations for a wide variety of commercial and service activities,
serving a wider area than the B-1 District. The district is intended to consist primarily of
businesses involved in the rendering of services or selling of goods or merchandise primarily
oriented towards residents of the City of Paterson as a whole (i.e., generally larger scale and
more specialized retail establishments than permitted in the B-1 District such as auto supply
stores, book stores, clothing and shoe stores, sporting goods stores and supermarkets), as well
as other commercial uses that are not permitted in the B-1 District, including gasoline filling
stations, automobile repair, hotels and motels, car washes and drive-through restaurants.
However, more intensive and larger scale commercial uses (e.g., motor vehicle sales
establishments, boat and marine showrooms and sales, building supply stores and home
maintenance supply centers), businesses that are primarily involved in the rendering of sales or
service to other businesses (e.g., business services and wholesale establishments), as well as
warehousing and light industrial uses are not permitted in the B-2 District. This district is located
normally at the conveyance of or along major thoroughfares where a general mixture of
commercial and service activity now exists, but which uses are not characterized by extensive
warehousing or frequent heavy truck activity.
G. B-3 General Business District: The intent of the B-3 General Business District is to provide a
wider and more intensive range of business and service activities than permitted in the B-1 and
B-2 districts. The permitted uses would generate larger volumes of vehicular traffic, would need
more off-street parking and loading, and would require more planning to integrate such districts
with adjacent residential areas. Commercial uses engaged in the selling of goods, merchandise
or services to patrons from a wider region (e.g., boat and marine showrooms and sales, building
supply stores and home maintenance supply centers) are permitted in the B-3 District, as are
motor vehicle sales establishments and businesses that are primarily involved in the rendering
of sales or service to other businesses (e.g., business services and wholesale establishments).
However, with the exception of indoor warehousing, industrial uses are prohibited from this
district. Since the district is intended to encourage economic development and since the
intensity and types of land uses permitted in the B-3 District are not as compatible with
residential areas as the preceding commercial zones, residential uses are prohibited from the B-
3 District (with the exception of apartments above stores and artist live-work quarters).
H. B-4 Central Business District: The purpose of this district is to foster the development of a
vibrant, pedestrian-friendly, and accessible downtown that is the center of commerce and civic
activity. The Central Business District is intended to function as a local and regional destination
for business, retail, education, governmental services, entertainment, and transportation. The B-
4 Central Business District is intended to encompass the retail, service, educational,
governmental and office core of the City's historic downtown area, and permits a wide variety of
such uses in a high intensity urban context. Uses that are not consistent with the intent of the
Central Business District (e.g., industrial uses, warehousing, low density residential
development) are prohibited. However, infill development and redevelopment consisting of
uses permitted in the district, that are consistent with the intended character, density and scale
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
138
of development, and that otherwise add to the Central Business District's role as a local and
regional destination for business, retail, education, governmental services, entertainment, and
transportation are encouraged. The B-4 district includes the designated Downtown Commercial
Historic District within its boundaries as well.
I. MU Mixed Use District: The MU Mixed Use District is intended to permit a mixture of
commercial and industrial uses in appropriate locations in accordance with the City's Master
Plan. This district is intended to create an environment for effective integration and mutual
support among the nonresidential activities and to promote more viable economic development
and higher land values. Further development of residences is prohibited in this district to
protect homes from the adverse effects of the light industrial and intensive commercial uses
permitted in the district and to conserve the supply of land for such uses.
J. I-1 Light Industrial District: The intent of the I-1 Light Industrial District is to provide for a wide
variety of light manufacturing, fabricating, processing, wholesale, distribution and warehousing
uses in a setting conducive to public health, economic stability and growth, and protection from
blight and nonindustrial encroachment. The regulations are designed to permit operations in a
clean and quiet manner and to protect adjacent district uses and industries within the district.
Further development of residences is prohibited in this district to protect homes from the
adverse effects of industries and to conserve the supply of industrial land for industrial uses.
Further, in order to avoid bringing the general public into the district, to protect commercial
establishments from the adverse effects of industry and to conserve the supply of land for
industrial uses, most commercial uses are prohibited from the I-1 District.
K. I-2 Heavy Industrial District: The intent of the I-2 Heavy Industrial District is to provide land for
more intense types of industrial and manufacturing uses excluding those with nuisance
characteristics. While the mapping of this district unavoidably includes some residential
buildings, future construction of dwellings in such districts is prohibited in order to protect
homes from the adverse effects of industries and to conserve the supply of industrial land for
industrial uses. Further, in order to avoid bringing the general public into the district and in
order to protect commercial establishments from the adverse effects of industry, most
commercial uses are prohibited from the I-2 District.
L. GFHD Great Fall Historic District: The intent of the GFHD Great Falls Historic District is to
safeguard the heritage and history of the City of Paterson by preserving the cultural, social,
economic, and architectural elements of this historic area of the City; to maintain and develop
an appropriate and harmonious setting for the architecturally and historically significant
buildings, structures and places in the City; to improve property values and strengthen the City's
economy; to foster civic beauty and appreciation for the City's heritage; and to promote the use
of historically and architecturally significant sites primarily for the education, pleasure and
general enhancement of the citizens of Paterson and its visitors. The District was created to stop
the demolition of the historic mill buildings in the area and to highlight elements of Paterson's
industrial past and encourage rehabilitation. The Great Falls Historic District still has numerous
attractive mill buildings that could be converted to market rate housing that attract a variety of
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
139
income groups to the area special emphasis should be made for market rate housing in this area
(in addition to existing income-regulated housing). In addition, the District encourages
restaurants, stores and other uses and attractions that highlight the natural resource of the
Great Falls, the architectural and historic character of the area and that encourage more tourism
and activity in the area. Specific design requirements are intended to preserve the architectural
integrity of the buildings and layout.
M. H-1 Hospital Zone-1: The H-1 Hospital Zone-1 is specifically designed to meet the needs of the
hospital for future expansion. In this zone, the existing land use types of one and two family
homes are permitted uses and the existing hospital, its expansion and related medical uses to
support a public purpose institution, are permitted by conditional use/site plan approval
procedures. Under this zoning, the existing R-2, one and two-family residential character is
retained and reinforced while encouraging the orderly development or land uses which support
the hospital in rendering an important institutional service under specific conditions and
requirements designed to be harmonious with the existing physical character. The boundaries of
the zoning district have been drawn to allow the reasonable future expansion of the hospital
and the development of related medical uses around the hospital. Any future expansion or
development of such uses should therefore be conducted within the confines of the hospital
zone, not within adjoining residential d istricts.
N. PUID Planned Unit Industrial Development District: The PUID Planned Unit Industrial
Development District is intended to encourage the development of industrial acreage under an
overall development plan, to encourage imagination and innovation in such development
planning to the end that Paterson will have industrial areas offering a variety of structural types,
site arrangements with well integrated facilities and services. It is further intended to permit
greater flexibility in the design than would be required through the strict application of standard
zoning and subdivision regulations.
O. I-T Industrial Transition District: The intent of the IT Industrial Transition District is to provide
flexible and expanded opportunities for the future re-use and redevelopment of existing
industrial buildings and sites previously designated in the industrial zoning districts to promote
the transition of existing industrial areas which are in a state of decline or flux as a result of the
changes in the economic industrial base to a broader based, mixed use zoning district. Industrial
uses will be permitted to continue and expand, but other new non-industrial uses will be
permitted under certain conditions to allow the resurgence of formerly zoned industrial areas
into viable and vibrant areas through redevelopment and integrated design measures.
P. R/C-3 High Medium Density Mixed Use District: The R/C-3 District is intended to permit more
intensive residential use than the R-1 or R-2 districts while also allowing neighborhood retail and
professional offices in a mixed use setting. Neighborhood retail uses are allowed in this district
to serve the residents of the surrounding neighborhood. The R/C-3 District is designed to permit
these types of uses together in a scale that is consistent with the R-2 District.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
140
§500-2.2 Schedules of Permitted Principal, Accessory and Conditional Uses.
A. The Schedule of Permitted Principal, Accessory and Conditional Uses - Residential Districts is
contained at the end of this Article and is hereby made part of this Ordinance.
B. The Schedule of Permitted Principal, Accessory and Conditional Uses - Non-Residential Districts
is contained at the end of this Article and is hereby made part of this Ordinance.
C. This Article shall be viewed as permissive. Any use not listed as a principal permitted use,
conditional use, and/or accessory use within the district in question shall be deemed to be
prohibited within such district.
D. Notwithstanding compliance with specific conditional use standards hereinafter set forth,
conditional uses shall require site plan approval by the appropriate Board.
E. Any use that produces hazardous materials as defined in Article I is prohibited in all districts,
unless otherwise permitted by applicable ordinances after approval by the appropriate
approving authority.
§500-2.3 Schedule of Bulk and Dimensional Requirements
The Schedule of Bulk and Dimensional Requirements is contained at the end of this Article and is hereby
made part of this Ordinance. Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, all proposed structures and
uses of land, buildings or structures shall comply with the regulations set forth therein.
§500-2.4 Relation to Redevelopment/Urban Renewal Plans
Where in a Redevelopment / Urban Renewal Area, as illustrated on the Zoning Map, the provisions of
the Redevelopment/ Urban Renewal Plan shall prevail. The Redevelopment/Urban Renewal Plan may
supersede the zoning in the area or create an overlay to the existing zoning depending upon the specific
language in the Redevelopment/ Urban Renewal Plan.
§500-2.5 Design Standards for the IT Industrial Transition District
A. Building Frontages and Lot Frontages
1. Building frontage is the length of a building façade that faces any public street. All
buildings that face a street shall be treated like a front regardless of garage or loading
needs.
2. All building setbacks and recesses along any street shall be appropriately landscaped.
Low fences, walls, and gates may be provided along the landscape area but shall not
exceed three (3) feet in height.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
141
3. Buildings shall incorporate architectural and design details in accordance with
Subsection 400-2.2.f of the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance to create
architectural interest, and avoid blank street level walls.
B. Building Placement
1. Build to lines for all streets are zero feet (0’) to ten feet (10’) from front property lines,
except where insufficient right-of-way exists to provide a required sidewalk width of a
minimum of ten feet (10’) and/or where a recessed entranceway is provided.
2. Adjustments to build-to lines to maintain visibility do not apply
a. To buildings fronting a Public Plaza or Park space; or
b. To building fronts where wide sidewalks and on-street parking lanes allow the
necessary visibility.
C. Building Size and Height Limitations
1. Building Frontage
a. All buildings fronting any street shall be considered building fronts.
b. For multiple adjoining lots under single control, or for a single lot with multiple
buildings, all standards apply to the combination of lot(s) and building(s).
2. Building Coverage
a. The maximum permitted building coverage shall be 70% in aggregate.
3. Building Height. Building heights are regulated for the IT District in the Schedule of Bulk
and Dimensional Requirements. Additional requirements are as follows:
a. No building may have an unbroken width greater than one hundred fifty feet
(150’) wide. Vertical architectural treatments shall be applied to minimize
unbroken widths.
b. Roof appurtenances such as chimneys and flues, elevator or stair bulkheads,
water tanks and mechanical equipment; may penetrate the maximum height
limit by no more than twenty-five feet (25’) so long as the appurtenances do not
occupy more than 10% of the topmost roof. Such appurtenances shall be
screened and /or treated as part of the buildings architecture.
D. General Architectural Design Standards. See Subsections 400-2.1 and 400-2.2 of the Zoning and
Land Development Ordinance for general residential and non-residential design standards.
E. Streetscape Design Standards. See Subsection 400-2.3 of the Zoning and Land Development
Ordinance for streetscape design standards.
F. Landscaping Design Standards. See Subsection 400-2.4 of the Zoning and Land Development
Ordinance for landscaping design standards.
G. Lighting Design Standards. See Subsection 400-2.5 of the Zoning and Land Development
Ordinance for lighting design standards.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
142
H. Sign Design Standards. See Subsection 400-2.6 of the Zoning and Land Development Ordinance
for sign design standards.
I. Parking & Loading Requirements
1. Off-Street Parking. See Subsection 500-7.3 of the Zoning and Land Development
Ordinance for off-street parking requirements, except for Mixed Use Community
Developments see Subsection 500-4.17.
2. Loading Requirements. See Subsection 500-7.4 of the Zoning and Land Development
Ordinance for the applicable loading requirements.
§500-3 GENERAL REGULATIONS
§500-3.1 Conformity Required.
A. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or structure shall be moved,
altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land or building be designed, used or intended to be
used for any purpose or in any manner other than as specified among the uses listed as
permitted, accessory or conditional in the district in which such building or land is located.
B. No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed in
height the limit designated in the district in which such building or structure is located, unless
otherwise permitted by this Ordinance.
C. No building or structure shall be erected, no existing buildings or structures shall be altered,
enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or
reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the lot, yard and building requirements
regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such building, structure or open
space is located.
D. The area or dimension of any lot, yard, parking area or other space shall not be reduced to less
than the minimum required by this Article; and if, already less than the minimum required by
this Ordinance, said area or dimension shall not be further reduced.
E. The provisions and restrictions contained in this Article shall not apply to or be binding upon the
City of Paterson.
F. For areas subject of a Redevelopment Plan or Urban Renewal Plan refer to such Redevelopment
Plan or Urban Renewal Plan for applicable requirements.
§500-3.2 Yard Regulations
A. Required Yards.
1. The depth of required yards shall be measured parallel to the street line and lot lines.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
143
2. No part of a yard or other open space required for any building for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard or
other open space similarly required for another building.
3. No land in a residential zone shall be used to fulfill open space, minimum areas,
minimum yard and setback requirements, or other similar requirements for a use in a
nonresidential zone.
B. Average Front Yard Setback.
1. In all zoning districts, where the average of the front yards existing on all lots within 200
feet of either side of the lot is less than the minimum required front yard, the required
front setback line may be reduced to this lesser average depth and constitute the
required minimum front yard setback, but not less than ten (10) feet
2. In the GFH District, no building shall be set back more than 10 feet further from the
street line than the average front yard setback on the street.
3. In business districts, no building shall be set back more than 20 feet further from the
street line than the average front yard setback on the street.
C. Front Yards on Corner Lots. Every yard of a corner lot that abuts a street shall be considered a
front yard, and the front yard setback requirements for the zone in which the lot is situated shall
be complied with on every street frontage.
D. Front Yards of Through Lots. A through lot shall have a front yard, as provided for its particular
district, along each street.
E. Side and Rear Yard Modifications for Lots in Residential Districts.
1. For each foot that a lot is less than 37 1/2 feet in width, each required side yard may be
reduced by 3 inches. However, in no event shall a side yard be less than 3 feet. The
required side yard for lots 37 1/2 feet in width shall each be 5 feet (for a total side yard
of 10 feet). When such lots are 37 1/2 feet or more in width, the side yards shall meet
the normally applicable side yard requirement of the district in which the lot is located.
2. For any platted and recorded lot in a residential district having a depth of less than (100)
feet, the required rear yard may be reduced by three (3) inches for each foot that the lot
is less than 100 feet deep; provided that no rear yard shall be less than ten (10) feet.
F. Yard Modifications for Lots in Non-Residential Districts. When an industrial parcel abuts a
railroad siding, the structure may be built on the property line adjoining the railroad siding.
G. Projections and Encroachments into Required Yards. Yards required by this Ordinance shall be
free of buildings, structures or parts thereof, and no building or structure shall project into any
front, side or rear yard required by this Article, nor shall use be made of such yard, except as
follows:
1. Uncovered steps may project not more than 4 feet into any required yard.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
144
2. Window wells affording light and air to basement and cellar areas, provided such
window wells are constructed in a way that would preclude an accidental fall into it.
3. Cornices and eaves may project not more than 2 feet into any required yard.
4. Chimneys may project not more than 2 feet into any required yard.
5. Driveways providing access to permitted garages or parking areas: provided, however,
that in residential zones driveways used to provide access to private garages shall not be
narrower than 8.5 feet or wider than 20 feet.
6. Sills, leaders and similar ornamental or structural features may project not more than 6
inches into any required yard.
7. Fences and retaining walls, where specifically permitted in this Ordinance.
8. Freestanding flagpoles, television antennas and radio aerial masts, children's playground
equipment, outdoor fireplaces and yard clothes lines and posts but must be set back at
least 3 feet from any property line. Except for freestanding flagpoles, such structures
shall not be located in the front yard.
9. Residential heating and cooling units may no more than 3 feet into a required side or
rear yard and shall not be located in a required front yard. If located in a required yard,
it shall be screened from adjacent neighbors.
§500-3.3 Lot Frontage
Every building or structure hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot having the minimum required
frontage upon a public street, or with access to an approved private street, and all structures shall be so
located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing and fire protection.
§500-3.4 Principal Buildings
Unless specifically permitted, no lot in a R-1, R-2 zone shall contain more than one principal building or
use. No building to be used as a one or two family dwelling shall be constructed, altered, or moved in
the rear of any building situated on the same lot.
§500-3.5 Height Exceptions
The height limitations contained in the Schedule of Lot, Yard and Building Requirements shall not apply
to spires, bulk heads, belfries, cupolas, antennas, water tanks, ventilators, chimneys, or other
appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human
occupancy, provided such features do not exceed 20 percent of the total roof area and provided no such
feature is greater than 20 feet above the height of the building.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
145
§500-3.6 Accessory Structures and Uses
A. General requirements.
1. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed on any lot on which there is no
principal building or structure.
2. Any accessory building or structure attached to the principal building shall be
considered part of the principal building or structure.
3. On through lots, no accessory structure erected in the rear yard shall be nearer to the
"rear" street line than the minimum front yard setback for the zone in which such lot is
located.
B. The following requirements shall be complied with in all residential zones:
1. No accessory building or structure shall be used for human habitation.
2. Except as otherwise specifically outlined in this ordinance, accessory buildings or
structures shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
3. No accessory building shall have a floor or ground area in excess of 500 square feet or
1/3 of the first floor ground area of the principal building, whichever is lesser.
4. No accessory building or structure shall be permitted in any front yard.
5. An accessory building or structure may occupy a required side yard, provided that such
building or structure is more distant from the street than any part of the principal
building and provided further that such accessory building or structure is not closer than
3 feet to any side or rear lot line.
6. An accessory building or structure may occupy a required rear yard, provided that such
building or structure is not located closer than 3 feet to any side or rear lot line.
7. On corner lots, accessory buildings or structures shall be set back from the street a
distance at least equal to the front setback of the principal building on the lot.
C. The following requirements shall be complied with in all nonresidential zones:
1. Uses that are customary and incidental uses to the related principal permitted use (e.g.,
office operations in association with industrial uses, cafeterias in association with places
of employment) shall be permitted as accessory uses in nonresidential zones provided
that the floor area occupied by such accessory uses shall not exceed more than 20% of
the total floor area of the principal permitted use.
2. No accessory building or structure shall have a ground area greater than the ground
area of the principal building on the same lot.
3. No accessory building or structure shall be permitted in a required front yard and shall
not be located closer than 3 feet to any side or rear lot line.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
146
4. No accessory building shall be used for dwelling purposes except for watchmen,
caretakers, or other domestic employees, whose employment functions are directly
related to the function of the principal building.
5. Accessory structures or uses in the GFH, MU, I-1 and I-2 Districts, such as restaurants,
cafeterias, offices, etc. shall be permitted provided such uses are customarily incidental
to the principal use.
6. Off-street parking facilities intended to meet parking requirements for the use shall be
considered an accessory use.
D. Requirements for specific accessory structures and uses.
1. Family Day Care Homes. Family day care homes are permitted as accessory uses in all
residential zones and shall be subject to the same requirements applicable to a onefamily
dwelling in the district in which it is located.
2. Private Garage Parking in Residence Districts. Private garage parking for two-family
dwellings in the R-2 District shall not accommodate more than 3 automobiles.
3. Swimming Pools.
a. A private swimming pool of permanent or temporary construction is permitted
as an accessory use to a dwelling if such pool is in conformity with these
requirements, provided, however, that these regulations shall not apply to any
such pool less than 24 inches deep and having a surface area less than 100
square feet for multiple family dwellings, except when such pools are
permanently equipped with a water recirculating system or involve structural
materials.
b. For All Types of Dwellings.
i. Appurtenant Structures. All appurtenant, permanent or temporary
structures, installations and equipment such as showers, dressing
rooms, equipment houses or other buildings and structures, including
plumbing, heating, air conditioners, and recirculating pumps
appurtenant to a swimming pool, shall comply with all applicable
requirements of the Paterson Board of Health and Building Code. All
such structures, installations or equipment shall be set back at least 3
feet from side and rear property lines. However, any apparatus such as
diving boards, recirculating pumps, or mechanical devices that may
cause noise shall not be closer than 10 feet to any property line. All such
structures, installations or equipment shall be set back from the street a
distance equal to the required front yard setback or the existing setback
of the principal buildings on the premises and surrounding properties,
whichever is greater.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
147
ii. Lighting. Installation of any lighting in connection with said pool shall be
such that there shall be no glare or direct lighting into adjoining
properties.
iii. Enclosure. Every person owning land on which there is situated a
swimming pool, fish pond or other body of water that contains 24
inches or more of water in depth at any point, shall erect and maintain
thereon an adequate enclosure either surrounding the property or pool
area, sufficient to make such body of water inaccessible to small
children. Such enclosure, including gates, must be not less than 5 feet
above the underlying ground or otherwise made inaccessible from the
outside to small children.
iv. Drainage System. The swimming pool and equipment shall be equipped
to be completely emptied and the discharged water from the swimming
pool, including a portable swimming pool, shall be disposed of in an
approved manner that will not create a nuisance to adjoining property.
v. Distance Measurement. The measurement of required swimming pool
setback shall be taken from the property line to the edge of the water
area of the pool.
c. For One and Two-Family Dwellings
i. Front Yard. Pools shall be set back from the street a distance equal to
the required front yard setback or the existing setback of the principal
buildings on the premises, whichever is greater.
ii. Side Yard. All pools on lots 35 feet or more in width shall have a side
yard setback not less than 6 feet from all side lot lines. For all pools on
lots of 35 feet or less in width, each required side yard may be reduced
by three 3 inches for each foot that a lot is less than 37 1/2 feet in
width, but in no event shall there be a side yard less than 3 feet.
iii. Rear Yard. Pools shall be set back not less than 6 feet from the rear lot
line.
d. For Multiple Family Dwellings. All pools for multiple family dwellings shall be no
closer than 10 feet to any property line. No pool shall encroach on any front
yard required by the Zoning Ordinance.
4. Reserved.
5. Private Greenhouses and Agricultural or Horticultural Activities in Residential Districts.
Private greenhouses and agricultural or horticultural activities in residential districts
incidental to residential use and not for business purposes shall be permitted in
residential districts provided that any storage of fertilizer shall be distant at least 50 feet
from a property line.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
148
6. Small Dish Antennae and TV Antennae. Consistent with the Federal Communications
Commission's rules implementing Section 207 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996,
the following satellite dishes and antennas shall be exempt from the requirements of
this Ordinance: A "dish" antenna that is one meter (39.37") or less in diameter and is
designed to receive direct broadcast satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite
service, or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals via satellite; an antenna that is
one meter or less in diameter or diagonal measurement and is designed to receive video
programming services via MMDS (wireless cable) or to receive or transmit fixed wireless
signals other than via satellite; and, an antenna that is designed to receive local
television broadcast signals for the purpose of providing service to customers at that
location. Such antennae may be placed on masts no higher than 12 feet above the
roofline.
7. Garbage Dumpsters
a. Structures to House Garbage Dumpsters.
i. Garbage dumpsters shall be housed within a solid structure consisting of
a concrete base or pad and four (4) solid walls of which one (1) will be
movable so as to permit access to the dumpster. The walls of said
structure shall be at least five (5) feet in height and no greater than
eight (8) feet in height.
ii. Location of Structure Housing Garbage Dumpsters. The location of any
structure housing a garbage dumpster shall comply with the following
requirements:
a) No structure housing a garbage dumpster shall be located
within any front yard except where the front yard is used as the
primary parking area. Any such structure permitted within the
front yard shall be at least twenty (20) feet from the front lot
line
b) A side yard setback of at least 5 feet.
c) A rear yard setback of at least 5 feet.
d) Garbage dumpsters shall be situated at least ten (10) feet from
the primary structure on the premises upon which it is located.
In any case, no such structure shall be located within ten (10)
feet of any residential structure.
e) Garbage dumpsters shall be located so as to permit access by
the collection vehicle without the vehicle extending onto the
public right-of-way.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
149
f) Garbage dumpsters shall have effective year-round landscaping
screening of at least three (3) feet in height on all sides of the
structure with the exception of the movable side.
8. Boarders and Roomers. In any residential structure, as an accessory use, not more than
2 persons shall be permitted to occupy any dwelling unit as boarders or roomers in
accordance with the following requirements:
a. Not more than 1 roomer or boarder may occupy a sleeping room.
b. Each sleeping room shall be at least 125 square feet in area.
c. There shall be no cooking facilities in any sleeping room.
9. Warehousing and Storage in Business Districts. Warehousing and storage shall be
permitted only as an accessory use in the B-1, B-2, and B-4 Districts. The space
dedicated to such warehousing or storage shall be conducted completely within a
building located upon the same lot as the principal use and shall not exceed 35% of the
total floor area of the use.
10. Home Offices. An office activity carried on for gain by a permanent full-time resident in
a dwelling unit and involving no non-resident employees, customers, or business
invitees or guests, shall be a permitted accessory use in residential districts requiring no
zoning approvals from the City, provided:
a. The use is limited solely to office use;
b. The use is operated in the residence only by a resident or residents who are
permanent full- time residents of the dwelling unit, and no other persons;
c. No non-resident employees, customers, or business invitees or guests shall visit
the dwelling unit for business purposes;
d. The use shall be located in only one room of the dwelling unit, which shall not
be served by an entrance separate from the household;
e. Interior storage of materials shall only consist of office supplies;
f. There shall be no change to the exterior of buildings or structures because of
the use, and no outside appearance of a business use, including, but not limited
to, parking, storage, signs, or lights;
g. The use operates no equipment or process that creates noise, vibration, glare,
fumes, odors, or electrical or electronic interference, including interference with
telephone, radio or television reception, detectable by neighboring residents;
h. The use does not require any increased or enhanced electrical or water supply;
i. The quantity and type of solid waste disposal is the same as other residential
uses in the zone district;
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
150
j. The capacity and quality of effluent is typical of normal residential use, and
creates no potential or actual detriment to the sanitary sewer system or its
components;
k. Delivery trucks shall be limited to U.S. Postal Service, United Parcel Service,
Federal Express, and other delivery services providing regular service to
residential uses in the zone district; and
l. All vehicular traffic to and from the home office use shall be limited in volume,
type and frequency to what is normally associated with other residential uses in
the zone district.
§500-3.7 Structures Above Roof Line.
Where structures such as air conditioning machinery or elevator housings are installed above the roof
line of a building, such structures shall be adequately screened or designed to blend with the
appearance of the buildings, as determined by the Board having jurisdiction, except that this
requirement shall not apply to television antennas, chimneys, ventilators and spires or towers forming
an integral architectural part of the building.
§500-3.8 Usable Open Space.
All multiple family dwellings in the R-3 and R-4 districts shall comply with the following requirements for
minimum usable open space per dwelling for the purposes of providing light, air, and recreational space
for occupants and other persons coming onto the property: efficiencies - 150 square feet; one bedroom
- 200 square feet; two bedroom - 250 square feet; three bedroom - 300 square feet; and, four bedroom
- 350 square feet. Parking lots or areas shall not be credited toward "usable open space."
§500-3.9 Minimum Floor Area per Dwelling Unit.
The following minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be provided for all apartments in addition to
federal, state and county laws and regulations governing multifamily dwellings: efficiencies - 300 square
feet; one bedroom - 600 square feet; two bedroom - 900 square feet; three bedroom - 1,100 square
feet; and, four bedroom -1,300 square feet.
§500-3.10 Distance Between Buildings.
A. The following minimum distances shall be required for townhouses and garden apartments:
1. 50 feet where situated face to face;
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
151
2. 10 feet for adjacent sides;
3. 25 feet where situated rear to rear, or 35 feet where there is parking between; and
4. Where front faces rear, a distance equal to the height of the taller building.
B. Low and high-rise apartment buildings shall be separated a distance at least equal to the taller
building height except that this may be reduced by 50 percent between the ends of buildings
not over 50 feet in width.
§500-3.11 Building Length.
All buildings for multiple family dwellings shall not exceed a maximum length of 200 feet. In addition, in
the case of garden apartment buildings, a building offset of at least five (5) feet for each building section
containing over twelve (12) units is required.
§500-3.12 Floor Area Premiums.
A. Intent. A premium is a legal authorization to exceed the normal maximum usable floor area
ratios established by this Ordinance for structures in the R-4, B-2, B-4 and GFH Districts. A
premium is not available unless a structure and its surrounding building site incorporate certain
architectural features. Premiums are intended to encourage developments that allow for ample
public open space, free flow of pedestrian traffic, abundant light and air, and other related
elements that protect and promote the health safety and welfare of the community.
B. Premium Specifications. In the R-4, B-2. B-4 and GFH Districts, normal maximum floor area ratios
set forth in the Schedule of Lot, Yard and Building Requirements may be exceeded to the extent
indicated below provided that specific design standards as prescribed are met.
Permitted Additional Floor Area Per Square Foot of Improvement
R-4* B-2 B-4 GFH
Open or Inner Plaza 6 6 10 10
Arcade 3 3 5 5
Roof Plaza 3 - 5 5
*Also includes low-rise apartment buildings in the R-3 District. Floor area premium is allowed up to
15% increase in density.
C. Design Requirements. For the purposes of this section, a "plaza" shall be defined as a nonpublicly
owned open area accessible to the public at all times, an "arcade" shall be defined as a
non-publicly owned continuous area open to a street or plaza, and a "roof plaza" shall be
defined as a plaza located on a roof of a non-publicly owned building or structure. The following
requirements shall be met in order to qualify for a floor area premium.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
152
1. Open Plaza:
a. Shall not be bounded on more than one side by a building or structure.
b. Shall be open from plaza level to the sky.
c. Shall be open for its entire width and accessible from a public sidewalk.
d. Shall be not less than 10 feet in depth.
e. Shall be not less than 40 feet in width.
f. Shall be not more than 4 feet above or below the elevation of the public
sidewalk upon which it fronts.
2. Inner Plaza:
a. Shall be accessible to a public sidewalk directly with a minimum opening of at
least 25 feet, or through an arcade or open plaza by an entrance not less than 8
feet in width.
b. Shall be not less than 20 feet in depth, 20 feet in width, nor 12 feet in height.
c. Shall be not more than 4 feet or below the elevation of the public sidewalk from
which it is accessible.
3. Arcade:
a. Shall be open and unobstructed to a height of not less than 12 feet and
accessible to the public at all times.
b. Shall be not less than 8 feet wide.
c. Shall be not less than 20 feet in depth along its entire length.
4. Roof Plaza:
a. Shall not be bounded on more than two sides by a building wall, or structure.
b. Shall be open from roof plaza level to the sky. However, canopy or other
covered areas may be included provided they do not exceed 25% of the total
plaza area.
c. Shall be accessible by a stairway for plazas situated on top of buildings or
structures 3 stories or lower. Such stairway must be open to the public during
normal operating hours of the building.
d. Shall be accessible by an elevator at least 24 square feet in area for plazas
situated on top of buildings or structures greater than 3 stories in height. Such
elevation must be open to the public during normal operating hours of the
building.
e. Shall not be less than 20 feet in depth.
f. Shall not be less than 20 feet in width.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
153
g. Shall be bounded by a railing and/or parapet wall at least four (4) feet in height.
h. Shall be structurally designed or certified by the BOCA Code or other applicable
law to be capable of supporting all necessary additional loads regarding its use.
§500-3.13 Fences, Walls and Screens.
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, fences, walls other than retaining walls, or other
screening structures above grade may be permitted anywhere on the lot subject to the following
requirements:
A. No fence shall be in excess of 4 feet in height in the front yard and a maximum of 6 feet in
height in the side and rear yard in any district, except as hereinafter provided.
B. No solid fence shall be erected in the front yard setback area as established by this Ordinance.
Solid, perforated, corrugated or flat sheet metal shall be prohibited for use as a fencing material.
Fences in the front yard setback area shall have a minimum of 60% open construction.
C. Where a non-residential use adjoins a semi-public, public or residentially-used property, or
where a multi-family development adjoins a one or two-family residence, a fence, wall or other
such permanent screen shall be placed along the property line separating the non-residential
use from the adjoining residential use. Such fence, wall or screen shall be at least 6 feet in
height, but shall not exceed 10 feet.
D. Any fence in excess of 4 feet in the front yard and in excess of 6 feet in the side and rear yard
existing as of the effective date of this ordinance may be so maintained or repaired in the event
of partial destruction, but, in the event that such fence is completely destroyed or removed, any
fence thereafter constructed to replace it shall conform to the height requirements of this
section.
E. These regulations shall not apply to fences erected in connection with schoolyards, playgrounds,
public buildings or athletic or recreation fields.
F. No fence shall be erected that encroaches upon the public right-of-way.
G. On any corner lot, no fence, structure, planting or shrubbery over 30 inches in height above the
level of the pavement shall be erected or maintained within the triangle formed by the
intersecting street lines and a straight line adjoining said street lines at points which are 20 feet
distant from their point of intersection, measures along such street lines. This does not apply to
intersecting street lines whose angle is more than 135 degrees.
H. The use of razor coil on fencing is prohibited.
1. No fence shall be erected of nonstandard materials that may be considered makeshift,
create an eyesore or cause an annoyance.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
154
§500-3.14 Temporary Use.
A. Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the use of a travel trailer, a mobile home, or other
similar structure, in any district as a temporary construction field office for a period not to
exceed the period of construction; provided, however, such structure is not used for overnight
sleeping accommodations, adequate arrangements for sanitary facilities are made and the
temporary field office has been certified by the Zoning Officer.
B. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prevent the use of a travel trailer(s) in any district as a temporary
facility to be used as a public health service or for a public works purpose for a period not to
exceed one year. One six-month extension may be granted for good cause. Such structure shall
not be used for overnight sleeping accommodations and shall have adequate arrangements for
sanitary facilities. Adequate security of the trailer(s), during the use period, as determined by
the Zoning Officer, may be required. Such structure must be certified by the Zoning Officer.
§500-3.15 Basement and Cellar Apartments.
No cellar shall be used or occupied for dwelling purposes at any time. Basement apartments may be
permitted provided that the floor level of said basement is not more than three (3) feet below grade and
otherwise complies with State standards.
§500-3.16 Subdivision of Lots.
Whenever a new lot(s) is or are formed from a part of any other lot(s), the assembly or separation shall
be effected in such a manner as not to impair any of the requirements of this Ordinance and shall be in
accordance with the City's Subdivision Ordinance.
§500-3.17 Continuance.
Nothing contained in this Ordinance shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated
use of a building for which a valid construction permit has been heretofore issued or plans for which are
on file with the Construction official at the time of the passage of this ordinance, and a permit for the
erection of which is issued within thirty (30) days after the passage of this Ordinance and the
construction of which, in either case, shall have been diligently prosecuted within six (6) month of the
date of such permit, and the ground story framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall
be completed within such six (6) months, and which entire building shall have been completed according
to such plans as filed within two (2) years from the date of the passage of this Ordinance.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
155
§500-3.18 Requirements Applicable to All Development in the GFH District.
A. To the greatest degree possible, buildings shall be constructed to match the existing character
and scale of surrounding development in terms of architecture, building setback and site layout.
B. Accessory parking facilities shall be prohibited from the front yard and shall be located only to
the side or rear of principal buildings.
C. Buildings shall be setback in accordance with the requirements of §500-3.2
D. The minimum building height shall be three (3) stories.
§500-3.19 Access Requirement for Two-Family Dwellings.
All new two-family dwellings shall have a rear exterior access stairwell.
§500-3.20 Outdoor Storage.
A. Residential Districts. Outdoor storage of any items, materials and equipment of any kind or
nature, except storage of those items customarily used in conjunction with a residential use and
occupancy, are prohibited in all residential districts. Permitted outdoor storage (i.e., that
customarily used in conjunction with a residential use) shall not occur within the front yard.
B. Non-Residential Districts
1. No article, equipment, vehicle supplies or materials shall be kept or stored outside the
confines of any building unless and until the same is screened from view of street and
abutting properties by a fence or wall at least 8 feet in height, except for temporary
storage during the business day of goods and products awaiting shipment received by
delivery on the same day and the display for retail sale or rental of new or used motor
vehicles, trailers, boats and mobile homes in association with a permitted motor vehicle
sales establishment or vehicle rental establishment.
2. No materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire,
explosive or other physical hazard shall be permitted for outdoor storage, unless all
applicable federal, state and municipal approvals are obtained and kept in force. All
materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or which constitute a fire hazard,
or which may be edible by or otherwise attractive to rodents or insects, shall be stored
outdoors only in closed containers.
3. All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by a fence or wall adequate to conceal
such facilities and the contents thereof from adjacent property and shall meet all
required accessory building setbacks for the zone in which located. This provision shall
not apply to outdoor storage of new cars or other vehicles on the premises of a motor
vehicle sales dealer.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
156
4. No materials or wastes shall be stored on any premises in such form or manner that
they may be transferred off such premises by natural causes or forces such as wind or
water.
5. The area of all driveways and other areas over which motor vehicles are intended to be
driven or parked shall be paved with bituminous or concrete surface, whose
specifications meet or exceed those established by the City for streets and roadways.
C. Exception in All Districts. Equipment and machinery used in connection with the construction,
alteration, removal, or demolition of any buildings or structure or the excavation of any land
may be permitted to stand upon the premises where such work is being undertaken while the
same is in progress.
D. Storage Trailers. Storage Trailers shall be permitted to be located only within an Industrial
District, or the Mixed-Use District of the City, subject to the following conditions:
1. Storage Trailers must be located in the rear yard of a property.
2. The rear yard of a property used for storage trailers must be enclosed by a fence.
E. Portable Storage Containers. Portable storage containers shall be permitted in any district in the
City under the following conditions:
1. The maximum allowable size of a portable storage container shall be one-hundred and
sixty (160) square feet, with a length not to exceed twenty (20) feet, and a height not to
exceed ten (10) feet.
2. Portable storage containers shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to any property
line.
3. No portable storage container shall remain on any property, except that of its intended
permanent storage location, for any period of time longer than fourteen (14) days.
§500-4 CERTAIN PERMITTED USES
§500-4.1 Mixed Residential and Commercial Uses
A. In mixed residential and commercial uses, business uses shall be located on the ground floor
with office and residential uses located only above and/or behind the business use(s) in the
same building. Conversion of ground floor commercial space into residential space shall be
prohibited in Business Districts.
B. The residential and commercial portions of the use shall each independently satisfy the
minimum requirements (e.g., lot area, parking, etc.) of this ordinance.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
157
§500-4.2 Community Residences and Community Shelters Housing not More than 15 Residents .
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1, community residences for the developmentally disabled and mentally
ill, community shelters for victims of domestic violence, community residences for the terminally ill and
community residences for persons with head injuries housing not more than 15 residents exclusive of
resident staff, which terms shall having meaning as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2 and as defined
herein, shall be permitted uses in residential districts R-1 through R-4 and shall be subject to the same
requirements applicable to a one-family dwelling in the district in which it is located.
§500-4.3 Cemeteries.
A. Existing Cemeteries. Existing cemeteries shall be considered as uses allowed by right in all zoning
districts.
B. Site Plan Review. New construction, addition or alteration to existing cemetery uses shall
require site plan review and approval only if the proposed change in existing use involves one or
more of the following:
1. The proposed total building floor area exceeds 1,000 square feet.
2. The total increase in amount of paved area (such as access drives and parking areas) is
more than 10% percent of the existing paved area.
3. The proposed improvement is situated closer than 50 feet from adjoining properties or
street.
4. The structure involved is more than 25 feet in height.
5. Fencing and screening improvements involve more than 100 linear feet.
§500-4.4 Residential Uses in the B-1 and B-2 Districts.
Reserved.
§500-4.5 Tailoring Related Uses.
Custom dress fabrication, millinery, tailoring and similar trades occupying not more than 2,000 square
feet of floor area shall be permitted in Business Districts. Any such establishment that occupies more
than 2,000 square feet shall be considered a manufacturing establishment and shall be prohibited in
such districts.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
158
§500-4.6 Dry Cleaning Establishments and Laundromats.
Dry cleaning establishments and Laundromats occupying not more than 2,000 square feet of floor area
shall be permitted in Business Districts provided that no central plant servicing more than 1 retail outlet
shall be provided. Any establishment of this nature that occupies more than 2,000 square feet shall be
considered an industrial establishment and shall be prohibited in such districts. For the purposes of this
section, waiting areas, child play areas and other such areas not utilized for the washing or other
treatment of clothing shall not be counted towards the 2,000 square foot floor area maximum.
§500-4.7 Drive-Through Banks.
Drive-through banks shall provide off-street driveway space for 5 or more vehicles waiting to use the
drive-through services.
§500-4.8 Wholesaling Establishments.
All storage in association with wholesaling establishments in the B-3 and M-U Districts shall occur
completely within buildings. All storage in association with wholesaling establishments in the I-1 and I-2
Districts shall comply with §500-3.6.D.4.
§500-4.9 Warehousing and Storage.
All storage in association with warehousing establishments in the B-3 and M-U Districts shall occur
completely within buildings. All storage in association with warehousing establishments in the I-1 and I-2
Districts shall comply with §500-3.20.B.
§500-4.10 Public Utility Distribution Systems.
Public utility lines for the transportation, distribution and/or control of water, electricity, gas, oil, steam
and telegraph and telephone communications, and their supporting members, other than buildings and
structures, including pipes, shall not be required to be located on a lot, nor shall this Ordinance be
interpreted to prohibit the use of a property in any zone for the above uses. For purposes of this
provision, wireless communications facilities shall not be deemed a public utility distribution system.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
159
§500-4.11 Temporary Offices.
Trailers or mobile structures used as temporary offices, workshops or for the storage of equipment and
materials in connection with permitted construction of new buildings or structures, may be temporarily
permitted on the same site during the actual period of construction.
§500-4.12 Loft Dwellings and Joint Living-Working Quarters for Artists.
A. Such uses shall be located on or above the second story of a commercial building.
B. Loft dwellings shall not be located on or below a story occupied by a commercial use.
C. Joint living working quarters for artists shall have a minimum floor area of 900 square feet. No
separation shall be required between the working and living portions of joint living-working
quarters for artists.
§500-4.13 Light Industrial Uses.
A. Light industrial uses in the MU and GFHD zones, including storage of materials of equipment and
storage in association therewith, shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building and
shall comply with the performance standards required in this Article.
B. Light industrial uses in the I-1 and I-2 Districts, shall comply with the requirements of §500-
3.6.D.3.b with respect to outdoor storage and the performance standards required in this
Article.
C. Light industrial uses in any district that manufacture or process foods may be permitted to
include retail sales as an accessory use under the following conditions:
a. Retail sales shall be limited to only the food products manufactured or processed on
site.
b. The area of retail sales shall be limited to no greater than ten percent (10%) of the gross
floor area of the building in which the manufacturing or processing takes place.
c. Additional off-street parking shall be provided for the retail space.
§500-4.14 Low and High-Rise Apartment Buildings in the GFH District .
A. The construction of new low-rise apartment buildings shall be permitted in the GFH District
provided the building does not exceed a height of four (4) stories and fifty (50) feet and shall
satisfy the requirements of §500-3.18.
B. The construction of new high-rise apartment buildings shall be prohibited.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
160
C. Low or high-rise apartments shall be permitted in the GFH District where an existing industrial
mill building is proposed to be converted partially or totally to such residential use and where no
additional stories are added thereto and which further complies with all applicable ordinances
pertinent to this type of development.
§500-4.15 Certain Community Retail Businesses Permitted in the Great Falls Historic District.
In order to help achieve the cultural, social and economic objectives of the GFHD, retail businesses are
permitted in the GFHD. Such uses are encouraged to be located in mixed use buildings with residential
uses above and shall satisfy the requirements of §500-3.18, Requirements Applicable to All
Development in the GFHD.
§500-4.16 Commercial Establishments in the B-1 and B-2 Districts.
A. In the B-1 District, a single business establishment shall occupy no more than 5,000 square feet
of floor area, and shall not be located above the first floor, excluding business and professional
offices.
B. In the B-2 District, a single business establishment shall occupy no more than 10,000 square feet
of floor area, and shall not- be located above the first floor, excluding business and professional
offices.
§500-4.17 Mixed Use Community Developments.
A. Mixed Use Community Developments shall be permitted on properties within the IT Industrial
Transition District at least 1.0 acre in aggregate area, provided that the subject property has
road frontages on at least two (2) existing public streets.
B. A “Mixed Use Community Development” shall include at least two of the currently permitted
uses within the IT District plus a Recreational Community Center. Furthermore, residential
units/apartments for sale or rent shall be located within mixed residential buildings, provided
that at least ten percent (10%) of the building’s gross floor square footage, located primarily on
the first two (2) floors, is devoted to commercial uses.
1. Law Against Discrimination. The New Jersey Law Against Discrimination, N.J.S.A. 10:5-1
et seq., shall apply to any structure or use created under the terms of this ordinance.
2. Housing. Sales or rentals of housing for buildings constructed pursuant to this ordinance
shall be subject to the explicit housing protections set forth in the Law Against
Discrimination, N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq.
3. Recreational Community Center. Subject to reasonable rules and regulations, the use of
a Recreational Community Center constructed pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
161
shall provide reasonable access and services to all members of the community without
discrimination, as set forth in the Law Against Discrimination, N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq.,
including but not limited to discrimination of the basis of race, creed, religion, color,
national origin, ancestry, age, sex, or marital status. Any such Recreational Community
Center shall be operated as a public accommodation and shall be subject to all federal
and state laws against discrimination. Nothing herein is intended to supersede the
limitations contained in N.J.S.A. 10:5-1.l.
4. Developer’s Agreement. In order to establish terms of construction, use, and occupancy,
any project approved pursuant to this Ordinance shall require the property owner to
execute a Developer’s Agreement satisfactory to the municipality. Said Developer’s
Agreement shall provide for, among other things, a plan to assure reasonable
community access to the facilities of the Recreational Community Center that will
guarantee the rights of public accommodation as set forth in federal and state statutes,
including but not limited to the Law Against Discrimination N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq.
Nothing herein is intended to supersede N.J.S.A. 10:5-1.l.
C. Underground parking shall be permitted as part of a Mixed Use Community Development and
the underground parking structure shall not be included in the calculation of floor/area ratio
(FAR)
D. Buildings within a Mixed Use Community Development may be as high as six (6) stories and
eighty feet (80’), provided that balconies and terraces are included in the design for the floors
above the 5th floor to serve as setbacks.
E. In accordance with the land use law, the Planning Board may modify the special height set forth
for any development during the course of site plan review. As a condition for such
modifications, the Board shall find that:
1. All other provisions of the Mixed Use Community are met;
2. The project is providing additional common open space and public gathering spaces;
and
3. The modified proposal provides adequate access of light and air to surrounding streets
and properties.
F. The lot coverage of a Mixed Use Community Development may be one hundred percent (100%)
provided that pedestrian amenities such as a central court plaza, a playground, and roof-top
open space/garden areas, are included in the design. Furthermore, pedestrian amenities shall be
accessible at the street level and shall calculate to at least ten percent (10%) of the total lot
coverage. Central court plaza should be designed to enhance the functionality of the businesses
in the development and be accessible to patrons.
G. No perimeter setbacks from street rights-of-way and other lot lines shall be required, provided
that pedestrian oriented areas, such as open space, public plaza or playground, are included
within the Mixed Use Community Development.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
162
H. Off-Street parking for the total combination of uses within a Mixed Use Community
Development shall be as follows:
1. For non-residential uses, off-street parking spaces shall be provided at the ratio of one
(1) parking space per four hundred fifty (450) square feet of gross floor area.
2. For residential dwellings units, off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance
with the Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) for high rise apartments.
3. The minimum number of parking spaces for a mixed use development shall be
determined by a shared parking analysis prepared in accordance with procedures
recommended with the “Shared Parking Report” of the Urban Land Institute (ULI) or in
accordance with the procedures recommended in the “Shared Parking Guidelines” of
the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or in accordance with other approved
procedures.
4. However, the off-street parking spaces may be reduced by the Planning Board based
upon any combination of the following:
a. A joint parking arrangement; and/or
b. Any other off-street parking opportunity approved by the Planning Board.
I. The construction of a Mixed Use Community Development can be phased in accordance with an
approved site plan.
J. Apartment units within a Mixed Use Community Development, if desired by the City of
Paterson, will be affordable units intended to be credited against Paterson City’s affordable
housing obligations as determined by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH).
K. Once an overall plan for the Mixed Use Community Development is approved by the City of
Paterson, subdivision of the property will be permitted for financial purposes, provided that the
development of individual lots shall only be permitted in accordance with the approved overall
plan.
L. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the City’s Zoning and Land Development Ordinance to
the contrary, the distances between buildings within a Mixed Use Community Development
shall be as specifically approved by the City’s Planning Board in consideration of promoting an
optimum site plan design.
M. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the City’s Zoning and Land Development Ordinance to
the contrary, buildings and uses within a Mixed Use Community Development may have
pedestrian access from a building side facing an abutting street and/or from a building side
facing an interior plaza.
N. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the City’s Zoning and Land Development Ordinance to
the contrary, no driveways shall be located closer than ten (10) feet measured along the curb
line to another driveway.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
163
O. The provisions relating to Mixed Use Community Developments supersede the use, bulk, and
design standard provisions of the Paterson Zoning Ordinance unless specifically referenced.
Other standards and submission requirements relating to all zones in Paterson not specifically
enumerated within as detailed in the Zoning Ordinance shall apply. All developments must be
approved by the Planning Board and shall be submitted through the normal site plan and
subdivision procedures as identified by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.
P. Any Mixed Use Community Development and/or Recreational Community Center purchased,
constructed, or improved with public funding, whether that funding is from federal, state, or
local sources, shall comply with any and all Federal, State, or Municipal Statutes, Ordinances,
Rules or Regulations that prohibit discrimination in public accommodations, including but not
limited to race, ethnicity or gender, currently in effect or subsequently imposed by the Federal,
State, or Municipal government.
§500-4.18 Child Care Centers in Non-Residential Districts.
A. Such use shall meet the applicable lot area, setback requirements and other applicable
requirements of §500-2.3 except that the minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet in the B-1
District, lot coverage shall not exceed 40%, and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.6 the floor
area occupied in any building or structure as a child care center shall be excluded in calculating:
(1) any parking requirement otherwise applicable to that number of units or amount of floor
space, as appropriate, under State or local laws or regulations adopted there under; and, (2) the
permitted density allowable for that building or structure.
B. There shall be provided a recreation/play space equal to at least 100 square feet per child,
which area shall be completely fenced in.
C. There shall be provided an off-street area for the drop off and pick up of children sufficient to
prevent the queuing of cars within the public right-of-way.
D. Where permitted in the B-1 or B-2 District, such establishments shall be subject to the
requirements of §500-4.1 and §500-4.16.
§500-5 CONDITIONAL USES
§500-5.1 General Requirements.
In reviewing an application for a conditional use, the Planning Board shall not approve a conditional use
unless it finds that the use and its operation; meets all the requirements of this Ordinance; would not
substantially impair the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties; is particularly appropriate for the
location proposed; would be consistent with the goals and objectives of the City of Paterson Master
Plan; conforms as much as possible to the existing character of the neighborhood and does not
substantially impair the character of the surrounding area; does not have any adverse effect on
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
164
surrounding properties; and complies with any and all applicable ordinances, statutes and conditional
use standards applicable to the particular use; and that all applicable materials shall have been
submitted in complete conformance with this ordinance. No taxes or assessments for local
improvements shall be due on the property or any part thereof; provided, however, that the approving
agency may condition its approval on the prompt payment of the total amount due. All the criteria for
site plan approval contained in this ordinance are hereby made criteria for conditional use approval and
are incorporated herein by reference as if they have been fully set forth. Unless specifically superseded
by a specific conditional use requirement below, conditional uses shall satisfy the most restrictive bulk
and dimensional requirements specified in §500-2.3, Schedule of Dimensional Requirements for the
district in which the use is located. Where such uses are required to be located a certain distance from
certain uses, zones or other features, such distances shall be measured in a straight-line radial distance
from the edge of the property lines.
§500-5.2 Hospitals in Residential Districts.
A. Hospitals shall be permitted on principal arterial, secondary arterial and collector roadways
B. The minimum lot area for hospitals shall be 2 acres.
C. Lot coverage shall not exceed 80%.
D. All yard setbacks shall not be less than 10 feet.
E. Floor ratio area shall not exceed 1.0.
F. Building height shall not exceed 3 stories.
G. Screening and buffers to adjacent residences shall be provided consistent with the design
standards in Article IV as required by the approving board.
H. Entrances and exits shall be located at least 50 feet from any street intersection.
§500-5.3 Places of Worship in Residential Districts.
A. The lot area shall be no less than one-half (1/2) acre.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed 60%.
C. Front and side yard setbacks shall not be less than 10 feet; the rear yard setback shall not be less
than 20 feet.
D. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.75.
E. Building height shall not exceed 2 and 1/2 stories, exclusive of steeples or other building
appurtenances.
F. Driveway entrances and exits shall be located at least 75 feet from any street intersection.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
165
G. Landscaping/screening shall be provided consistent with the design standards in Article IV as
required the approving board.
§500-5.4 Charitable Institutions in Residential Districts.
A. The lot area shall be no less than 5,000 square feet.
B. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.75.
C. Lot coverage shall not exceed 40%.
§500-5.5 Public Recreation Establishments, Public Parks and Playgrounds in Residential Districts.
A. The lot area shall be no less than 10,000 square feet.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed 50%
C. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.0.
D. Front, side and rear yard setbacks shall not be less than 10 feet.
§500-5.6 Libraries, Museums or Art Galleries in Residential Districts.
A. The lot area shall be no less than 10,000 square feet.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed 50%.
C. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.0.
D. Front, side and rear yard setbacks shall not be less than 10 feet.
§500-5.7 Schools in Residential Districts.
A. Schools shall be permitted on principal arteries, minor arterial and collector roadways
B. The minimum lot area for schools shall be 2 acres.
C. Lot coverage shall not exceed 80%.
D. All yard setbacks shall not be less than 10 feet.
E. Floor ratio area shall not exceed 1.0.
F. Building height shall not exceed 3 stories.
G. Screening and buffers to adjacent residences shall be provided consistent with the design
standards in Article IV as required by the approving board
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
166
H. Entrances and exits shall be located at least 50 feet from any street intersection.
§500-5.8 Community Residences and Community Shelters Housing Greater than 15 Persons.
Community residences and community shelters that house more than 15 persons, excluding residence
staff, may be permitted upon the issuance of a conditional use permit, provided that:
A. No permit will be issued to a proposed residence or shelter located within 1,500 feet of an
existing residence or shelter housing greater than 15 persons. Such distances shall be measured
in a straight-line radial distance from the edge of the property lines.
B. Such a residence or shelter shall be located only abutting an arterial or collector street as
depicted on the Street Functional Classification Map in Appendix B attached to this Ordinance.
C. The lot area shall be no less than 5,000 square feet.
D. If a residence houses mentally ill or developmentally disabled persons, such residence must
have been approved for a purchase of service contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to
such procedures established by regulation of the New Jersey Division of Mental Health and
Hospital of the Department of Human Services.
E. All such residences or shelters shall comply with all applicable standards of the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code, the Paterson Fire Code, the City of Paterson Health Code, and all
other applicable state, county and local laws statutes, ordinances and regulations.
F. All such community residences and shelters shall comply with the Paterson Zoning and Land
Development Ordinance requirements in the district in which they are located, and for the type
of structure in which the residence or shelter is to be housed (single family, two family or
multiple family). Existing housing which does not conform to this ordinance shall not be used for
community residences or shelters.
G. The design of the facility shall conform to the general character of the area.
H. One (1) on-site parking space shall be provided for each 2 beds, plus one space for each staff
member on the maximum shift, whether or not a resident. One of the non-staff spaces shall
conform to the dimensional requirements for handicapped parking.
§500-5.9 Child Care Centers in Residential Districts.
A. The minimum lot area shall be 5,000 square feet.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed 40%.
C. There shall be provided a recreation/play space equal to at least 100 square feet per child,
which area shall be completely fenced in.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
167
D. There shall be provided an off-street area for the drop off and pick up of children sufficient to
prevent the queuing of cars within the public right-of-way.
§500-5.10 Satellite Dishes Over 1 Meter in Diameter
A. Applicability. Satellite dishes that are over one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter shall require
conditional use approval and shall be subject to the provisions outlined below. All such satellite
dishes shall be deemed accessory structures to principal buildings on a lot. No such apparatus
shall be located on a lot without a principal structure or building.
B. Procedure and Submission of Site Plan.
1. Any applicant defined herein as a person, corporation, association and/or other legal
entity, shall, prior to the placement of a satellite dishes over one meter (39.37 inches) in
diameter shall submit to the board having jurisdiction , prior to its regular meeting, 9
copies of a site plan together with two completed application forms and other
information as required by the board having jurisdiction and the Paterson Zoning and
Land Development Ordinance.
2. The site plan shall contain the following data: Name and address of applicant and
owner; name, address and title of professional license preparing the plan and related
data; date of plan; drawing of appropriate and legible scale; address, block and number
and lot number of site on which antenna is to be erected; all existing buildings and
structures on the lot with dimensions showing distances to property lines; finished and
existing grade elevations in immediate area of the placement of the antenna; all
abutting rights-of-way and property lines; the proposed locations of the antenna with
the actual dimensions of the antenna and supports including the overall height of the
structure; landscaping and screening as required herein; setback dimensions of antenna
from property line; any and all other information necessary to meet the requirements
and intent of this Ordinance as required by the City of Paterson.
C. Design and Performance Standards. The following design and performance shall apply to
satellite dish antennae over one meter (39.37 inches) in diameter:
1. All antennas shall be designed in conformance with the American National Standards
Institute Standard A58.1, American National Building Code requirements for minimum
design loads in buildings and other structures, Electronics Industry Association
standards RS-411, Electrical and Mechanical Characteristics of Antennas for Satellite
Earth Stations and the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, as well as any other
modifications or successors to said standards and shall further satisfy the rules and
regulations of any other governmental entity having jurisdiction over such antennas,
including, without limitation, the Federal Communications Commission. A certificate of
conformance to any and all of the aforesaid standards by the manufacturers or
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
168
professional shall be required by the Construction Official as a condition of the
construction permit.
2. All cables and wiring for delivery of signals received by the antenna to the principal
building(s) shall be located underground.
3. Maximum overall height of freestanding antennas and supporting apparatus measured
vertically from the main ground level to the highest point of the structure or extension
thereof for reception shall not exceed 10 feet in residential districts.
4. Maximum overall height of roof-mounted antennas measured from the base of the
antenna to the highest point of the antenna or extension thereof for reception shall not
exceed 15 feet or 25% of the existing height of the building, whichever the lesser.
5. No lot shall contain more than one such antenna.
6. The maximum surface area of any reflective parabolic dish antenna shall not exceed 9
feet in any direction.
7. The antenna shall be designed and shall be used only by the occupants of the principal
building(s) on the lot. Any connection, electrical or otherwise, to adjacent properties
shall be deemed a violation of this Section including the setback provision.
8. The antenna should be of a color that is compatible with surrounding building(s) and
terrain and should be designed and located to make the antenna as inconspicuous as
possible.
9. No antenna shall be placed in the required front yard.
10. In residential districts, an antenna shall only be permitted as a freestanding structure
and shall not be mounted on the roof of any part of the principal or other accessory
structures on the lot. In non-residential districts, roof-mounted dish antennas shall be
permitted, provided the installation is certified by a licensed engineer to comply with all
applicable building codes, and further that written documentation of such compliance is
provided, including load distributions within the building support structure.
11. The antenna shall not be located closer to any side or rear property than the minimum
side yard requirement for the principal building or the height of said antenna, whichever
results in the greatest setback. A corner lot shall respect the front yard setback with
regard to calculating the side yard requirement.
12. Every freestanding antenna apparatus shall be effectively screened by planting and/or
appropriate fencing as approved by the approving board that shall be maintained in
good condition and same shall be the responsibility of the property owner in order that
the apparatus shall not be visible from any adjacent property or public street.
13. Screening may consist of trellis, latticework, decorative block or similar materials at least
4 feet in height, or as approved by the approving board depending on the height of the
apparatus. If the screening, including planting, is not maintained as originally approved,
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
169
any permit granted in connection with the satellite is subject to revocation by the
Construction Official.
14. The ability of the applicant to install the antenna in an unobtrusive location and to limit
impact on adjacent properties shall be a major factor in determining whether the
application will be favorably considered.
15. An applicant, after receiving final approval for the construction, placement and
operation of an antenna, shall not subsequently modify or alter the structure of the
antenna, except to change the direction of its main reflector/receiver, without the
approval of the appropriate board.
§500-5.11 Health Centers, Clinics, Assisted Living Facilities, Nursing Homes, Long-Term Care Facilities,
and Adult Medical Day Care in the R-3 and R-4 Districts.
A. The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed 60%.
C. Front and side yard setbacks shall not be less than 10 feet; the rear yard setback shall not be less
than 20 feet.
D. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.65.
E. Building height shall not exceed 3 stories.
F. Entrances and exits shall be located at least 50 feet from any street intersection.
G. Landscaping/screening as required by the approving board.
§500-5.12 Mortuaries and Funeral Homes.
A. The minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed 25%.
C. Screening at least 6 feet in height, in the form of a fence, wall or hedge, shall be provided along
adjacent side and rear lot lines and as otherwise required in the design standards in Article IV.
D. Entrances and exits shall be at least 75 feet from any street intersection.
E. Where permitted in the B-1 or B-2 District, such establishments shall be subject to the
requirements of §500-4.1 and §500-4.16.
§500-5.13 Child Care Centers in Non-Residential Districts.
Reserved.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
170
§500-5.14 Professional Offices in the R-3 and R-4 Districts.
Office or studio of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, psychotherapist, dentist, osteopath, engineer,
teacher, artist, musician, lawyer, architect or other profession as determined by the approving authority
to be similar in character, and which is not a home business as defined and regulated in this Ordinance,
shall be permitted in the R-3 and R-4 districts provided that the following requirements are met.
A. The lot area shall be no less than 20,000 square feet.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed 60%.
C. Front and side yard setbacks shall not be less than 10 feet; the rear yard setback shall not be less
than 20 feet.
D. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.65.
E. Building height shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories.
F. Entrances and exits shall be located at least 50 feet from any street intersection.
G. Landscaping/screening as required by the approving board.
§500-5.15 Governmental Offices in the R-3 and R-4 Districts.
A. The lot area shall be no less than 1 acre.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed 60%.
C. Front and side yard setbacks shall not be less than 10 feet; the rear yard setback shall not be less
than 20 feet.
D. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.65.
E. Building height shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories.
F. Entrances and exits shall be located at least 50 feet from any street intersection.
G. Landscaping/screening as required by the approving board.
§500-5.16 Store Front Social Club or Fraternal Lodges.
A. Shall be conducted at ground or street level within premises fully or partially converted from
business or commercial use.
B. Shall consist of less than 1,000 square feet of floor area.
§500-5.17 Private Clubs.
A. Shall be conducted at ground or street level.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
171
B. Shall have direct access and visibility to an adjacent street.
C. Shall consist of less than 5,000 square feet of floor area.
D. Shall be located at a minimum distance of 1,500 feet from other such uses or other private
clubs, lodges, recreational clubs, and storefront clubs, as measured in a straight-line radial
distance from the edge of the property lines.
E. Sleeping accommodations shall be prohibited.
§500-5.18 Lodges.
A. Shall be located at a minimum of 1,500 feet from other such uses or other private clubs, lodges,
recreational clubs, and storefront clubs, as measured in a straight-line radial distance from the
edge of the property lines.
B. Shall be located on a lot not less than 20,000 square feet, with a lot frontage of not less than
100 feet and a lot coverage of not more than 40%.
C. Landscaping as required by the approving authority for screening of adjacent residences.
§500-5.19 Recreational Clubs.
A. Shall be conducted at ground or street level.
B. Shall have direct access and visibility to an adjacent street.
C. The use of such premises shall be restricted primarily to the principal use, which is a generally
recognized sport or recreational activity.
D. Shall consist of no more than 2,500 square feet of floor area.
E. Shall be located at a minimum distance of 1,000 feet from other such uses or other places of
assembly, as measured in a straight-line radial distance from the edge of the property lines.
§500-5.20 Stand-Alone Convenience Stores.
A. Maximum lot area shall be 100 feet by 100 feet.
B. Building coverage shall not exceed 50%.
C. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.50%.
D. Side yards and rear yard shall not be less than 10 feet.
E. Front building setback shall be not less than 65 feet.
F. Required loading/unloading space shall be 10 feet by 40 feet.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
172
G. Where permitted in the B-2 District, such establishments shall be subject to the requirements of
§500-4.16.
1. Gasoline filling stations may be operated in conjunction with a convenience store
provided that both the convenience store and the gasoline filling station are considered
as separate but joint uses wherein each use must satisfy the lot area and other bulk
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.
§500-5.21 Drive-Through Restaurants.
A. Lot area shall not be less than 15,000 square feet.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed 50%.
C. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.75.
D. Building height shall not exceed 25 feet.
E. When adjacent to a residential structure, screening shall be provided as required by the
approving board.
F. For cars waiting to use the drive-through services such establishments shall provide off-street
driveway area sufficient to prevent the queuing of cars within the public right-of-way as
determined by the anticipated operation of the facility, but no less than enough space for 5 or
more vehicles.
G. Where permitted in the B-2 District, such establishments shall be subject to the requirements of
§500-4.1 and §500-4.16.
§500-5.22 Commercial Recreational and Amusement Establishments.
A. Lot area shall not be less than 5,000 square feet.
B. Lot coverage shall not exceed 60%.
C. Floor area ratio shall not exceed 1.0.
D. When adjacent to a residential structure, screening shall be provided consistent with the design
standards in Article IV and as required by the approving board.
E. Where permitted in the B-2 District, such establishments shall be subject to the requirements of
§500-4.1 and §500-4.16.
§500-5.23 Car Washing Establishments.
A. Any property line of a lot used for a car washing establishment is at least: 100 feet, measured in
a straight line, from any boundary of any residential district; and 200 feet from the nearest
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
173
property line of any lot used for a theater, auditorium, or other place of public assembly capable
of seating over 300 persons or used for a church, hospital for humans, college, school, public
library or institution for dependents or children, or any public playground or athletic field. Such
distances shall be measured in a straight-line radial distance from the edge of the property lines.
B. Any building or structure used for a car washing establishment shall have a front setback of 15
feet, side setbacks of 10 feet each, and a rear setback of 30 feet.
C. Such establishments shall provide off-street driveway area sufficient to allow the on-site
queuing of all vehicles waiting to use the drive-through services (and the prevention of queuing
within the public right-of-way), as shall be determined by the reviewing Board based upon the
anticipated size and operation of the facility. In no case, however, shall any such establishment
provide on-site queuing for less than 10 vehicles..
D. Separate entrance and exit driveways shall be provided. Such driveways shall have an
unrestricted width of not less than 16 feet nor more than 24 feet, and shall be located not
nearer than 10 feet from any lot line, and shall be so laid out as to avoid the necessity of any
vehicle leaving the property by backing out across any public sidewalk, street, right-of-way or
portion thereof.
E. The area of all driveways and other areas over which motor vehicles are intended to be driven
or parked shall be paved with a bituminous or concrete surface sufficient to meet City paving
specifications applicable to streets and roadways.
§500-5.24 Gasoline Filling Stations.
A. The size of any lot upon which any gasoline filling station is located shall be not less than 15,000
square feet, and the street frontage of such lot on any street shall be not less than 75 feet,
except on lots fronting on two or more intersecting streets, in which case the frontage shall not
be less than 100 feet on each street.
B. Unless separated by a public street, no part of any gasoline filling station, nor any driveway
entrance or exit to and from the same, shall be located within 300 feet of any lot upon which
another gasoline filling station is located or for which a building permit for a gasoline filling
station has been issued. Such distances shall be measured in a straight-line radial distance from
the edge of the property lines.
C. The nearest lot line of the lot or parcel of land to be used as a gasoline filling station shall be at
least 200 feet, measured in a straight line, from the nearest lot line of any lot upon which is
located any building used as a theater, auditorium, church, hospital for humans, college, school,
public library, any public playground or athletic field, or other place of public assembly. Such
distances shall be measured in a straight-line radial distance from the edge of the property lines.
D. On any lot that is used for a gasoline filling station, the only other uses permitted shall be the
following accessory uses: vending machines, parking spaces and the rental of trailers and
parking spaces. No accessory use shall be located within 20 feet of any street line or occupy
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
174
more than 50% of the open area of the lot. In the case of any existing gasoline filling station, the
addition of any of the above permitted accessory uses shall be subject to the same regulations.
No accessory use shall be located on a different lot than that containing a gasoline filling station.
E. Combined entrance and exit driveways to and from any lot upon which a gasoline filling station
is located shall have an unrestricted width of not less than 16 feet nor more than 24 feet. The
Planning Board shall determine that said driveways are designed for maximum safety to persons
and property.
F. The area of all driveways and other areas over which motor vehicles are intended to be driven
or parked on any lot on which is located a gasoline filling station shall be paved with a
bituminous or concrete surface sufficient to meet City paving specifications applicable to streets
and roadways.
G. On any premises upon which a gasoline filling station is located, all motor vehicles servicing or
repairs, other than such minor items as the changing and filling of tires or the sale of gasoline or
oil, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
H. No vehicle or part thereof shall be permitted to be left outdoors on any premises upon which a
gasoline filling station is located, which is unregistered, unlicensed or is in such condition as to
constitute a menace to public health and safety.
I. Any building used as a gasoline filling station and any filling pump or other service appliance,
whether for gasoline, oil or any other combustible liquid or material, shall not be erected within
10 feet of any side or rear lot line and the 10 foot free area required hereunder shall be at all
times kept free and unobstructed for the purposes of ready access by emergency fire and police
equipment. No gasoline or oil pumps, oil or greasing mechanism or other service appliance
installed for use at such premises shall be located within 15 feet of any street line.
J. At any gasoline filling station, storage facilities for gasoline, oil, or other flammable materials in
bulk shall be located wholly underground and no nearer than 35 feet from any lot line other
than a street line. No gasoline pump shall be located or permitted within any enclosed or semienclosed
building.
K. No part of any building or structure used in whole or in part as a gasoline filling station shall be
located within 250 feet of any boundary line of any residential district. Such distances shall be
measured in a straight-line radial distance from the edge of the property lines.
L. In addition to the foregoing, all gasoline filling stations and facilities shall comply with relevant
federal, state and municipal laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations and codes.
M. Gasoline filling stations may be operated in conjunction with a convenience store provided that
both the convenience store and the gasoline filling station are considered as separate but joint
uses wherein each use must satisfy the lot area and other bulk requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance.
N. Where permitted in the B-1 or B-2 District, such establishments shall be subject to the
requirements of §500-4.16.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
175
§500-5.25 Automobile Body Repair Facilities and Automobile Repair Service Facilities .
A. The minimum lot area required for automobile body repair facilities shall be 30,000 square feet
and street frontage shall not be less than 100 feet. The minimum lot area required for
automobile repair- specialized service facilities shall not be less than 20,000 square feet, and
street frontage shall not be less than 100 feet.
B. On any lot that is used for an automobile repair-specialized service facility, the following
accessory uses are permitted: food and beverage vending machines and the rental of trailers
within the Ordinance requirements for setbacks and off-street parking. On any lot that is used
for automobile body repair facilities, food and beverage vending machines are permissible as
accessory uses but not the rental of trailers.
C. Combined entrance and exit driveways to and from any lot upon which an automobile body
repair facility or an automobile repair-specialized service facility is located shall have an
unrestricted width of not less than 16 feet nor more than 24 feet. The Board having jurisdiction
shall determine that said driveways are designed and located for maximum safety to persons
and property.
D. The area of all driveways and other areas over which motor vehicles are intended to be driven
or parked on any lot on which is located an automobile body repair facility or automobile repairspecialized
service facility shall be paved with a bituminous or concrete surface sufficient to
meet City paving specifications applicable to streets and roadways.
E. On any lot, other than a lot in an industrial district, upon which an automobile body repair
facility or automobile repair-specialized service facility is located, all such services shall be
conducted within a fully enclosed building.
F. On lots outside of an industrial district, no vehicle or part thereof which is unregistered,
unlicensed or is substantially damaged or dismantled shall be stored shall be left outside an
enclosed building on any lot upon which an automobile body repair facility or automobile repair
service facility is located for more than 48 hours. Irreparably damaged vehicles shall not be
stored for more than 30 days. Automobile body repair facilities or automobile repair-specialized
service facilities in the I-1 and I-2 Districts shall comply with the requirements of §500-3.6.D.4
with respect to outdoor storage.
G. The storage of oil, gasoline, or other flammable materials/liquids in bulk, for automobile body
repair facilities and for automobile repair/specialized service facilities, shall be located wholly
underground and no nearer than 35 feet from any lot line.
H. No part of any automobile body repair facility or automobile repair-specialized services facility
shall be located within two hundred (200) feet from the boundary lines of an R-1, R-2 or R-3
District. Such distances shall be measured in a straight-line radial distance from the edge of the
property lines.
I. Where permitted in the B-2 District, such establishments shall be subject to the requirements of
§500-4.16.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
176
§500-5.26 Hospitals, Medical Testing Laboratories, Medical Supply Distributors, Medical Offices,
Pharmacies, Florists, and Professional Offices in the H-1 District.
A. Hospitals in the H-1 District shall be subject to the following requirements:
1. Hospitals shall be permitted on sites fronting on principal arterial, secondary arterial and
collector roadways as shown on the Street Functional Classification Map in Appendix B
attached to this Ordinance.
2. The minimum lot area for hospitals shall be 2 acres.
3. Lot coverage shall not exceed 80%.
4. All yard setbacks shall not be less than 10 feet.
5. Floor ratio area shall not exceed 1.0.
6. Building height shall not exceed 5 stories or 60 feet.
7. Screening and landscaping for buffering shall be provided consistent with the design
standards in Article IV as required by the approving board.
8. Entrances and exits shall be located at least 50 feet from any street intersection.
B. Medical testing laboratories, medical supply distributors, medical offices, pharmacies, florists
and professional offices in the H-1 District shall be subject to the requirements of §500-2.3,
Schedule of Dimensional Requirements, respective to the district.
§500-5.27 Sexually-Oriented Businesses.
Sexually-oriented businesses, while permissible, may be inimical to the public health, safety, morals or
welfare if located without due consideration of their conditions or surroundings. The location, relocation
or establishment of sexually-oriented businesses shall be permitted upon conditional use approval in
accordance with the following standards:
A. No person shall operate, nor as record owners of a premises allow to be operated, such an
establishment within 1,000 feet of any existing church, synagogue, temple or other place of
public worship or any elementary or secondary school or any school bus stop or any municipal
or county playground or place of public recreation, or any hospital or any child care center, or
within 1,000 feet of any residential zone. Such distance shall be measured as a straight line
radial distance from the edge of the property lines. This subsection shall not apply to a sexuallyoriented
business already lawfully operating on the effective date of this Ordinance where
another sexually oriented businesses, an elementary or secondary school or school bus stop, or
any municipal or county playground or place of public recreation, or any hospital or any child
care center, is subsequently established within 1,000 feet, or where a residential district or
residential lot is subsequently established within 1,000 feet.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
177
B. Such use shall not be located within 1,000 feet of an existing sexually oriented business or go-go
bar. Such distance shall be measured as a straight line radial distance from the edge of the
property lines. This subsection shall not apply to a sexually oriented business or go-go bar
already lawfully operating on the effective date of this Ordinance where a sexually oriented
business is subsequently established within 1,000 feet.
C. Such use shall have a minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet.
D. No such use shall display more than two exterior signs, consisting of one identification sign and
one sign giving notice that the premises are off limits to minors. The sum area of such signage
shall not exceed 5% of the facade area or 40 square feet, whichever is lesser.
E. Such use shall be situated and limited to the ground floor of the structure.
F. No visibility of entertainment from the street view. All openings, entries, windows, doors, etc.,
to a sexually-oriented business facility shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as
to prevent a view into the interior from any public place.
G. Every such establishment, other than existing establishments lawfully operating as of the
effective date of this Ordinance, shall be surrounded by a perimeter buffer at least 50 feet in
width with plantings, fence, or other physical divider along the perimeter of the premises
sufficient to impede the view of the interior of the premises in which the business is located.
H. No other use shall be conducted in the building or structure in which such establishment is
located. In particular, no sexually oriented business shall be established or permitted in any
building of which any part is used for residential purposes. No residential use shall be
established in a building of which any part is used as a sexually-oriented business.
I. For purposes of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as
part of the premises for an sexually-oriented business to the nearest property line of land upon
which is situated a school, church, park or other use or district described above.
§500-5.28 Recycling Facilities.
A. Lot area shall not be less than 80,000 square feet.
B. The driveway or driveways to and from any lot upon which a recycling site is located shall have
an unrestricted width adequate to handle the anticipated traffic load, but in no event shall the
driveway be less than 20 feet wide and it shall be so designated as to avoid the necessity of any
vehicle leaving the property by backing out across any public sidewalk, street right-of-way or
part thereof.
C. The area of all driveways and other areas over which motor vehicles are intended to be driven
or parked shall be paved with bituminous or concrete surface, whose specifications meet or
exceed those established by the City for streets and roadways.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
178
D. The perimeter of a lot on which a recycling site is located shall be fenced according to the
following specifications:
1. That the portion of the perimeter lying along a street in an industrial district shall have a
solid wall or fence at least 8 feet in height.
2. That portion of the perimeter lying along a railroad right-of-way shall have a solid wall
or fence at least 8 feet in height.
E. As to any recycling site, no animal or vegetable matter or by products, wood, rags, rubber or
other hazardous or flammable materials shall be processed for recycling. However, paper and
plastic products may be sorted, baled or compacted and then shipped to another location.
F. All stationary motor-driven equipment shall be located within an enclosed building or buildings.
G. Such use shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, regulations
and statutes regarding noise, pollutants, health, safety and welfare of the public. Approval by
the City of Paterson shall not be deemed to waive any other requirement(s) for State or Federal
approval, including, but not limited to, regulation by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
H. Such use shall not be located nearer than 500 feet to a dwelling, place of worship, school,
auditorium, place of public gathering or similar places, as measured in a straight-line radial
distance from the edge of the property lines.
I. The site shall be so designed and used so that all operations associated with the use occur
entirely within the interior of the site. No loading, vehicular maneuvering or any other activity
associated with the operation of the site shall extend beyond the confines of the property into
the right-of-way or any other area outside of the property.
J. Such use shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance pertaining to outdoor storage.
§500-5.29 Truck Terminals.
A. The lot area for such use shall be not less than 2 acres.
B. Separate entrance and exit driveways; provided that each driveway shall have an unrestricted
width of not less than 15 feet or more than 30 feet, shall be located not nearer than 10 feet
from any lot line, and shall be so laid out as to avoid any vehicle leaving the property by backing
out across the public sidewalk, street right-of-way or part thereof.
C. Driveways, loading areas and other areas over which vehicles are intended to be driven or
parked on the lot shall be improved to meet or exceed City specifications applicable to street
and roadways.
D. Such uses shall be located adjacent to any principal arterial roadway as defined in the Street
Functional Classification Map in Appendix B attached to this Ordinance.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
179
E. Such use shall not be located nearer than 500 feet to a dwelling, place of worship, school,
auditorium, place of public gathering or similar places, as measured in a straight-line radial
distance from the edge of the property lines.
F. The site shall be so designed and used so that all operations associated with the use occur
entirely within the interior of the site. No loading, vehicular maneuvering or any other activity
associated with the operation of the site shall extend beyond the confines of the property into
the right-of-way or any other area outside of the property.
G. Such use shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance pertaining to outdoor storage.
§500-5.30 Motor Vehicle Junk Yards.
A. The lot area for such use shall not be less than 65,000 square feet.
B. Such use shall be adjacent to a principal arterial roadway as defined on the Street Functional
Classification Map in Appendix B attached to this Ordinance.
C. Such use shall not be located nearer than 500 feet to a dwelling, place of residence, place of
worship, school, auditorium, place of public gathering or similar places, as measured in a
straight-line radial distance from the edge of the property lines.
D. Such use shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, regulations
and statutes regarding noise, pollutants, health, safety and welfare of the public.
E. Such use shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance pertaining to outdoor storage.
F. Driveways, loading areas and other areas over which vehicles are intended to be driven or
parked on the lot shall be improved to meet or exceed City specifications applicable to street
and roadways.
G. The driveway or driveways to and from any lot upon which such use is located shall be of such
width and design to handle the anticipated traffic load and shall be so designed as to avoid the
necessity of any vehicle leaving the property by backing out across any public sidewalk, street
right-of-way or part thereof.
H. The site shall be so designed and used so that all operations associated with the use occur
entirely within the interior of the site. No loading, vehicular maneuvering or any other activity
associated with the operation of the site shall extend beyond the confines of the property into
the right-of-way or any other area outside of the property.
§500-5.31 Junk Yards
A. The lot area for such use shall not be less than 43,560 square feet.
B. Such use shall be adjacent to a principal arterial roadway as defined on the Street Functional
Classification Map in Appendix B attached to this Ordinance.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
180
C. Such use shall not be located nearer than 500 feet to a dwelling, place of residence, place of
worship, school, auditorium, place of public gathering or similar places, as measured in a
straight-line radial distance from the edge of the property lines.
D. Such use shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, regulations
and statutes regarding noise, pollutants, health, safety and welfare of the public.
E. Such use shall comply with the requirements of this Ordinance pertaining to outdoor storage.
F. Driveways, loading areas and other areas over which vehicles are intended to be driven or
parked on the lot shall be improved to meet or exceed City specifications applicable to street
and roadways.
G. The driveway or driveways to and from any lot upon which such use is located shall be of such
width and design to handle the anticipated traffic load and shall be so designed as to avoid the
necessity of any vehicle leaving the property by backing out across any public sidewalk, street
right-of-way or part thereof.
H. The site shall be so designed and used so that all operations associated with the use occur
entirely within the interior of the site. No loading, vehicular maneuvering or any other activity
associated with the operation of the site shall extend beyond the confines of the property into
the right-of-way or any other area outside of the property.
§500-5.32 Heavy Industrial Uses.
Heavy industrial uses, where permitted, shall comply with the requirements of §500-3.6.D.4 with
respect to outdoor storage and the performance standards required in §500-10.
§500-5.33 Wireless Telecommunication Services
It is in the best interest of the City to establish regulations and standards for the siting, design,
installation, appearance, construction and maintenance of all Wireless Telecommunication Services
Facilities (WTSF) equipment, including towers, monopoles, pole-mounted and structure-attached
equipment and other related devices and other related devices and equipment, in order to: promote the
safety and welfare of the residents of the City and surrounding communities; minimize the adverse
visual effects of WTSFs and protect the natural features, historic character, and aesthetics of the City by
careful siting, design, buffering and screening of WTSFs; limit the total number of WTSFs to be
constructed in the City to the minimum number of WTSFs necessary to provide adequate coverage
within the City; maximize the use of any proposed site by encouraging co-location and multiple use of
WTSFs to the extent reasonably permissible; encourage the siting of WTSFs on existing or other planned
or approved WTSFs; encourage the use of alternative technologies that eliminate the need for new or
additional WTSFs in the City; and, limit new WTSFs to existing nonresidential buildings and areas zoned
for industrial uses where the siting of a WTSF within the City is proven to be necessary.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
181
The following standards and requirements shall apply to all WTSFs. All applications for a WTSF shall be
accompanied by such written narratives, visual analyses, technical reports, site plans and other
materials as determined necessary by the Board having jurisdiction (the Board) in order to demonstrate
that the WTSF would fulfill all of the purposes and meets all of the requirements of this section. No
conditional use approval shall be granted unless the Board makes the findings in writing that the
application fulfills all of the purposes and meets all of the requirements of this section.
A. Use. Except as provided hereinafter, no WTSF shall be located, constructed or maintained on
any building, structure or land area in the City of Paterson, except in conformity with the
requirements of this section and all other applicable regulations. Any alteration of an existing
WTSF must comply with requirements of this section and all other applicable regulations.
B. Demonstration of Need and Master Plan. The operator(s) of the wireless telecommunication
service shall submit a copy of their Federal Communications Commission (FCC) license and shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Board that there is a public need for each such WTSF at
the location(s) proposed by the Applicant to provide adequate coverage in the City of Paterson.
The Board may hire a qualified professional or recognized authority to review and report on the
information and conclusions contained in the application materials, the cost of which shall be
reimbursed by the Applicant. Such demonstration shall include the preparation of existing
coverage and gap plans and a master plan of proposed service that:
1. Consist of multi-color signal level propagation plots at not less than 5 dBm intervals to -
100 dBm at standard USGS scaled drawings, including information such as, but not
limited to, topography and elevations, existing buildings, streets, existing WTSFs and
other similarly tall structures, tile propagation plots, radial propagation plots and drive
propagation plot data, and identification of all of the relevant system design parameters
of all existing, approved or proposed WTSFs which may affect or provide service within
the City. Separate signal level propagation plots shall be required for each existing,
planned, approved and proposed WTSF; and
2. Demonstrate that existing, or other planned or approved WTSFs, do not and cannot be
modified to provide adequate coverage to the City; and
3. Minimize the number of such WTSFs within the City; and
4. Maximize co-location and shared use of existing public utility and WTSFs; and
5. Identify all existing and proposed WTSFs that impact the service area covering the City
and that identify all proposed and other locations considered for such WTSF; and
6. Analyze feasible alternatives, including alternative sites, construction and transmission
technologies, to reasonably minimize the visual and other adverse impacts.
C. Location and Access. WTSFs shall be located in accordance with the following order of
placement priorities. The Applicant shall evaluate and demonstrate the infeasibility of a higher
priority location before considering the next lower priority and shall demonstrate such analyses
to the satisfaction of the reviewing board:
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
182
1. Co-location on an existing or other planned or approved WTSFs within an Industrial
District, PUID or MU District that eliminates the need for new or additional WTSFs in the
City.
2. Placement of new WTSF on an existing structure within an Industrial District, PUID or
MU District.
3. Construction of a new monopole tower within an Industrial District, PUID or MU District.
4. Co-location on an existing or other planned or approved WTSFs within a Business or
Hospital District that eliminates the need for new or additional WTSFs in the City.
5. Placement of new WTSF on an existing structure within a Business or Hospital District.
6. Construction of a new monopole tower within a Business or Hospital District.
7. Co-location on an existing or other planned or approved WTSFs within a R-3 or R-4
District that eliminates the need for new or additional WTSFs in the City.
8. Placement of new WTSF on an existing structure within a R-3 or R-4 District.
9. Construction of a new monopole tower within a R-3 or R-4 District.
10. Co-location on an existing or other planned or approved WTSFs within 2,000 feet of a
public park, school or place of worship that eliminates the need for new or additional
WTSFs in the City.
11. Placement of new WTSF on an existing structure within 2,000 feet of a public park,
school or place of worship.
12. Construction of a new monopole tower within 2,000 feet of a public park, school or
place of worship.
In reviewing a particular application for a WTSF, the Board may require placement at a lower priority
location if it determines that the location, design and appearance of the WTSF at such location would
protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities and residential characteristics of the City of Paterson, the
safety and welfare of its citizens, and would otherwise further the intent and purpose of this section to
the same or greater degree than placement of the WTSF at a higher priority location. However, wireless
telecommunication service facilities shall in no circumstance be permitted in a R-1, R-2 District or in the
Great Falls Historic District.
D. Co-Location Requirements.
1. Any application for a WTSF shall include a statement and appropriate documentation
demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Board that to the extent relevant to provide
wireless telecommunication service (WTS) in the City that is the subject of such
application, all reasonable efforts have been made to co locate such WTSF on all other
existing, planned or approved sites with communication antennas which would
eliminate the need for new or additional WTSFs in the City. A proposal for a WTSF shall
not be approved unless the Board finds that the antenna planned for the proposed
WTSF cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved WTSF or a structure within a
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
183
1.5-mile search radius of the proposed WTSF due to one or more of the following
reasons:
a. The antenna would exceed the structural capacity of the existing or approved
WTSF or structure, as certified by a licensed professional engineer, and the
existing or approved WTSF or structure cannot be reinforced, modified, or
replaced to accommodate the planned or equivalent antenna at a reasonable
cost.
b. The antenna would cause interference materially impacting the function of
other existing or approved antenna at the WTSF or structure as certified by a
qualified professional or other recognized authority and the interference cannot
be prevented at a reasonable cost.
c. Existing or approved WTSFs and structures within the 1.5-mile search radius
cannot accommodate the antenna at a height necessary to function reasonably
or to provide adequate coverage to the intended service area as certified by a
qualified professional or other recognized authority.
d. Other reasons that make it infeasible to locate the antenna upon an existing or
approved WTSF or structure.
2. All WTSFs shall be designed, structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to
accommodate both the applicant's antennas and base equipment and comparable
antennas and base equipment for at least four (4) additional licensed carriers. WTSFs
must be designed to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the WTSF and to
accept antennas mounted at varying heights. The Board may reduce the number of
licensed carriers required to be accommodated for just cause and consistent with the
purposes of this section and the Zoning Ordinance.
3. As a condition of conditional use approval, the applicant shall be required to provide a
written agreement, in recordable form, and prepared to the satisfaction of the Board
Attorney, acknowledging that the applicant, and its successors in interest, shall be
required to allow the co- location of all other future wireless telecommunication service
WTSFs unless otherwise unreasonably limited by technological, structural or other
engineering considerations and expressly stating that it shall negotiate in good faith for
shared use of the proposed WTSF by other WTS providers in the future. The issuance of
any approval for a WTSF, shall commit the new WTSF owner and its successors in
interest to:
a. Respond in a timely comprehensive manner to a request for information from a
potential shared-use applicant.
b. Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared use of the WTSF
by other WTS providers.
c. Allow shared use of the new WTSF if another WTS provider agrees in writing to
pay charges.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
184
d. Relocate antennas on the WTSF as necessary to accommodate co-location of
additional licensed service providers, to provide adequate coverage, or to
minimize the height or other avoidable impacts of the WTSF.
E. Setbacks. Unless otherwise modified by the Board in an effort to accommodate the purposes of
this Section, free-standing WTSFs shall be located not less than:
1. Two (2) times the otherwise applicable setback requirements for principal structures for
the district in which the property is located; or the height of the WTSF, whichever shall
be greater.
2. A WTSF's setback may be reduced by the Board to allow the integration of a WTSF into
an existing or proposed building or structure.
3. It shall be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Board that the proposed WTSF is set
back adequately to prevent damage or injury resulting from ice fall or debris resulting
from failure of a WTSF or any part thereof, and to avoid and minimize all other impacts
upon adjoining properties.
F. Height Limitations. Notwithstanding the following height limitations, in no case shall a WTSF
exceed the minimum height reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose it is proposed to
serve.
1. The height of any antennas, or other associated equipment, structurally mounted as
part of a WTSF shall not exceed by more than fifteen (15) feet the highest point of the
existing structure on which such antennas or equipment are affixed.
2. The maximum height of free-standing WTSF is limited to 100 feet above the ground
upon which the antenna is placed. The ground elevation may not be raised to increase
the height of the WTSF.
3. Height limitations may be waived by the Board when the antenna is mounted on an
existing building or structure or to accommodate collocation.
G. Design and Visual Mitigation.
1. Unless otherwise permitted by the Board, WTSFs shall only be permitted on, in or
attached to existing or approved buildings or structures by use of stealth technologies,
(e.g., architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, antennas integrated into
architectural elements, and WTSFs designed not to look like a conventional WTSF but
like something else existing in the community, such as light poles, power poles, flag
poles, and trees or materials).
2. Where permitted, the only freestanding WTSF permitted shall be a monopole. WTSFs
that require the use of guy wires or open framework are prohibited.
3. The applicant/provider shall prepare a visual impact assessment of the proposed WTSF
based upon appropriate modeling, photography and other pertinent analytical
techniques as required by the Board, including but not limited to a map identifying the
zone of visibility.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
185
4. Landscaping and/or other screening and mitigation, including but not limited to
architectural treatment, and alternative construction, structural and transmission
technologies such as antennas attached to or disguised as trees or other features or
camouflaging techniques, shall be required to minimize the visual impact of such WTSF
from public thoroughfares, important view and vantage points and surrounding
properties to the extent practicable as determined by the Board.
5. No signs other than exempt signs or as may be required by the Board for security or
safety purposes, shall be erected on any WTSF.
6. All ground-based equipment and all utilities shall be located underground to the extent
feasible.
7. WTSFs shall be designed to blend into the surrounding environment through the use of
color and camouflaging architectural treatment, except in instances where the color is
dictated by federal or state authorities. Every WTSF shall be of colors and design that
are compatible and harmonious to blend with the natural features, buildings and
structures surrounding such WTSF.
8. The WTSF shall not be artificially lighted unless otherwise required by the appropriate
governmental authority, (e.g., FAA).
H. Operational Characteristics.
1. Unless otherwise superseded by the FCC, the design and use of the proposed WTSF,
including its cumulative impact with other existing and approved WTSFs, shall be
certified to conform with the maximum NIER exposure standards promulgated by the
FCC, as amended. Said certification shall include a report prepared in accordance with
FCC Office of Engineering and Technology Bulletin 65, as amended. If new, more
restrictive, standards are adopted, the antennas shall be made to comply or operation
of the WTSF shall be terminated. The cost of compliance shall be borne by the owner
and operator of the WTSF.
2. Annual certification of conformance with the applicable emissions standards and the
requirements and conditions of special use permit approval shall be required.
3. Certification shall also be required prior to any modification of the WTSF or upon
modification of the FCC standards.
4. The Board may hire a qualified professional or recognized authority to review and report
on such initial and annual certification report, the cost of which shall be reimbursed by
the Applicant.
5. Any violation of the emissions standards shall require immediate discontinuation and
correction of the use responsible for the violation. Any such violation of these
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance or the conditions of conditional use approval
shall be deemed to be an offense punishable in accordance with this Zoning Ordinance.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
186
I. Safety Provisions. A WTSF shall be designed and erected so that in the event of structural failure,
it will fall within the required setback area and, to the maximum extent possible, away from
adjacent development. No new structure shall be permitted which would be classified by the
Federal Aviation Administration Regulations Title 14 CFR Part 77 as an obstruction or hazard.
J. Insurance. The owner and applicant shall provide and keep in full force and effect, at their own
cost and expense, public liability insurance which shall afford protection in an amount to be
fixed by the City naming the City as an additional insured and indemnifying the City against any
and all losses for personal injury, death, property damage or other claim, obligation or liability,
and all costs or expenses in connection therewith, including reasonable attorney’s fees and all
costs of litigation, arising out of or relating to the existence, operation or use of any approved
WTSF and any activities in connection therewith. Said insurance shall be written in form
satisfactory to the City by good and solvent insurance companies of recognized standing,
authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey and shall contain a provision that the policy
or policies shall not be canceled on less than thirty (30) days written notice to the City.
Appropriate insurance certificates shall be deposited with the City before any permit is issued.
The owner and applicant shall obtain and maintain at all times insurance of an appropriate type
and amount from an insurer licensed and authorized in the State of New Jersey.
K. Security Provisions. A security program shall be formulated and implemented for the site of a
WTSF. Such program shall include physical features such as fencing screened by buffer
vegetation, anti-climbing devices or elevating ladders on monopoles or other approved
structure and/or monitoring either by staff or electronic devices to prevent unauthorized access
and vandalism.
L. Structural Inspection and Report. A monopole or other approved structure shall be inspected at
the expense of the service provider by a licensed professional engineer in the State of New
Jersey at any time upon a determination by the City Engineer that the monopole or other
approved structure may have sustained structural damage, but in no case less than once every
five (5) years. A copy of the inspection report shall be submitted to the City Engineer.
M. Emergency Plan. An emergency action plan shall be formulated and implemented for the site of
a WTSF, to the satisfaction of the Board. Such plan shall include identification of all appropriate
features and considerations of each WTSF, appropriate training of local police, fire and
ambulance service providers, and appropriate provisions for notification of the public in the
event of an emergency.
N. Removal.
1. A WTSF, or any portion thereof including any portion above the height of the antenna,
shall be dismantled and removed from the property on which it is located when it has
been inoperative or abandoned for a period of twelve (12) months from the date on
which it ceased operation, or no longer has a valid approval, permit or license, or is
otherwise no longer necessary for the provision of adequate coverage in the City of
Paterson.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
187
2. The applicant shall provide to the satisfaction of the Board Attorney, a written
agreement to ensure the dismantling, removal and restoration of such an abandoned
wireless telecommunications services facility. Performance of the removal requirements
shall be secured by a bond posted by the Applicant in an amount and for a duration
determined to be adequate by the Board.
3. In the event that such WTSF, or portion thereof, is not completely removed from such
property within such time, the City shall be authorized to effect such removal at the
expense of the property owner.
O. Owner/Applicant Representative Contacts. The applicant and all future owners of the premises
and the WTSF shall at all times keep on file in the office of the City Engineer the name, address,
and telephone number of the owner and operator of such WTSF and of at least one individual
who shall have authority to arrange for the maintenance of the premises and WTSF, and who
shall be authorized to accept service of notices and legal process on behalf of the owner and
operator(s) of the premises and WTSF and to bind the owner to any settlement, fine, judgment,
or other disposition (other than incarceration) which may result from any civil or criminal action
or proceeding instituted by the City against such owner and/or operator(s).
P. Assignment of Permit. No permit granted under this section shall be assigned or transferred
without the prior approval of the Board having jurisdiction.
§500-5.34. Home Businesses.
Home businesses shall be permitted within a dwelling subject to the following conditions:
A. The proprietor of the home business shall be a permanent full-time resident of the dwelling and
no persons other than members of the family residing on the premises shall be engaged in such
business except that there may be no more than one (1) non-resident employee on the
premises.
B. No more than one (1) home business shall be operated in a dwelling.
C. The home business shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the
dwelling. The home business shall occupy no more than 35% of the floor area of the dwelling
unit, or 500 square feet, whichever is less.
D. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible
evidence of the conduct of such home business other than one sign, which shall be subject to
the provisions of §500-8.5.A.2 of this Ordinance.
E. Home businesses in single-and two-family dwellings shall be limited to a single floor in the
dwelling. No home business shall be conducted in any accessory building.
F. Off-street parking requirements must be satisfied in accordance with this Ordinance.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
188
G. There shall be no on-premise sale, distribution or delivery of goods in connection with such
home business.
H. The rate of visits by clients, patients or other types of visitors per hour to the home business
shall not exceed two (2) per hour.
I. There shall be no delivery vehicles in excess of that associated with the residential use on site.
I. No equipment or process shall be used in such home business which creates noise, glare, fumes,
odors, electrical interference, medical waste or nuisance factors detectable to the normal sense
or to radio, telephone or television equipment off the lot.
§500-5.35. Tattoo, Body Piercing and Skin Art Studios
A. Waiting and Display Areas. Tattoo samples inside the studio and any other artwork inside the
studio shall be displayed in professionally matted and framed panels. Frames must include glass
glazing. Tattoo samples shall not be displayed in such a manner as to be visible to the general
public outside the studio. There shall be no outdoor scats or ledges that could be used for
seating or loitering. There shall be no outdoor area for smoking that is visible to the general
public or a public street.
B. Signage. Studios must use either silk-screened signs on canvas awnings or a non-glossy panel
sign that may be illuminated by gooseneck style spot lighting. Mounted lettering can also be
used if it is not backlift or made of a glossy material. The total signage area may not cover more
than 10% of the building's facade area. Window signs that do not block the window from view
or cover more than 10% of the window area are also allowed. None may be used in windows,
but only for the logo of the establishment, and a neon sign cannot cover more than 5% of the
window area. Window displays shall not contain sample artwork or posters that have not been
professionally mounted or framed. Backlift signs, signs with movable or removable lettering, and
blinking signs or blinking lighting may not be used in any circumstance.
C. Storefront Condition. Storefront areas must be maintained free of litter, including cigarette
butts, at all times. The studio's entire grounds, lawn area, and the sidewalk in front of the studio
must be kept free of litter. Any studio found to have litter in front of it shall be in violation
rendering its certificate of occupancy null and void. Studios must operate in well maintained
buildings with no boarded-up windows or loose or missing siding, roof damage, damage to the
building parapet, rotting wood, or exposed unpainted or untreated wood.
D. Parking. Parking must be provided in accordance with Section 500-7, Off-Street Parking and
Loading, of this Ordinance at a rate of 2 spaces per workstation. Parking can be arranged
through a written agreement with another property owner, provided that these spaces are
located within 200 feet of the front entrance of the studio. The agreement must be established
for a period equal to or in excess of the duration of the lease for the studio's site. If the studio
operator owns the site, the parking arrangement's continuance shall be a requirement for the
operator's compliance with its certificate of occupancy.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
189
E. Lot Area and Bulk. Subject to the requirements of Section 500-2.3, Schedule of Bulk and
Dimensional Requirements.
F. Health Conditions. All establishments must comply with all requirements of the City of Paterson
Health Division and the Health Department of the State of New Jersey. Certification of
compliance including licenses and permits is a condition of obtaining conditional use approval.
All health requirements for staff credential must be met, and proof of compliance is required
prior to conditional use review.
G. Not more than one studio at any time shall be approved to operate in the City of Paterson for
every 75,000 residents of the City as published in the most recent Census Report issued by the
US Bureau of the Census. No studio shall be located within 1,000 linear feet of another studio,
bar, tavern, liquor store, church, child day care facility, or private or public school, as measured
in a straight-line radial distance from the edge of the property lines.
H. Where permitted in the B-2 District, such establishments shall be subject to the requirements of
§500-4.16.
§500-5.36 Go-Go Bar.
A. Such use shall not be located within 200 feet of a residential zoning district as measured in a
straight line. Such use shall not be located within 500 feet, as measured in a straight line radial
distance from the edge of the property lines, to the following: place of worship, public or private
school, public park or playground, hospital or child care center.
B. Such use shall not be located within 750 feet another go-go bar or within 750 feet of a sexually
oriented business, as measured in a straight line radial distance from the edge of the property
lines. This subsection shall not apply to a go-go bar or a sexually-oriented business already
lawfully operating on the effective date of this Ordinance where a go-go bar is subsequently
established within 750 feet.
C. Such use shall have a minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet.
D. Such use shall be situated and limited to the ground floor of the structure.
E. No visibility of entertainment from the street view. All openings, entries, windows, doors, etc.,
to a gogo bar shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view into
the interior from any public place.
F. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the ratio of one space for every 150 square feet of
floor area for the entire establishment, not merely the area in which the dancing is to be
performed, and one space for every two employees or fraction thereof.
G. No go-go bar shall be established or permitted in any building of which any part is used for
residential purposes. No residential use shall be established in a building of which any part is
used as a go-go bar.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
190
H. For purposes of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as
part of the premises for an go-go bar to the nearest property line of land upon which is situated
a school, church, park or other use or district described above.
I. These uses may not be located on a State Highway.
§500-5.37 Large-Scale Retail Facilities in the I-2 District.
Large-scale wholesale and/or retail centers including self-storage facilities, facilities which involve the
sale of general merchandise, home improvement centers and outdoor garden centers shall be permitted
in the I-2 District provided the following conditions are satisfied:
A. The minimum lot area shall be 5 acres.
B. The minimum building size shall be 80,000 square feet.
C. The minimum lot width shall be 400 feet.
D. The maximum lot coverage shall be 40%.
E. Where four (4) or more loading bays are provided, a curb cut providing access to such areas may
be provided between 40 and 80 feet wide to permit tractor-trailers.
F. Fencing on the property line and within the property shall be permitted up to twelve (12) feet in
height where necessary for public safety.
G. Where screening is required, and where a masonry screen is proposed in lieu of year-round
landscaping, such masonry screen may be up to twelve (12) feet in height.
H. Two (2) freestanding signs shall be permitted and no such sign shall exceed 144 square feet in
area. Such signage shall comply with other applicable requirements of §500-8.7. Building signs
and all other signs shall comply with the normally applicable sign requirements of the I-2 District
as stipulated in §500-8.7.
I. Such uses shall be located on a property that abuts a State highway or an arterial road as
classified in the Master Plan.
§500-5.38 Mid-Scale Retail Facilities in the I-2 District.
It is reasonable to include in the I-2 District retail and personal services on a site not less than 2 acres
and located along major roadways traversed by the general public, provided the following conditions are
satisfied
A. The minimum lot area shall be 2 acres.
B. The maximum building size shall not be more than 35,000 sq. ft.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
191
C. The minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
D. The maximum lot coverage shall be 40%.
E. Where four (4) or more loading bays are provided, a curb cut providing access to such area may
be provided between 40 and 80 feet wide to permit tractor trailers.
F. Fencing on the property line and within the property shall be permitted up to twelve (12) feet in
height where necessary for public safety.
G. Where screening is required, and where a masonry screen is proposed in lieu of year-round
landscaping, such masonry screen may be up to twelve (12) feet in height.
H. One (1) freestanding signs shall be permitted and no such sign shall exceed 144 square feet in
area. Such signage shall comply with other applicable requirements of 500-8.7. Building signs
and all other signs shall comply with the normally applicable sign requirements of the I-2 District
as stipulated in 500-8.7.
I. Such uses shall be located on a property that has frontage on and direct vehicular access to a
State highway.
§500-5.39 Liquor Store
A. Any property line of a lot used for a liquor store shall be located at least 200 feet from the
nearest property line of any lot used for a theater, auditorium, or other place of public assembly
capable of seating over 300 persons, church, hospital for humans, college, school, public library
or institution for dependents or children, or any public playground or athletic field. Such
distance shall be measured in a straight-line radial distance from the edge of the property lines.
B. When adjacent to a residential structure, screening and fencing shall be provided consistent
with the design standards in Article IV and as required by the approving board.
C. Where permitted in the B-1 or B-2 District, such establishments shall be subject to the
requirements of §500-4.1 and §500-4.16.
§500-5.40 Bars and Taverns
A. Any property line of a lot used for a bar or tavern shall be located at least: 200 feet from the
nearest property line of any lot used for a theater, auditorium, or other place of public assembly
capable of seating over 300 persons, church, hospital for humans, college, school, public library
or institution for dependents or children, or any public playground or athletic field. Such
distance shall be measured in a straight-line radial distance from the edge of the property lines.
B. When adjacent to a residential structure, screening and fencing shall be provided consistent
with the design standards in Article IV and as required by the approving board.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
192
C. Where permitted in the B-1 or B-2 District, such establishments shall be subject to the
requirements of §500-4.1 and §500-4.16.
§500-5.41 Neighborhood Retail in the R-3 District
A. Neighborhood Retail uses must be on a corner lot, having frontage on at least two public Rightsof-
Way.
B. A minimum front yard of 20 feet shall be required.
C. Neighborhood Retail in the R-3 zone shall be subject to all the bulk requirements of the B-1 zone
as enumerated in the Schedule of Bulk and Dimensional Requirements §500-2.3, except for the
minimum front yard setback.
D. Mixed-Uses of Residential and Commercial Uses shall be subject to the requirements of §500-
4.1.
§500-5.42 Low-Rise Housing in the B-4 District
A. The property shall not have direct frontage on any of the following streets:
1. Main Street
2. Market Street
3. Ward Street
§500-5.43 Automobile-Dismantling
A. All dismantling of automobiles or other vehicles shall be conducted within an enclosed
structure.
B. No automobile or vehicle parts shall be stored outside of the enclosed facility.
C. The minimum lot area for such use shall not be less than 20,000 square feet.
D. Such use shall not be located nearer than 500 feet to a dwelling, place of residence, place of
worship, school, auditorium, place of public gathering or similar places, as measured in a
straight-line radial distance from the edge of the property lines.
E. Such use shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances, regulations
and statutes regarding noise, pollutants, health, safety and welfare of the public.
F. Driveways, loading areas and other areas over which vehicles are intended to be driven on the
lot shall be improved to meet or exceed City specifications applicable to street and roadways.
G. The driveway or driveways to and from any lot upon which such use is located shall be of such
width and design to handle the anticipated traffic load and shall be so designed as to avoid the
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
193
necessity of any vehicle leaving the property by backing out across any public sidewalk, street
right-of-way or part thereof.
H. The site shall be so designed and used so that all operations associated with the use occur
entirely within the interior of the site. No loading, vehicular maneuvering or any other activity
associated with the operation of the site shall extend beyond the confines of the property into
the right-of-way or any other area outside of the property.
§500-5.44 Public Utilities in Residential Districts
A. The Utility Provider shall provide evidence demonstrating that the proposed utility service
facility cannot be located in a non-residential zone in the City and provide satisfactory utility
service to the neighborhood or area in which the particular use is to be located.
§500-5.45 Commercial Uses in the R/C-3 District
A. All commercial uses in the R/C-3 District shall have their primary frontage and entrance along
Madison Avenue.
B. Mixed-Uses of Residential and Commercial Uses shall be subject to the requirements of §500-
4.1.
C. A minimum front yard setback of 10 feet shall be required.
D. Neighborhood Retail in the R/C-3 zone shall be subject to all the bulk requirements of the B-1
zone as enumerated in the Schedule of Bulk and Dimensional Requirements §500-2.3, except for
the minimum front yard setback.
§500-6 NON-CONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS
§500-6.1 Intent.
Within the districts established by this Ordinance and amendments thereto, there exist lots, structures
and/or uses of land that were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended, but which are
prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendment. It is the
intent of this Ordinance that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor
be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited in the district in which it is located.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the
designated use of any building on which actual construction has begun prior to the enactment of this
ordinance. Actual building construction is hereby defined to include the placing or fastening of
construction materials in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an
existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
194
or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently
to conclusion. All of the above provisions shall not apply unless a valid site plan has been approved by
the appropriate City agency and such approval is still in effect.
§500-6.2 Non-Conforming Lots of Record.
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, in the R-3 and R-4 residential districts, a
one or two-family dwelling may be altered, renovated, added onto, or erected on any single lot
of record that is non-conforming with respect to applicable minimum lot area and minimum lot
width requirements without the need for a variance provided: that such lot was existing at the
effective date of adoption of this Ordinance; such lot is not less than 25 feet in width and 2,500
square feet in area; such lot is in separate ownership from adjoining lot(s); development of the
lot otherwise complies with yard, lot coverage and other dimensional requirements for the
district in which such lot is located (unless otherwise permitted to be modified in accordance
with §500-3.2) and provided that the number of dwelling units shall not be increased even if
such increased number of dwelling units are allowed in the district. This provision shall not apply
to lots in the R-1 and R-2 residential districts.
B. In the R-1 and R-2 residential districts, an existing one- or two-family dwelling on a lot having a
lot width and lot area less than that required in the zoning district in which it is located may be
altered, renovated or added onto without the need for a variance provided: the lot is at least
37.5 feet in width and at least 100 feet in depth; the lot and dwelling were existing at the
effective date of adoption of this Ordinance; and, the addition or alteration complies with all
applicable bulk regulations of this Ordinance.
C. If two or more lots of record in single ownership adjoin one another and do not meet the
minimum requirements established for lot width and lot area, the lands involved shall be
considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this Ordinance, and no portion of said
parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with the minimum lot
width and lot area requirements established by this Ordinance, nor shall any division of any
parcel be made which creates a lot width or lot area below the requirements stated in this
ordinance.
§500-6.3 Non-Conforming Uses of Land, or Structure
The non-conforming use of land or structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
provided:
A. No such non-conforming use of land shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a
greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
ordinance.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
195
B. No existing structure devoted to a non-conforming use shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the
structure to a use permitted in the district.
C. Where a non-conforming use of a structure or land is replaced by a permitted use, the use of
such structure or land shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district and the nonconforming
use may not thereafter be restored nor resumed.
D. No such non-conforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or
parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Ordinance.
E. If any such non-conforming use of a structure or land ceases and is abandoned for a period of
one (1) year, any subsequent use of such structure or land shall conform to the regulations
specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such structure or land is located.
F. No additional building or structure not conforming to the use requirements of this Ordinance
shall be erected in connection with such non-conforming use.
§500-6.4 Structures Non-Conforming for Reasons Other Than Use.
Wherever a structure is non-conforming because it fails to comply with restrictions on area, lot
coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, other
than use, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the
following provisions:
A. Structural alterations, internal rearrangements and renovations may be made in such a
structure so long as the structural alteration or increase, internal rearrangement or renovation
does not extend or enlarge the non-conformance of the structure. No such non-conforming
structure may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its non-conformity, but any
structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its non-conformity.
B. Should such structure be moved for any reason and for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
§500-6.5 Repairs and Maintenance.
A. On any non-conforming structure or portion of a structure containing a non-conforming use, no
alteration or reconstruction other than normal maintenance may be done and no increase or
expansion of the non-conforming use shall result from such maintenance.
B. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with
protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
196
C. Should any non-conforming structure or non-conforming portion of structure be destroyed by
any means by at least 50% as determined by the Construction Official, it shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. Reconstruction of a
non-conforming structure or portion of structure that is destroyed less than 50% may be
restored to its prior condition provided that it may not enlarge the previously existing nonconformance.
§500-7 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§500-7.1 General Provisions for Off-Street Parking.
A. Responsibility. The duty to provide and maintain off-street parking spaces shall be the joint and
separate responsibility of the operator and owner of the use or land for which off-street parking
spaces are required to be provided and maintained. In the B-4 District, parking for public,
semipublic, and commercial uses may be provided by the Parking Authority of the City of
Paterson or other privately owned centralized facilities. Each developer shall be required to
coordinate his plans with those of the Planning Board and other applicable agency of the City of
Paterson.
B. Location.
1. All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or
use served. However, parking spaces required for non-residential uses may be located
on a separate lot in a non-residential district within 300 feet of the principal building
subject to the requirement of §500-7.1.C.4, below.
2. No land in a residential zone shall be used to fulfill the off-street parking or loading
requirements for a use in a nonresidential district.
C. Joint Parking Facilities. Required parking may be satisfied through participation in a joint parking
program involving 2 or more uses; provided that
1. Plans for such a joint program shall have been approved by the Planning Board.
2. The area for the parking facilities shall be adequate to provide the sum total of off-street
parking space requirements of all such joint uses, unless modified in accordance with
§500-7.1.D, below
3. Parking requirements for a use in a non-residential district shall not be satisfied within a
residential district.
4. In any case, where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the
building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and
used, such parking spaces shall be established by a recorded covenant or agreement as
parking spaces to be used in conjunction with the principal use and shall be reserved as
such through an encumbrance on the title of the property to be designated as required
parking space, such encumbrance to be valid for the total period the use or uses for
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
197
which the parking is needed are in existence. Such agreement or covenant shall be duly
recorded in the Office of the county Registrar of Deeds.
D. Mixed Uses and Allowable Reduction in Parking Requirements for Shared Parking. In the case of
mixed uses, uses with different parking requirements occupying the building or premises, or in
the case of the joint use of a building or premises by more than one use having the same parking
requirements, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the
various uses computed separately, except that parking requirements for permitted accessory
retail and service uses and apartment buildings with 100 or more dwelling units or hotels, may
be reduced by the following percentages where it is found shared parking is likely to occur as a
result of patrons utilizing several of the uses comprising the development in a single visit or
where variations in peak demand for parking spaces would occur between different uses:
1. Retail sales, offices, service establishments: 50%
2. Restaurants and dining rooms: 60%
3. Ballroom, banquet hall, meeting rooms: 70%
E. "Land-Banking" of Parking Spaces. Where the Board reviewing a plan for development
determines, in connection with its review of such plan, that less than the required number of
parking or loading spaces will satisfy the intent of this chapter because of the unique nature of
the proposed use, variations in the probable time of maximum use by joint users or for any
other reason, the Board may waive or "landbank" the improvement of up to 1/3 of the total
number of spaces as required by this Chapter, subject to the following regulations:
1. Since this section does not reduce the number of required spaces (instead it allows the
reviewing board to allow less than the required number of spaces to be constructed), it
shall be demonstrated on the plan that sufficient area remains for the future provision
of the total number of spaces required. The site plan shall clearly indicate both that
portion of the parking area to be initially improved and that portion of the required
spaces proposed to be "land-banked."
2. The site plan shall provide for adequate drainage, lighting and landscaping of both the
initial and "land-banked" future parking areas.
3. The "land-banked" parking area shall be landscaped in accordance with this ordinance.
Such unimproved or "landbanked" spaces shall be maintained as additional landscaped
area until and unless required for parking or loading use.
4. Written guarantees, satisfactory to the Attorney to the Board having jurisdiction, shall
be submitted by the applicant, insuring the improvement of such spaces within six
months of the date of written notice to the property owner by the Board having
jurisdiction stating that all or a portion of such spaces have been determined to be
necessary and shall be constructed.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
198
5. An application for site plan approval shall be required in the event there is a proposed
change of use that requires more total parking spaces than was required on the plan
involving the "landbanking" of parking spaces.
F. Parking, Storage and Other Use Restrictions.
1. A parking area shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any
vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies.
2. No major recreational equipment shall be parked or stored on any lot in a residential
district except in a carport or enclosed building or behind the nearest portion of a
building to a street, provided, however, that such equipment may be parked anywhere
on residential premises not to exceed 24 hours during loading or unloading. No such
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or
stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use. For purposes of
these regulations, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and boat
trailers, travel trailers, pickup campers or coaches (designed . to be mounted on
automotive vehicles), mobile home or motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and the like,
and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by
such equipment or not. No such recreational equipment shall be stored or parked within
any residential district other than that lot upon which the principal residence structure
of the owner of the recreational equipment is located. No such recreational equipment
shall be parked in a public right-of-way.
3. In all R-1 and R-2 residential districts, overnight parking of any commercial vehicle
having a gross weight that exceeds 4,000 pounds is prohibited.
4. Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without current license plates shall
not be parked or stored on any residentially used or zoned property other than in
completely enclosed buildings.
5. The rental or leasing of parking spaces within parking lots for non-residential uses shall
only be permitted when the site exceeds the off-street parking requirement for the site,
with the number of spaces that are rented or leased limited to the extra (i.e., over that
required for the site) number of parking spaces provided on the site.
G. Rental or Leasing of Parking Spaces in Residential Districts. The rental or leasing of accessory
parking spaces in the rear of a residentially zoned lot is permitted, provided that:
1. It is found by the Planning Board that such rental or leasing of parking spaces is essential
to the public interest as evidenced by a serious need for off-street parking facilities and
as being not detrimental to the surrounding neighborhood.
2. The spaces are in addition to those already provided to meet the off-street parking
requirements of the lot. The rental or leasing spaces shall equal more than 25 percent of
the required parking spaces for that lot, or not more than 2 spaces when located on a
one or two family lot.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
199
3. The rental or leasing of parking spaces shall be restricted to residents of the surrounding
neighborhood.
4. The parking space shall be used for parking private passenger vehicles only.
§500-7.2 Supplementary Requirements for Off-Street Parking.
A. Yard Requirements.
1. For one- and two-family dwellings, no off-street parking areas shall be placed in any
required front yard.
2. In all districts, a surface parking area may be located in a required side or rear yard, but
shall be set back at least 3 feet from the property line.
3. For all townhouses, garden apartment, low and high-rise apartment buildings, all
parking lots shall be at least 8 feet from building lines.
B. Parking Structures. Parking structures shall be so situated on their respective sites as to provide
for adequate ingress and egress with particular attention given to the provisions of waiting
space for cars entering the structure during peak periods.
C. “Stacking” of Cars. In parking lots with attendant parking, the “stacking” of cars will be limited to
a depth of 2 cars so that no more than 1 car must be moved in order to get any car out of the
lot. For stacking purposes, a parking space shall be measured on the basis of not less than 200
square feet per car.
D. Parking Space Dimensions. Minimum off-street parking spaces shall be measured as follows:
Angle of Parking Stall Width Stall Depth Minimum Drive Areas
0 degrees (parallel) 9’ 22’ 12’
30 degrees* 9’ 17’ 15’
45 degrees* 9’ 17’ 15’
60 degrees* 9’ 21’** 18’
90 degrees 9’ 18’** 24’
* Such parking shall only be permitted in association with one-way drive areas
** Measured perpendicular to the access driveway
§500-7.3 Schedule of Parking Space Regulations.
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking for Residential Uses. The number of off-street parking spaces
required for residential uses shall be determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21, as amended, and by
reference to the Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking for Residential Uses below. Alternative parking
paring standards to those shown in the Schedule below shall be accepted by the reviewing board if the
applicant demonstrates such alternative parking standards better reflect local conditions. Factors
affecting the reviewing board’s consideration of alternative parking standards include household
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
200
characteristics, availability of mass transit, urban versus suburban location and the availability of off-site
parking sources.
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking for Residential Usesa
Housing Unit Type/Sizeb Parking Requirement
One and Two-Family Dwellings
2 bedrooms 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
3 bedrooms 2.0 spaces per dwelling unit
4 bedrooms 2.5 spaces per dwelling unitc
5 bedrooms 3.0 spaces per dwelling unit
Townhouse
1 bedroom 1.8 spaces per dwelling unit
2 bedrooms 2.3 spaces per dwelling unitc
3 bedrooms 2.4 spaces per dwelling unit
Multi-Family (3 to 7 Unit) Buildings, Garden
Apartments, and Low-Rise Apartment Buildings
1 bedroom/studio 1.8 spaces per dwelling unit
2 bedrooms 2.0 spaces per dwelling unitc
3 bedrooms 2.1 spaces per dwelling unit
High-Rise Apartment Buildings
1 bedroom/studio 0.8 spaces per dwelling unit
2 bedrooms 1.3 spaces per dwelling unitc
3 bedrooms 1.9 spaces per dwelling unit
Retirement Community Values shall be commensurate with the most
appropriate housing type and size noted above
that the retirement community resembles.
Assisted Living, Nursing Homes, and Long Term
Care Facilities
0.5 spaces per bed
Residential Uses in the B-4 District 1 space per dwelling unit
a. When determination of the required number of parking spaces results in a fractional space for
the entire development, any fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded, while a fraction of
greater than one-half shall be counted as one parking space.
b. Requirements for attached units (apartments, condominiums, townhomes) include provisions
for guest parking.
c. If applicant does not specify the number of bedrooms per unit, this parking requirement shall
apply.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
201
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking for Non-Residential Uses. Except as otherwise provided in this
Ordinance, off=street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the minimum requirements
as set forth in the Schedule of Parking Space Regulations.
Schedule of Required Off-Street Parking for Non-Residential Uses*
Use Categories Parking Requirement
PUBLIC/SEMI-PUBLIC
Hospitals 1.5 spaces per 2 beds, plus 1 per 2 employees on maximum
shift
Places of worship, Community Buildings, and
other places of public assembly
1 space per 3 seats (60 inches of seating). Where specific
amount of seating is undetermined, then 1 parking space
shall be required for each 75 square feet of assembly area.
Libraries, Museums, and Art Galleries 1 space per employee, plus 1 per 300 square feet of floor
area
Elementary and Junior High School 1 space per each classroom, plus 4 for administration, plus 1
space per each 10 seats in the main auditorium
High School 1 space per each 10 seats of student seating capacity, plus 4
for administration, plus 1 per each 10 seats in the main
auditorium
College or University 1 space per 5 students, plus 1 per employee at peak period of
activity
Trade or Vocational School 1 space per 200 square feet
Child Care Centers and Nursery Schools 1 space per each employee, plus 1 space for each 350 square
feet of floor area
Store Front Social Club or Fraternal Lodge 1 space per 400 square feet of floor area
Private Clubs 1 space per 2 members
Lodges 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space per
120 square feet of assembly area, whichever is greater
Recreational Clubs 1 per 4 members
Penal and Correctional Institutions 1 per 2 employees on maximum shift
Cemeteries 1 space per 500 square feet of administration building, plus 1
per 2 employees on maximum shift
BUSINESS
Home Businesses Based on the amount of business-related non-resident
visitation
Mortuaries and Funeral Homes 1 space per 75 square feet of floor area in viewing rooms
Medical and Dental Offices 1 space per 150 square feet of floor area
Professional and Other Offices 1 space per 250 square feet of floor area, excluding common
hallways, utility rooms and basements
Banks 1 space per 200 square feet of gross floor area
Stand Alone Convenience Stores 1 space per 150 square feet of gross floor area
Retail Businesses and Personal Service Businesses,
not separately listed
1 space per 200 square feet of floor area
Barber Shops and Beauty Parlors 1 space per chair, plus 1 per employee on maximum shift
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
202
Dry Cleaning Establishments and Laundromats 1 space per 2 washing machines
Business Services 1 space per 600 square feet of floor area
Bars, Taverns, and Cafes 1 space per 3 seats or 100 square feet of gross floor area,
whichever is greater
Restaurants/Cocktail Lounges 1 space per 3 seats
Restaurants, Fast Food 1 space per 35 square feet of gross floor area
Commercial Recreation and Amusement
Establishments
1 space per 200 square feet of building area
Bowling Alley 3 spaces per lane, plus 1 per employee on maximum shift
Hotels, Inns, Bed and Breakfasts 1 per guest room or suite, plus 1 per employee on maximum
shift
Animal Hospitals 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area
Indoor Theaters 1 space per 3 seats or 75 square feet of floor space in seating
area, whichever is greater
Car Washing Establishments 1 space per washing lane, plus 1 per 2 employees on
maximum shift
Gasoline Filling Stations 1 space per pumping island and each service bay, plus 1 per 2
employees on maximum shift
Automobile Repair 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area
Motor Vehicle Sales 1 per 300 square feet of showroom and sales office space
Large Scale Retail Facilities in the I-2 District 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area, plus 1 per 2
employees on maximum shift
Mid-Scale Retail Facilities in the I-2 District 1 space per 300 square feet of floor area, plus 1 per 2
employees on maximum shift
Wholesaling Establishments 1 space per 2 employees, plus 1 per 800 square feet of floor
area in excess of 6,000 square feet
Research and Development 1 per 1,000 square feet of floor area
Retail, Professional Offices, in the B-4 District 1 space per 500 square feet of floor area
Restaurants, Bars and Taverns in the B-4 District 1 space per 200 square feet of floor area
INDUSTRIAL
Warehousing and Storage, Light and Heavy
Industrial Uses, Recycling Facilities, Truck
Terminals, and Junk Yards
1 space per each employee on maximum shift, plus 1 per
each vehicle used in the conduct of the enterprise
*In the B-1 and B-2 Districts, lots 25 feet or less in width existing at the date of the adoption of this Ordinance
shall be exempt from non-residential parking requirements. However, existing off-street parking shall not be
reduced below that already provided. Lots greater than 25 feet in width shall provide parking at the rate indicated
in the table.
A. Parking for the Handicapped. In all instances where parking lots or garages are provided for
buildings, 12’ by 20’ handicapped accessible parking spaces shall be located in one area,
designated as parking for the handicapped and located so that access does not require passing
behind parked cars. Handicapped parking requirements are contained in the following table:
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
203
Total Parking Spaces Provided Required # of Accessible Spaces
1 – 50 1
51 – 200 2
201 + 1% of total spaces in lot or garage
B. Uses Not Specified. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned in the Schedule of Parking
Space Regulations, the requirements of off-street parking facilities for a use most similar,
compatible or consistent with the use that is mentioned, shall apply. In the event that there is
no similar, compatible or consistent use, off-street parking requirements shall be determined by
the Board based upon accepted industry standards.
C. Storage of Trucks or Other Vehicles. The parking space requirements as prescribed in the
Schedule of Parking Space Regulations are in addition to spaces for storage of trucks or other
vehicles used in connection with any use.
D. Employees. The number of parking spaces which are calculated based upon the number of
employees shall be based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both,
on the premises at the time of maximum use. In addition, the estimated number of employees
shall be determined appropriate by the Board based upon comparison to industry standards for
the use involved.
E. Fractions. For non-residential development, when units of measurement result in the
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall require 1 parking space.
§500-7.4 Off-Street Loading and Unloading.
A. Each lot on which a building for trade or business is hereafter erected or substantially altered or
where there is a change in use shall make provision for loading and unloading which will not
interfere with traffic on the street or streets on which the use is located.
B. Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the structure for
which it is provided. Such space may be provided on an aisle or driveway required for off-street
parking.
C. Loading berth shall be at least 12 feet in width and.50 feet in length, with a minimum 14-foot
height clearance and having direct access to the street.
D. In the B-4 District, 1 off-street loading berth for each 30,000 square feet or fraction thereof of
floor area for each building over 5,000 square feet. In all other districts, except for the B-4
District, 1 loading berth shall be provided for each 30,000 square feet or fraction thereof of floor
area for any building.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
204
§500-8 SIGN REGULATIONS
§500-8.1 Sign Permit Required.
All signs hereinafter erected, altered, enlarged, relocated or repaired, except for identical replacement
of worn-out or damaged signs, shall require a sign permit issued by the Division of Community
Improvements and shall comply with the requirements of this Section. Where applicable, sign permit
applications shall also be filed with the Division of Historic Preservation.
Applications for a sign permit shall be submitted to the Division on forms available at the Building
Department and at the Division of Planning and Zoning and shall include 3 copies of each of the
following: the identification of the size, dimensions, type, materials, letter style and size, colors, method
of construction and method of attachment to building or ground, and lighting and support details of
each sign that is proposed; each application for signs to be placed within the ground shall include a plot
plan of the property showing the sign location(s) in relation to property lines, buildings and other
structures, parking areas and other site features; and, each application for awning, canopy and/or other
signs affixed to a building shall include building elevations showing each entire facade of the building
upon which signs are proposed showing existing conditions of the facade and the awning, canopy
and/or other signs to be affixed to the facade.
§500-8.2 Exempted Signs.
No approval shall be required for the signs listed below:
A. Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, county or local
law, regulation or ordinance.
B. Any sign that is inside a building, not attached to a window or door, and that is not readable
from a distance of more than three feet beyond the lot line of the lot or parcel nearest to where
such sign is located.
C. Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message.
D. Any sign indicating the name of a building and/or date of construction and/or other incidental
information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze
or similar permanent material including historic tablets, cornerstones, memorial plaques and
emblems.
E. Traffic control signs on private property which meets Department of Transportation standards,
and which contain no commercial message of any sort.
F. Flags of the United States, State of New Jersey, the City of Paterson, foreign nations having
diplomatic relations with the United States, other flags adopted or sanctioned by an elective
legislative body of competent jurisdiction and flags flown in conjunction with the flag of the
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
205
United States. The statutory requirements associated with flags and generally accepted
standards of flag display etiquette shall be observed.
G. Pump mounted fuel price informational signs subject to the following:
1. Only one fuel price informational sign shall be permitted per fuel pump.
2. Fuel price informational signs shall be limited in size to an area of 216 square inches in
accordance with State and Federal regulations.
3. Each fuel price informational sign shall be affixed directly and firmly to a fuel pump and
shall be stationary.
4. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the advertisement of fuel prices on any
other sign meeting the requirements of this section.
H. Temporary real estate sign indicating the sale of premises is permitted, subject to the following
requirements:
1. The sign shall not exceed five square feet for a residential use. The sign shall not exceed
20 square feet or a height of six feet for a nonresidential use.
2. Only one sign shall be permitted per lot, except in the following instances:
a. Residential through lots shall be permitted two signs with one sign be placed on
each street.
b. Commercial lots with a frontage on more than one street shall be permitted two
signs.
c. Temporary real estate signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the
consummation of a lease or sale.
d. Temporary real estate signs shall not be illuminated.
§500-8.3 Signs Prohibited in all Districts.
The following signs are prohibited in all districts:
A. Signs that interfere with, disrupt, are erected upon, or block a pedestrian or vehicular circulation
pattern or sight line within or from any parking area, service drive, public driveway, alley or
other thoroughfare.
B. Sign that obstruct any window or door opening used as a means of egress, interferes with an
opening required for legal ventilation, or is attached to or obstructs any standpipe, fire escape
or fire hydrant.
C. Illuminated signs that have interior or exterior flashing light sources, that have intermittent or
variable intensity lighting, or that cause glare on pedestrian or vehicular circulation patterns
within or into residential areas.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
206
D. Signs containing exposed incandescent bulbs or neon tubing or lighting.
E. Privately owned or operated signs which simulate or resemble by color, size, shape, or location
any governmental, public utility, official, traffic, directional or warning sign or device, including
signs of such design and/or location that they interfere with, compete for attention with, or may
be mistaken for a traffic signal or sign.
F. Signs painted directly on the surface or facing material of a building, except as otherwise
permitted.
G. Handbills, posters, bumper stickers, stencil signs, or other similar objects painted, affixed or
applied in any manner directly upon any building, street furniture, retaining wall, fence, railroad,
trestle, public utility pole, natural or artificial tree or other similar objects.
H. Billboards.
I. Signs which move either by wind, motion, mechanical or electrical means, except signs with
time or temperature messages.
J. Signs that repeat a message or announcement along a public or railroad right-of-way.
K. Roof signs or other signs that are erected or projected above the cornice or parapet of a
building.
L. Signs on any building facade not fronting on a public right-of-way or driveway with direct access
to a public right-of-way.
M. Signs on bridges or other structures crossing over any public right-of-way.
N. Signs with more than two (2) display faces.
O. Signs located on an accessory structure.
P. Signs applied to the facade of a building that cover any portion of a window or cornice of that
building or placed on a balcony, gallery or any architectural feature or detail so as to disfigure or
conceal any architectural feature or detail of the building.
Q. Signs that obstruct the view of any natural geographic feature, especially when viewed by
occupants of vehicles traversing an interstate or inter-county highway.
§500-8.4 Signs Permitted in all Districts.
The following signs are permitted in all districts:
Address signs not exceeding 8" x 12" in size; and governmental and public utility signs.
§500-8.5 Signs Permitted in all Residential Districts.
Except as otherwise permitted, only the following signs shall be permitted in residential districts:
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
207
A. Address signs, on residential properties subject to the following conditions:
1. Only 1 address sign per property or building is permitted not exceeding 8" x 12" in size.
2. An address sign for a home business or for a permitted conditional use maybe permitted
to be up to 18" x 24" in size and may identify the name of the use
B. One identity sign for a "semi-public or public" conditional use permitted in the district, for a
funeral home, for a nursing home or long term care facility, or for a multi-family or apartment
development in a R-3 or R-4 District, shall be permitted provided such sign does not exceed 12
square feet in sign area whether it be affixed to the building or to the ground, and 5 feet in
height if affixed to the ground. Places of worship, schools, governmental buildings, and other
institutional uses shall also be permitted to have one bulletin board for the purpose of
announcing events related to such institution provided such bulletin board does not exceed12
square feet in sign area whether it be affixed to the building or to the ground and 5 feet in
height if affixed to the ground.
C. Neighborhood retail businesses, personal service businesses, and professional offices permitted
in residential districts, and the R/C-3 District shall be subject to the signage requirements of the
B-1 District.
§500-8.6 Signs Permitted in all Non-Residential Districts.
A. Business and identity signs shall be permitted in the City's Non-Residential Districts as specified
in the Schedule of Permitted Signage-Non Residential Districts which is contained at the end of
this Article and is hereby made part of this Ordinance. Signs in association with residential uses
shall be as permitted in residential districts.
B. Directional Signage. In addition to the signage permitted in the Schedule of Permitted Signage,
small directional signs meant to direct visitors or patrons to a particular component of the
establishment (e.g., signs directing patrons to the drive through facility of a bank or restaurant)
shall be permitted and shall not be counted towards the allowable sign area provided each such
sign is no more than 2 square feet in area and 4 feet in height. Such signage may utilize the
corporate logo and/or colors of the establishment provided the directional purpose of the
signage is achieved.
C. Temporary signs that comply with the applicable sign area, dimension, height, location and
design standards shall be permitted provided such sign is not otherwise prohibited in
accordance with §500-8.3.
D. No sign shall project more than 4 inches past the street line when its lowest point is less than 12
feet above the curb level, and no sign shall project more than 24 inches past the street line
when its lowest point is 12 feet or more above the curb level, with the exception of projecting
signs as permitted in the Schedule of Permitted Signage.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
208
E. Signs within a Historic District. In addition to the requirements concerning signs found
elsewhere in this Ordinance, the following requirements shall apply to any new sign proposed to
be erected in any historic district. Pursuant to §300-13.2, such signage shall require the review
by the Historic Preservation Commission.
1. No sign display or advertising devices shall be erected which contain a brand,
trademark, slogan, symbol or other similar device unrelated to the specific business or
service provided on the premises.
2. An application shall be submitted which includes the following information included on
drawings and samples or models where available: the number of signs including
reference to frontage requirements and coverage limitations, as per this Ordinance;
location of signs, citing any other special aspects (e.g., angle, or direction toward which
the sign will face); materials; dimensions; colors; lettering design and/or style of
lettering with reference to standard print fonts; an indication of whether the sign or
signs will be affixed to the building or be free-standing, and what method and materials
of attachment or support are proposed; surface texture; illumination; and, permanent
or temporary effect on any surface of building, pavement, walkway or landscaping.
§500-8.7 Discontinued Signs.
A. In the event a business ceases operation for a period of time in excess of 60 days, the sign
owner or lessee, or the property owner, shall immediately remove any sign identifying or
advertising said business or any product sold thereby. Upon failure of the sign owner or lessee,
or property owner to comply with this section, the City shall issue a written notice to the sign
owner or any lessee and to the property owner, which notice shall state that such sign shall be
removed within the following time period: sign face - 60 days; posts, columns and supporting
structures - one year.
B. If the sign owner or lessee, or property owner, fails to comply with such written notice to
remove, the City may cause removal of such sign, and any expenses incidental to such removal
shall be charged to owner of the property upon which the sign is located and shall constitute a
lien upon the property For the purpose of this section, the word "remove" shall mean the
removal and dismantling of the sign face, along with posts, columns or supports of any such
sign(s) and their removal from the property.
§500-8.8 Non-Conforming Signs.
A. No non-conforming sign may be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its non-conformity.
Existing non-conforming signs may continue to exist; however, when the sign is modified either
in shape, size or structure, the sign shall be altered to conform to the provisions of this section.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
209
B. An existing sign that does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance may be repaired
provided that the cost of repair does not exceed 50% of the estimated replacement cost of the
entire sign. Should any non-conforming sign be damaged by any means to an extent of more
than 50% of its estimated replacement cost at time of damage, it shall not be reconstructed
except in conformity with the provisions of this section.
§500-8.9 Removal of Unsafe Signs.
If the Division of Community Improvements shall determine that any sign is unsafe or insecure or is a
menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in such a manner as to
pose a hazard to persons or property, it shall give written notice to the permittee, and if there is no
permittee, to the owner of the premises of such violation. If the said permittee or owner fails to remove
or correct such violation within 30 days after such notice, such sign may be removed or altered by the
Division at the expense of the permittee or owner of the premises upon which it is located. The Division
may cause any sign that is an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and
without prior notice. The cost of removal or alteration by the City shall constitute a lien upon the
property. Failure to remove signs in accordance with this action will result in the City taking the
necessary steps to have the sign removed at the expense of the owner of the property.
§500-9 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
§500-9.1 PUID Planned Unit Industrial Development District.
A. Principal Uses Permitted. The uses listed below shall be permitted. In addition, mixed uses
containing one or more of the uses listed below shall be permitted in one or more buildings,
structures, lots, and/or properties. Several or more uses may occupy a structure or property at
one time, provided there is compliance with the applicable bulk standards.
1. Mid-rise office buildings that are related to uses in the development.
2. Research laboratory establishments, as per the Performance Standards section of this
Article.
3. The manufacture, fabrication, assembling and other handling of products, according to
the Performance Standards section of this Article.
4. Restaurants or cafeterias serving the uses within the development.
5. Warehousing up to 50% of the total floor area of a building or buildings in combination
on a lot or parcel and only when the warehousing is related to a manufacture,
fabrication, assembling or research laboratory use within the development.
6. Public utility company structures provided that all utility lines are underground.
7. Landing areas for helicopters.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
210
8. Government uses and structures other than housing and schools.
9. Recreational facilities for company employees.
10. Garages for transportation companies.
11. T.V. and radio stations.
B. Location. A planned industrial development shall be permitted in the following zoning districts:
1. Mapped PUID districts.
2. I-1 Districts provided that minimum overall acreage requirements are met.
3. I-2 Districts provided that minimum overall acreage requirements are met.
C. Minimum Size of Planned Industrial Development.
1. A planned industrial development shall comprise an area of no less than three (3)
contiguous acres. All such acreage shall be in common ownership at the time of
application.
2. Minimum lot size for any individual lot or single user within a planned industrial
development shall be one acre
D. Common Open Space.
1. All common open space shall be preserved for necessary light, air and recreational
amenities as expressed in the approved general development plan. The developer shall
choose one or a combination of the following three (3) methods of administering
common open space:
a. Public dedication to the City of the common open space subject to formal
acceptance by the City.
b. Establishment of an association or corporation of all individuals or corporations
owning property within the planned industrial development to insure the
maintenance of all common open space.
c. Retention of ownership, control and maintenance of all common open space by
the developer.
2. All privately owned common open space shall continue to conform to its intended use
and remain as expressed in the approved general development plan through the
inclusion in all deeds of appropriate restrictions to insure that the common open space
is permanently preserved according to the development plan. Said deed restrictions
shall run with the land and be for the benefit of- present as-well as future property
owners and the public and shall contain a prohibition against partition or subdivision, or
other alteration.
3. All common open space as well as recreational facilities shall be specifically included in
the development schedule and be constructed and/or fully improved by the developer
or owner.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
211
4. If the developer elects to administer common open space through an association or
corporation, said organization shall conform to applicable laws and standards imposed
by the Planning Board.
E. Utilities and Services. Structures within the planned industrial development shall be connected
to City water and sewer lines and all utility lines shall be placed underground. The road network
of the planned industrial development shall be of a suitable design and construction, whether
public or private, to allow for adequate access of fire fighting equipment or access to necessary
service areas such as for garbage collection and waste disposal. The City shall have the right to
require prior to the approval of the final development plan, such easements from the developer
as are necessary for access by the City to privately owned areas of the planned industrial
development to permit the City to perform necessary police, health, safety and fire service.
F. Streets, Alleys, Walkways, Parking Areas and other Facilities, Public and Private. All streets,
alleys, walkways and parking areas within the development that are or are not dedicated to
public use shall be improved in accordance with the standards established pursuant to City
ordinances. Provisions acceptable to the city shall be made for the preservation and
maintenance of all such streets, alleys, walkways and parking areas where not dedicated to
public use.
G. Landscaping. All common open space and private open space within the boundaries of the
development shall be landscaped as approved by the Planning Board and provided with a
permanent underground water system.
H. Building Coverage. Maximum building coverage shall not exceed 50% for a single lot or 50% of
the area for a multi-lot development.
I. Setback and Height Requirements. The minimum front yard setback shall be ten (10) feet from
the property line. The maximum height of a building shall not exceed twice the distance of the
front yard setback to the building, up to a maximum of fifty (50) feet in height.
J. Distance Between Buildings. There shall be a minimum distance between detached buildings as
follows:
1. The distance between buildings shall be equal to the height of the higher or taller
building.
2. Where buildings are adjacent to a railroad track or siding, the building may be erected
on the property line or close to the railroad track or siding in order to take advantage of
loading and unloading directly from the building.
K. Access. All lots and buildings shall have access to either private or public roads within the
planned industrial development. Private roads are to be allowed within the planned industrial
development if they meet the minimum City construction standards and are of a design that
meets the approval of the Department of Public Works. Private roads shall not be permitted
along the perimeter of the planned industrial development unless approved by the Planning
Board and Department of Public Works. All roads must be designated to tie in effectively with
the City's plans. The City shall be allowed access on private roads and privately owned common
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
212
open space to insure the police and fire protection of the area to meet emergency needs, and to
conduct City services.
L. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
1. Parking within the development shall be one space for every two employees or one
space for every 600 square feet of floor area, whichever provides the greater number of
parking spaces.
2. Parking shall not be permitted in the front yard setback directly in front of the building.
However, parking may be permitted in the front yard setback not directly in front of the
building and only when there is screening at least four (4) feet in height
3. No parking will be permitted in the development other than areas designed specifically
for same.
4. The parking areas, loading berths, driveways, and service entrances shall be suitably
designed, engineered and landscaped. Lighting shall be provided so as not to cause glare
onto adjacent properties or structures
5. Parking, driveway and loading areas as well as curb cuts shall be guided by the minimum
standards established in the applicable City ordinances.
M. Buffer Areas. Compatible and complimentary buffer screening shall be provided between
parking areas and the streets and between conflicting uses located on the periphery of the
development and surrounding developments or zoning districts. Screening shall be developed to
a height that would eliminate view of all outside stored materials such as pallets, oil drums,
parking cartons, rubbish, trash and other materials that would cause unsightly conditions.
N. Signage. Subject to the provisions of §500-8.
1. Only two signs per structure shall be permitted, one of which may be freestanding.
2. The signs may be mounted directly on the facade of the building and shall not project
more than eighteen inches from the building facade nor shall it project above the roof
line.
3. Signs painted directly on the facade of the building shall not be permitted.
4. Exposed neon tubing, flashing or varying intensity signs shall not be permitted.
5. One freestanding double-faced sign will be permitted provided:
a. The sign is strategically located so as not to interfere with the sight distance at
intersections or driveways and is not hazardous to traffic.
b. The sign shall not project across any walkway, roadway or property line.
O. Antennas and Satellite Earth Stations. As permitted under Sections 500-3.6.D.6 and 500-5.10
P. Procedure for Securing Approval of Planned Unit Industrial Development. Applications and
exhibits shall be required when applying for approval of a planned industrial development in
accordance with site plan and land subdivision ordinances of the City of Paterson.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
213
Q. The Planning Board of the City of Paterson shall find the following facts and conclusions, as a
basis for approval, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45:
a. That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to standards pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65.
b. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open
space are reliable, and the amount, location and purpose of the common open
space are adequate.
c. That provision through the physical design of the proposed development for
public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic and the amenities
of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate.
d. That the proposed development will not have an unreasonable adverse impact
upon the area in which it is proposed to be established.
e. If the development contemplates construction over a period of years, the terms
and conditions intended to protect the interests of the public and the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total completion of
development are adequate.
§500-10 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
§500-10.1 Intent and Applicability.
All uses shall be so operated as to comply with the performance standards described in this section. In
addition to the performance standards hereinafter specified, all uses shall be so constructed,
maintained, and operated as not to be injurious to the use and occupation of the adjacent premises by
reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration by radiation, fire and explosive hazards, glare or
toxicity.
A. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a use or structure subject to performance
standards herein and as a condition of approval and the continuance of any use, occupancy of
any structure and operation of any process or equipment, the owner and/or applicant shall file a
sworn affidavit that the use will be operated in accordance with same. Said affidavit shall be
accompanied with supporting documentation by qualified professionals that the proposed use is
in compliance with the performance standards. Permits and certificates required by other
government agencies shall be submitted to the Board as proof of compliance with applicable
codes. Continued compliance with the performance standards stated herein shall be a
requirement for the continued occupancy of any structure or the operation of any process or
equipment
B. The regulations contained in this section shall not apply to one- and two-family dwellings, but
shall apply to any home businesses contained therein.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
214
§500-10.2 Noise.
In all districts, the sound pressure level resulting from any activity shall not exceed, at any point on or
beyond any lot line, the maximum permitted sound level, according to standards as set forth in Chapter
337 of the Code of the City of Paterson.
A. The sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and associated octave band filter
manufactured in compliance with standards prescribed by the United States of America
Standards Institute.
B. Sounds produced by the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities shall not
be included in determining the maximum permitted sound levels.
§500-10.3 Vibration.
No use shall be operated so as to produce ground vibration, noticeable without instruments, at the lot
line of the premises on which the use is located. Except that quarrying operations involving blasting are
specifically exempted from the foregoing restrictions, but shall be controlled by the "Rules and
Regulations Governing Quarry Blasting and Related Operations" as published and revised by the
Department of Labor and Industry of the State of New Jersey.
§500-10.4 Air Pollution.
A. General. No substance shall be emitted into the atmosphere in quantities that are injurious to
human, plant or animal life or to property or which interfere unreasonably with the comfortable
enjoyment of life and property anywhere in the City. All provisions of Title 7, Chapter 27 of the
New Jersey Administrative Code, (N.J.A.C.), or the regulations contained in this section,
whichever shall be more stringent, shall apply.
B. Smoke. In any district, no smoke, the shade of which is darker than No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, shall be emitted into the open air from any fuel-burning equipment, pursuant to
Chapter 105 of the Code of the City of Paterson. However, smoke emitted during the cleaning of
a fire box or the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is not darker than No.
2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, may be permitted for a period or periods aggregating no
more than three (3) minutes in any thirty (30) consecutive minutes. Smoke emissions from the
combustion of fuel and mobile sources and from stationary internal combustion engines shall
not exceed the limits set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:27.
C. Dust or Solid Particles. In any district, no discharge of solid particles through a stack, duct or vent
shall be permitted that is greater than the allowable emission in pounds per hour established by
Chapters 7 and 8 of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
215
D. Open Burning. No open burning shall be permitted in any district as established pursuant to
Chapter 105 of the Code of the City of Paterson, or any other pertinent air pollution laws.
E. Odors.
1. In districts other than the I-2 District, the emission of odorous matter in such quantities
as to be detectable at any point along lot lines or to produce a public nuisance or hazard
beyond lot lines is prohibited.
2. In the I-2 District, the emission of odorous matter in such quantities as to produce a
public nuisance or hazard at or beyond lot lines is prohibited.
§500-10.5 Waste.
A. Liquid Waste. No liquid waste shall be discharged into any watercourse in the City without all
necessary permits from the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP). No
liquid waste shall be discharged into the public sewage collection and disposal system unless the
appropriate City official shall have first investigated the character and volume of such wastes
and shall have certified that the City will accept the discharge of such waste material into the
system. The applicant shall comply with any requirements of said officials, including the
pretreating of such wastes, the installation of processing methods, separation or screening of
wastes, control of pH and other methods of improving such wastes prior to discharge, as a
condition of approval of such facilities.
B. Solid Waste. Each property owner shall be responsible for:
1. Adequate and regular collection and removal of all refuse, except where the City
assumes such responsibility.
2. Compliance with all applicable provisions of the NJDEP.
3. Compliance with all provisions of Title 7, Chapter 26, of the N.J.A.C., where applicable.
4. No accumulation on the property of any junk or other objectionable materials except in
designated trash receptacles.
5. There shall be no accumulation of solid wastes conducive to the breeding of rodents or
insects.
§500-10.6 Heat Hazards.
In any zoning district, any use or process shall not produce a temperature rise in excess of one (1)
degree Fahrenheit in the ground, or discharge water into any natural watercourse that will produce a
temperature increase of greater than three (3) degrees Fahrenheit in that watercourse within ten (10)
feet of the discharge point.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
216
§500-10.7 Fire and Explosion Hazards.
Subject to compliance by the applicant and/or owner of the property with all federal, state, county and
municipal laws, statutes, ordinances, and regulations, processes that involve the possibility of fire or
explosive hazards are regulated as follows:
A. In all manufacturing districts, slow and moderately burning materials or products may be stored,
manufactured or utilized in the manufacturing processes or other production.
B. Free to intense burning materials may be stored within buildings or other structures that are
completely enclosed in MU and I-1 districts and may be stored, manufactured or utilized in I-2
districts.
C. No flammable or explosive vapors or gases may be stored, manufactured or utilized in MU, I-1
or I-2 districts or within any other zoning district in the City.
D. Materials that decompose by detonation shall not be manufactured in any district and may be
utilized only when authorized by the approving agency.
§500-10.8 Humidity and Glare.
An activity producing excessive humidity in the form of steam or producing intense glare, (defined as
brightness of sufficient intensity to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and
visibility) shall be entirely enclosed in such manner so as not to be perceptible at or beyond the lot line
of the premises.
§500-11 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§500-11.1 Statutory Authorization
The legislature of the State of New Jersey in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et- seq. has delegated the responsibility to
local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Municipal Council of the City of Paterson, New Jersey
does ordain as follows:
§500-11.2 Findings of Facts.
A. The flood hazard areas of Paterson are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life
and damage to property, health and safety hazards, disruption to commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
217
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood
hazards that increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage
uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
§500-11.3 Statement of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by
provisions designed:
A. To protect human life and health.
B. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
C. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public.
D. To minimize prolonged business interruptions.
E. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard.
F. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the secondary use and development of areas
of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas.
G. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard.
H. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard and who contribute to such
conditions assume responsibility for their actions.
§500-11.4 Method of Reducing Flood Losses.
In order to accomplish its purpose, this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance includes methods and
provisions for:
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water
or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities.
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction.
C. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective
barriers that help accommodate or channel floodwaters.
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development that may increase flood damage.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
218
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers that may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§500-11.5 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Flood Damage Prevention ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common usage and to give this Flood
Damage Prevention ordinance its most reasonable application.
A. APPEAL : Means a request for a review of the Construction Official's interpretation of any
provisions of this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance or a request for a variance.
B. AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING : Means a designated AO or VO Zone on the flood insurance rate
map (firm). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does
not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be
evident.
C. AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD : Means the land in the flood plain within a community
subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This area is shown as
the "Flood way Fringe" District on the Zoning Map and is subject to the requirements of the
"Flood way Fringe District in this Section.
D. BASE FLOOD : Means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
E. BASEMENT : Means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all
sides.
F. BREAKAWAY WALL : Means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is
intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces
without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation
system.
G. DEVELOPMENT : Means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading,
paving, excavation or drilling operations within the areas of special flood hazard.
H. ELEVATED BUILDING : Means a non-basement building (1) built in the case of a building in an
area of special flood hazard to have the top of the elevated floor or in the case of a building in a
coastal high hazard area to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and piers), or
shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (2) adequately anchored so as not to impair the
structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an
area of special building hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of
fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters. In areas of coastal high hazard "elevated building" also includes a
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
219
building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is
enclosed by means of breakaway walls.
I. FLOOD OR FLOODING : Means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of norm dry land areas from: (1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or (2) the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
J. FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP OR FIRM : Means the official map on which the Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community.
K. FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY : Means the official report provided in which the Federal Insurance
Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary flood way map and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
L. LOWEST FLOOR : Means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access
or storage in an area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided
that such. enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation other applicable nonelevation
design requirements.
M. MANUFACTURED HOME : Means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, the term
"manufactured home", also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles
placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term
"manufactured home" does not include park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles.
N. MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION : Means a parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
O. NEW CONSTRUCTION : Means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or
after the effective date of this Flood Damage Prevention ordinance.
P. START OF CONSTRUCTION : (For other than new construction or substantial improvements
under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348) includes substantial improvement and
means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site
such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home an a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
220
Q. STRUCTURE : Means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid
storage tank, that is principally above ground.
R. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT : Means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the assessed market value of the
structure either: (1) before the improvement or repair is started; or (2) if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition
"substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimension of the structure. The term does not, however, include either: (1) any
project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) any
alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state or municipal
Register of historic places.
S. VARIANCE : Means a grant of relief from the requirement of this Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
ordinance.
§500-11.6 General Provisions.
A. Lands to which this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance Applies. This Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance shall apply to all lots including portions of parcels within areas of special flood
hazards within the jurisdiction of the City of Paterson.
B. Basis for Establishing the Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal
Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance
Study for the City of Paterson, Passaic County, New Jersey" dated May 1976, with accompanying
flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary flood way maps is hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. The flood insurance study
is on file at the Engineering Division and the Planning and Zoning Division, Municipal Complex,
111 Broadway. The Zoning Map of the City of Paterson, as revised to include the flood hazard
area, is hereby incorporated as part of this article as if fully set forth herein.
C. Penalties for Noncompliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted, altered without full compliance with the terms of this Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance Failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than
$1,000 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for each violation, and in addition shall
pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City
of Paterson from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
221
D. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance is not intended
to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However,
where this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance or other ordinance, easement, covenant, or
deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall
prevail.
E. Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance,
all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements.
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
F. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance does not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted
with such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Paterson, any officer of employee
thereof or the federal insurance administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
§500-11.7 Procedures.
A. Establishment of Development Permit.
1. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins
within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 500-11.6.B. Application for
a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Construction Official and
may include, but not be limited to: plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, and drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. A copy of
the development permit shall accompany any application submitted to the Planning
Board and Board of Adjustment, as applicable. Specifically, the following information is
required:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement)
of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed;
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
222
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing
methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood-proofing
criteria in Section 500-11.8.E.2; and,
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated
as a result of proposed development;
e. Any additional information that may be required by the City of Paterson. It shall
be the responsibility of the developer to obtain all necessary reviews permits
from the N.J. Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Water
Resources. The local approving agency shall require the developer to obtain
such permits that shall accompany all local applications submitted to the
approving agency involving lands within the flood hazard area.
B. Designation of the Construction Official. The Construction Official is hereby appointed to
administer and implement this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance by granting or denying
development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
C. Duties and Responsibilities of the Construction Official. Duties of the Construction Official shall
include, but not be limited to:
1. Permit Review.
a. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of
this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance have been satisfied.
b. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have
been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from
which prior approval is required.
c. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development is
located in the flood way, and assure that the encroachment provisions of
Section 500-11.8.17.1 are met.
2. Use of Other Base Flood and Flood way Data. When base flood elevation and flood way
data have not been provided in accordance with Section 500-11.6.13, the Construction
Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and flood
way data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Section
500-11.8.
3. Information to be Obtained and Maintained.
a. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved
structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement.
b. For all new substantially improved flood-proofed structures: verify and record
the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level); and maintain the floodproofing
certifications required in Section 500-11.7.A.1.c.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
223
c. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
4. Alteration of Watercourses.
a. Notify adjacent communities and the N.J. Department of Environmental
Protection prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
b. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of
said watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished.
D. Variance Procedure.
1. The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by the City of Paterson shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this Section.
2. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is
an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Construction
Official in the enforcement or administration of this Section.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer,
may appeal such decision to the City Council of the City of Paterson, according to law
4. In passing on such applications, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this Section and
shall determine the specific flood damage potential for the site and shall evaluate the
suitability of the proposed use in relation to that flood damage potential and the
following:
a. The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of
others;
b. The danger to life and property due to flooding erosion damage;
c. The degree to which the natural, scenic, and aesthetic values at the proposed
activity site could be retained.
d. The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and
the effect of such damage;
e. The proposed water supply and sanitation systems.
f. The importance of the service provided by the proposed facility to the
community and the degree to which the proposed use would serve the general
public health, safety and welfare.
g. The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
h. The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject
to flooding or erosion damage;
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
224
i. The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
j. The relationship of the proposed use to the Master Plan and Flood Plan
Management Program of that area;
k. The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles.
l. The degree to which archeological or historical sites and structures and
endangered or rare species of animals and plants would be degraded or
destroyed;
m. The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of
the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the
site; and
n. The degree to which people, animals, and property would be evacuated in the
expected time available after flood warning.
o. Whether the proposed use would provide adequate facilities for the proper
handling of litter, trash, refuse, and sanitary and industrial wastes.
p. The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions,
including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of Section 500-11.7.D.4 and the purposes of this
Section, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of
such variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance.
6. The Construction Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including
technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration
upon request.
7. Conditions for Variance.
a. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot on one-half acre or less in size contiguous
to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing items (a-k) in Section 500-11.7.D.4 have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
b. Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of
structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State
inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the
remainder of this section.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
225
c. Variances shall not be issued within any designated flood way if any increases in
flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
d. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the
minimum necessary, consideration the flood hazard, to afford relief.
e. Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) a showing of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant; and (c) a determination that the granting of the
variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public
safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in Section 500-11.7.D.4, or conflict with
existing local laws or Ordinances.
f. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that
the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below
the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
§500-11.8 Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
A. Anchoring
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse, or late movement of the structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over
the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is an addition to applicable
state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems
into floodwaters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or
contamination from them during flooding; and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment and other
service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering
or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
226
C. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to
flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other
proposed development which contain at least 50 lots or 5 acres (whichever is less)
D. Enclosure Openings. For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed
areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: A
minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every
square toot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings
shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers
or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
E. Specific Standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in Section 500-11.6.13 or in Section 500-11.7.C.2, the following
standards are required:
1. Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or
above base flood elevation.
2. Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or
a. Be flood-proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design
and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of
practice for meeting the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 500-
11.7.A.1.c.
3. Manufactured Homes.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
227
a. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with Section 500-
11.8.A.2.
b. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved within an area
of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that
the top of the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation.
F. Floodways. Located within area of special flood hazard established in Section 500-11.6.B are
areas designated as floodways. Since the flood way is an extremely hazardous area due to the
velocity of floodwaters that carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the
following provisions shall apply:
1. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development are prohibited unless a technical --valuation demonstrates that
encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of
the base flood discharge;
2. If Section 500-11.8.F.1 is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 500-11.8.
3. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data has been provided
and no flood way has been designated, the cumulative effect of any proposed
development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, shall
not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood way more than two-tenths
(0.2) of a foot at any point.
§500-11.9 Flood Hazard Area.
A. Designation of Districts. The flood hazard area is hereby divided into two districts: flood way
district and flood way fringe district. The district designation corresponds to the degree of flood
damage potential at locations along the river or stream. Within these districts, all uses not
allowed by right or as conditional uses shall be prohibited.
B. Flood way District.
1. Permitted Uses in Flood way Regulations. Permitted uses in the flood way shall have an
inherent low flood damage potential, and shall not be prohibited by other regulations
and:
a. Shall not require the erection of new structures, or substantial temporary or
permanent improvements.
b. Shall not require fill borrowed from outside the immediate flood way.
c. Shall not require channel modification or relocation.
d. Shall not obstruct flood flows.
e. Shall not increase local run-off and/or erosion.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
228
f. Are undertaken with full on-site flood damage risk accepted by the owner.
g. Shall not affect the water carrying or storage capacity or any channel, flood way
or flood plain.
h. Shall not increase off-site flood damage potential.
i. Shall not cause degradation of water quality and/or the natural environment.
2. List of Permitted Uses. Permitted uses in the flood way shall include the following:
a. Private and public recreation uses, such as tennis courts, basketball courts,
baseball fields, other playing fields, picnic grounds, archery ranges, driving
ranges, boat launching ramps, parks, fishing areas, hiking trails, biking trails, and
swimming areas.
b. Accessory industrial and commercial uses such as loading areas and parking
areas.
c. Accessory residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas.
3. Conditional Uses in Flood way. A conditional use permit required for all land uses in the
flood way which involve:
a. Structures, temporary or permanent, which permit nonresidential occupancy by
human beings or animals.
b. Fill.
c. Storage of materials or equipment.
d. Channel modifications or relocation.
e. Excavation of sand, gravel, and other materials.
f. All uses allowed in Section 500-11.9.13.2 when they involve any of the factors
listed in a-e of this section.
g. Off-street parking facilities serving the general public.
h. Utilities and transportation facilities such as transmission lines, railroads,
streets, highways, bridges, pipelines, and transmission lines.
4. Prohibited Uses in Flood way. The following uses are prohibited in the flood way, except
as permitted as a lawful preexisting use as provided for in this Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance:
a. Placing, depositing, or dumping any solid waste, untreated sewage or industrial
waste.
b. The erection of residential structures for occupancy at any time by human
beings or structures housing livestock, and the erection of kennels for the
boarding of domestic pets.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
229
c. The discharge, except as authorized under other provisions of the State law,
processing, storage or disposal of pesticides, domestic or industrial wastes,
radioactive materials, petroleum products or other hazardous materials.
d. The construction of individual septic systems for residential, commercial or
industrial buildings.
e. Uses that do not require storage or material or equipment which increase offsite
flood damage potential.
C. Flood way-Fringe District
1. Permitted Uses in Flood way Fringe. All uses allowed in the flood way under Section
500- 11.9.B.2 are permitted in the flood way fringe provided that they are not
prohibited by other zoning regulations and:
a. Have an inherent flow flood damage potential.
b. Do not obstruct flows in the flood way.
c. Do not require modification or relocation of the channel. If this provision is at
any time waived by any federal, state or local action and channel modification
or relocation is permitted, notification of such proposal must be sent to
adjoining communities as well as the State Department of Environmental
Protection. Under all circumstances the flood carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of the watercourse is maintained.
d. Do not increase significantly the local rate of run-off and/or erosion and
sedimentation.
e. Are undertaken with full on-site flood damage risks accepted by the owner or
his assigns.
2. Conditional Uses in Flood way Fringe. A conditional use permit is required for uses in the
flood way fringe that involves one or more of the following:
a. Structures (temporary and permanent).
b. Fill.
c. Excavation.
d. Channel modification or relocation.
3. List of Conditional Uses. Uses that are not prohibited under Section 500-11.9.C.5 and
that do not meet the regulations of Section 500-11.9.C.2 are conditional uses, such as:
a. Off-street parking facilities serving the general public.
b. Retaining walls, dams, bulkheads and dikes.
c. Utilities and transportation facilities such as railroads, streets, highways,
bridges, pipelines, and transmission lines.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
230
d. Residences (and other structures) except mobile homes, constructed so that the
basement floor, or first floor if there is no basement, is at or above the flood
protection elevation. (The finished fill elevation shall be at least equal to the
flood hazard profile elevation and shall extend at such elevation at least fifteen
(15) feet beyond the limits of any structure or building erected thereon).
Residential structures shall only be elevated and shall not be flood-proofed.
e. Other uses that are elevated, flood-proofed or otherwise protected and,
therefore, are in compliance with the stated purposes and objectives of the
flood hazard area.
4. Standards for Conditional Uses.
a. Fill.
i. Any fill proposed to be deposited in the flood way fringe must be shown
to have a beneficial purpose and the amount thereof must not exceed
that necessary to achieve the intended purpose, as demonstrated by a
plan submitted by the owner showing the uses to which the filled land
will be put and the final dimensions of the proposed fill or other
materials
ii. Such fill or other materials shall be protected against erosion with riprap
vegetative cover or bulkheading.
b. Structure.
i. Residential structures shall not be flood-proofed.
ii. Structures shall have a flow flood damage potential.
iii. Any permitted structures shall be constructed or placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed longitudinal axis
parallel to the direction of flood flow, and when practicable, structures
shall be placed, approximately on the same flood flow-lines as an
adjoining structure
iv. Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation that may result
in damage to other structures, restriction of bridge, openings and other
narrow sections of the stream or river.
c. Utilities. Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
constructed at or above the flood protection elevation for the particular area or
flood-proofed.
d. Storage (and Processing) of Materials. Any permitted storage of materials or
equipment shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation or be readily removable
from the area within the time of flood warning.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
231
5. Prohibited Uses in Flood way Fringe. No person shall engage in or cause other persons
to engage in prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited, except as permitted as a
lawful preexisting use as provided in this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance:
a. Placing, depositing, or dumping any solid waste.
b. The dumping, disposal, or discharge except as authorized under other provisions
of state law, pesticides, domestic and industrial wastes, radioactive materials,
petroleum products, or other hazardous materials.
c. The water table is within four (4) feet of the surface at any time of the year.
d. Soil type is a "moderate" to "high" shrink-swell potential, especially if
development of road or building is involved.
e. Exposed surface area is to remain unprotected and unstabilized for six (6)
months or longer.
f. The site is within a flood hazard area.
g. No use that will adversely affect the capacity of channels or floodways of any
tributary to the main stream, drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or
system shall be permitted.
City of Paterson, Zoning Ordinance Chapter 500 Zoning
232
APPENDICES


Appendix
Chapter A495
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Telephone franchise — See Ch. A513.
§ A495-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated,189 and the following additional terms shall have
the following meanings:
ACT or CABLE TELEVISION ACT — That statute of the State of New Jersey
relating to cable television, known as the "Cable Television Act," N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Cablevision's application for renewal of municipal
consent, which application is on file in the City Clerk's office and is
incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof, except as
modified, changed, limited or altered by this ordinance.
BOARD — The Board of Public Utilities of the State of New Jersey or its
successor agency.
CITY — The City of Paterson in the County of Passaic and the State of New
Jersey.
COMPANY — Cablevision of Paterson, LLC ("Cablevision"), the grantee of
rights under this ordinance.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — That federal statute relating to cable communications
commonly known as the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984," 47
U.S.C. § 521 et seq. and the Telecommunications Act of 1996, or as those
statutes may be amended.
189. Editor's Note: The "terms defined above" refers to the definitions of "City" and "company"
in the preamble to this ordinance. Said terms are also defined below.
§ 474-5 PATERSON CODE § A495-1
A495:1026
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Those federal regulations relating to cable
television services, 47 CFR § 76.1 et seq. (and, to the extent applicable, any
other federal rules and regulations relating to cable television, including but
not limited to, those described in 47 CFR § 76.3), or as such regulations may
be amended.
STATE — The State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Those regulations of the State of New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television, N.J.A.C. 14:17-1.1 et
seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be amended.
§ A495-2. Statement of findings.
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of
the Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and
the municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications
of Cablevision to receive this consent, the City hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ A495-3. Grant of authority.
The City hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to place in,
upon, along, across, above, over and under its highways, streets, alleys,
sidewalks, public ways and public places in the municipality poles, wires,
cables and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the City
of a cable television system, and for the provision of any communication
service over such system as may be authorized by federal or state
regulatory agencies. Operation and construction, pursuant to said consent,
is conditioned upon prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ A495-4. Duration of franchise.
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
15 years from the date of issuance of a certificate of approval by the Board.
§ A495-5. Expiration and subsequent renewal.
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a municipal consent and certificate of approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A 48:5A-16, and applicable state and federal rules
and regulations. The company shall also petition the Board for approval
authorizing continued operation during the period following expiration of
the consent granted herein, and until such a time that a decision is made by
the City and the Board relative to the renewal of said consent.
§ A495-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A495-6
A495:1027
§ A495-6. Franchise territory.
The consent granted under this ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the City and any property hereafter annexed.
§ A495-7. Service area.
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence within the portion of the
franchise territory, as described in the application for municipal consent, at
tariffed rates for standard and nonstandard installation. Cablevision shall
extend service to businesses in accordance with the line extension policy
attached to the application for municipal consent.
§ A495-8. Franchise fee.
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act,
Cablevision shall pay to the City, as an annual franchise fee, a sum equal
to 2% of the actual gross revenues received from all recurring charges in
the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable television
reception services in the City. In the event applicable law hereinafter
permits a larger franchise fee to be collected, but does not fix the amount
thereof, the City and Cablevision shall negotiate in good faith with respect
to the amount thereof.
§ A495-9. Free service.
A. Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide free of charge one
standard installation and monthly cable television reception service to
all state or locally accredited public and private elementary and
secondary schools and all municipal public libraries, as well as
municipal buildings located within the City that are used for municipal
governmental purposes.
B. The company shall, upon written request, provide one standard
installation, one cable modem and monthly Internet access to all state
or locally accredited public and private elementary and secondary
schools and the municipal public libraries. Faith school or municipal
library shall be permitted, at its own cost, to network up to 25 personal
computer terminals to the cable modem provided by Cablevision. Upon
request, the company shall provide each public elementary and
secondary school and the municipal public libraries with a basic router
at no additional charge.
C. The company shall provide, free of charge, one standard installation,
one cable modem and monthly Internet access to one municipal
location upon written request by the City. The City shall be permitted to
network up to three additional personal computer terminals in the
designated building (four computers in total) to the cable modem
provided by Cablevision. At the City's request, Cablevision shall pay the
§ A495-6 PATERSON CODE § A495-9
A495:1028
§ A495-10. Construction/system requirements.
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable state and federal law. The company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its plant and facilities in the City:
§ A495-11. Technical and customer service standards.
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable federal and state laws,
rules and regulations.
§ A495-12. Local office or agent.
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
costs to network the four computer terminals to the cable modem
provided by the company.
A. In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the company
shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
B. If at any time during the period of this consent the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
company, upon reasonable notice by the City, shall remove or relocate
its equipment, at its own expense.
C. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the City, the company shall temporarily move or remove appropriate
parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection of buildings
or for the performance of other work. The expense of any such
temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
company shall be given not less than 14 days' prior written notice in
order to arrange for the changes required.
D. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the City so as to prevent
the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires,
cables, conduits and fixtures of the company. Such trimming shall be
only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for the
company's facilities.
E. In any areas in the City where all utility services, including telephone
and power, are required to be underground, Cablevision shall also place
its cable underground.
§ A495-9 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A495-12
A495:1029
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. With the exception of holidays,
said office shall be open daily during normal business hours, and in no event
less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and shall include
some night and/or weekend hours.
§ A495-13. Designation of complaint officer.
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the City pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All complaints
shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5.
§ A495-14. Liability insurance.
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect, at its sole cost
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance
naming the City as an additional insured and insuring against loss by any
such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum amounts of
$1,000,000 for property damage or bodily injury or death to one person and
$2,000,000 for property damage or bodily injury or death resulting from any
one accident or occurrence stemming from or arising out of the company's
exercise of its rights hereunder. In addition, the company will provide a
five-million-dollar umbrella liability policy over and above the above stated
coverage amounts. Cablevision shall provide to the City Clerk copies of
the certificates of insurance setting forth the coverage amounts specified
herein.
§ A495-15. Paterson traffic system.
A. Cablevision shall continue to host the City of Paterson's traffic system
on its broadband network and shall continually maintain the network
consistent with those technical standards established for the cable
television industry under applicable law so as to be capable of
supporting the City's traffic system. The City of Paterson shall be
responsible for the acquisition, maintenance and operation of all
component parts and ancillary software and equipment needed to
operate the traffic system and for ensuring that its traffic system,
inclusive of all of its component parts, not interfere with the use,
operation or maintenance of the broadband network, including but not
limited to the quality of any signals carried thereon. Cablevision shall
provide the City with written notice of any interference problems
caused by the traffic system or any of its components, and the City shall
take prompt action to rectify the problem.
B. In the event that the City fails to cure any interference by the traffic
system or any of its component parts within 20 days of the City's receipt
of written notice by Cablevision, Cablevision shall have the right, in its
sole discretion, in addition to any other remedies which Cablevision
may possess under law to elect to shut down that portion of the traffic
system or part causing the interference or to correct, repair or replace
the interfering portion of the traffic system or component part at the
§ A495-12 PATERSON CODE § A495-15
A495:1030
§ A495-16. Indemnification from traffic control system operation.
The City shall indemnify and save harmless Cablevision and each of its
respective officers, directors, employees, representatives and agents
against any and all claims, actions and suits at law or in equity for all losses,
damages, liabilities, costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees,
arising from, directly or indirectly, the City's management, operation,
maintenance and control of the traffic control system, regardless of whether
the City's management, operation, maintenance and control thereof is
exercised directly by the City, its employees, agents or representatives or
indirectly by some other entity operating the City's traffic control system on
the City's behalf
§ A495-17. Performance bond.
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this agreement, a bond to the municipality in the amount
of $50,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of its
obligations as provided in this franchise.
§ A495-18. Rates.
sole cost and expense of the City of Paterson. Cablevision shall be
permitted to recoup any costs or expenses which it may incur in
correcting, repairing or replacing any portion of the traffic system
or component part hereunder by deducting any such sums from any
franchise fees or other payments due the City from Cablevision.
A. The rates of the company for cable television services shall be subject
to regulation to the extent permitted by federal and state law.
B. Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of
l0% off the monthly rate of the broadcast basic level of cable television
reception service to any person 62 years of age or older who subscribes
to the company's cable television service, subject to the following:
(1) Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who
do not share the subscription with more than one person in the
same household who is less than 62 years of age; and,
(2) In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers seeking
eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and
Disabled program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:4D-21; and,
(3) The senior discount herein relates only to the broadcast basic level
of cable television service and shall not apply to any additional
service, feature or equipment offered by the company, including
any premium channel services and pay-per-view services; and,
§ A495-15 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A495-18
A495:1031
§ A495-19. Emergency uses.
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the City pursuant to state and federal requirements. The
company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
City or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason the
municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system as
contemplated herein. The City shall utilize the state-approved procedures
for such emergency uses.
§ A495-20. Equitable terms.
§ A495-21. Removal of facilities.
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this ordinance, Cablevision, at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated entities
or assignees should, within six months after such expiration, termination
or revocation, obtain certification from the FCC to operate an open video
(4) Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television service
beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or per
channel a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount.
A. In the event that another multi-channel video program provider's
service within the City creates a significant competitive disadvantage to
Cablevision, the company shall have the right to request from the City
lawful amendments to its franchise that relieve it of burdens which
create the unfair competitive situation. Should the company seek such
amendments to its franchise, the parties agree to negotiate in good
faith appropriate changes to the franchise in order to relieve the
company of such competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an
agreement on such terms, the City agrees to support the company's
petition to the Board for modification of the consent in accordance with
N.J.S.A 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
B. If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate
amendments to the franchise, the City acknowledges that the company
shall have the right to petition the Board directly for such amendments
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7; provided,
however, the City shall be under no obligation to support Cablevision's
request for such relief from the Board.
C. Cablevision represents and acknowledges that, as of the date of its
acceptance of this municipal consent, competition within the City has
not yet risen to the level of creating a significant competitive
disadvantage sufficient to enable the company to seek relief under this
section.
§ A495-18 PATERSON CODE § A495-21
A495:1032
system or any other federal or state certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ A495-22. Public, educational and governmental access.
A. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access as described in the
application for municipal consent.
B. The company shall provide one public access channel, one educational
access channel and one government access channel on its cable system,
which channels shall be used exclusively for noncommercial
programming. The government access channel and educational access
channel shall be under the exclusive control of the City. Cablevision
shall administer the public access channel and may establish
reasonable rules governing access to and use of the public access
studio.
C. The City agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the PEG
access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access programming,
during times when the City is not utilizing the channel for purposes of
providing PEG access programming. In the event that the company uses
said PEG access channel for the presentation of such other
programming, the PEG programming shall remain the priority use, and
the company's rights with respect to using the channel for non-PEG
programming shall be subordinate to the City's provision of PEG access
programming on such channel.
D. Cablevision shall continue to provide throughout the duration of this
ordinance one access return feed at each of the following locations to
provide for upstream transmission of noncommercial programming
from these facilities to the company's customers using the cable
system:
(1) City Hall located at 155 Market Street, Paterson, New Jersey;
(2) John F. Kennedy High School located at 61-127 Preakness Avenue,
Paterson, New Jersey; and
(3) Public access studio located at 100 Hamilton Plaza, Paterson, New
Jersey or such future site for public access as designated by the
City.
E. In consideration for the rights granted in this ordinance and upon
written request of the City, Cablevision will provide a one-time grant of
$150,000 to assist the City in the purchase of new equipment for the
production and promotion of noncommercial public access
programming on the cable system from the public access studio located
within the City. Cablevision shall not be responsible for making this
payment until the City has decided upon and designated a new public
access studio location within the City, secured its use and readied the
building for occupancy. Upon receipt of a written request from the City
§ A495-21 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A495-22
A495:1033
§ A495-23. Transfer.
No transfer of this franchise may be exercised without the consent of
the Board. With Board consent, the rights granted to Cablevision by this
and sufficient proof that the conditions for payment have been met,
Cablevision will provide the production equipment grant within 90
days.
F. Cablevision shall provide training at its public access studio in the
production of programming for the City, its public schools and
residents. These training sessions shall be conducted upon the
reasonable request of the City, its public schools and residents;
provided, however, each training session shall take place at the public
access studio and require a minimum of five participants. The company
shall not be obligated to provide more than 20 hours of training per
month.
G. Upon request, Cablevision will cablecast six Paterson specific
community events per year for the benefit of the company's cable
customers in the City. Cablevision's total commitment for all six events
shall be a minimum of 12 cablecast hours in each calendar year. The
cablecasts will be produced by Cablevision and aired on its cable
system. The City shall have the right to choose which events
Cablevision covers, provided it shall give the company, on or before
December 15 of each year, a list of those events it would like covered for
the following calendar year.
H. Within 60 days following the effective date of the franchise, Cablevision
shall provide a one-time grant to the City of $100,000. The City agrees
that the grant money will be used exclusively for the purpose of funding
City personnel or a third party entity to produce and air City Council
meetings on Cablevision's government access channel. Upon making
this payment to the City, Cablevision will no longer be responsible for
such productions and will turn over these duties exclusively to the
City's control.
I. Cablevision shall pay the City of Paterson $340,000 in annual
compensation for the duration of this franchise for the continued use of
the City's real property at 76-80 North Barclay Street and to help fund
the acquisition, construction, equipping and operation of a new public
access studio/technology center for use by the residents of the City at
75-81 Ellison Street or other designated location during the term of this
franchise. This sum shall continue to be passed through as a line item
on customer bills in the same manner that Cablevision's current lease
payments are reflected, or as otherwise permitted under law.
Concomitant with this ordinance, the City and Cablevision shall enter
into a modified site lease for the North Barclay Street location and
subsequently may enter into a lease for the new public access studio/
technology center in lieu of or in addition to the lease for the North
Barclay Street location.
§ A495-22 PATERSON CODE § A495-23
A495:1034
ordinance may be exercised by a successor, provided such transferee or
assignee remains bound by all the lawful provisions, terms, conditions and
limitations prescribed in this ordinance.
§ A495-24. Incorporation of application.
All of the commitments contained in the application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the City by the company, except as modified
herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of this
consent. The application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this ordinance by reference and made a part hereof, except as specifically
modified, changed, limited or altered by this ordinance, or to the extent that
they conflict with state or federal law.
§ A495-25. Consistency with applicable laws.
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
federal, state and local laws. Should any state or federal agency or body
modify, change or alter any of its provisions with respect to cable television
generally, such modifications, changes or alterations shall be incorporated
into this consent consistent with the applicable dates specified in the
change.
§ A495-26. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ A495-27. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon passage, approval and publication as
required by law and the issuance of a certificate of approval as issued by
the Board of Public Utilities.
Chapter A505
PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE COMMISSIONERS RULES AND
REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 407. Water — See Ch. 473.
§ A495-23 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A495-27
A505:1035

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ A505-1. Purpose and policy.
§ A505-2. Administration; Chief Executive Officer; Hearing Officer.
§ A505-3. Service of notices.
A. These Rules and Regulations set forth uniform requirements for
dischargers into the PVSC wastewater collection and treatment
systems and enable PVSC to protect public health in conformity with all
applicable state and federal laws relating thereto. The objectives of
these Rules and Regulations are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the PVSC treatment
works which will interfere with the normal operation of the
treatment works or contaminate the resulting sludge.
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned
treatment works which do not receive satisfactory treatment by the
POTW or which pass through the system into receiving waters or
the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW.
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge produced by the treatment processes.
B. These Rules and Regulations provide for the regulation of discharges
into the PVSC treatment works through the issuance of sewer
connection permits.
A. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Chief Executive Officer of the
PVSC shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of these
Rules and Regulations. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
Chief Executive Officer may be delegated by the Chief Executive Officer
to the persons acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the
PVSC. The position of Hearing Officer is created to conduct informal
proceedings prior to referral to the Commissioners. Conclusions and
recommendations reached by the Hearing Officer are subject to review
by the Commissioners.
B. Users that fail to submit periodic monitoring reports as specified in
§ A505-26 of the Rules and Regulations shall have the right to an
informal hearing before this Hearing Officer. This user shall pay any
fine stipulated or assessed. Failure to pay the fines assessed will result
in the matter being referred to the Commissioners for action. Minimum
fines are listed in Appendix C.190
A. Unless otherwise provided herein, any notice required to be given
under these Rules and Regulations shall be in writing and served in
190. Editor's Note: Appendix C, Fines, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A505-1 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-3
A505:1037
§ A505-4. Inspections; access.
§ A505-5. Changes to rules and regulations.
The PVSC reserves the right to promulgate changes to these Rules and
Regulations in order to conform to changes in USEPA or NJDEP regulations
or where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in
§ A505-1. Public hearings or public meetings shall be conducted in
accordance with USEPA public participation requirements which are
contained in 40 CFR 25 and its subsequent changes and revisions.
person or by certified mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be sent
to the last address known to the Chief Executive Officer. Where the
address is unknown, service may be made upon the owner of record of
the property upon which the alleged violation occurred. If the written
notice served in person or by certified mail is not accepted, then said
notice shall be posted in a conspicuous location by or on the property
upon which the alleged violation occurred.
B. Notice shall be deemed to have been given at the time of deposit,
postage prepaid, in a facility regularly serviced by the United States
Postal Service. A dated, signed receipt shall be the determinant for the
acknowledgment of such notice and the start of any time limitation.
A. Whenever it shall be necessary for the purpose of these Rules and
Regulations, the Chief Executive Officer, upon presentation of
credentials, may enter upon property or premises for the purpose of:
(1) Copying any records required to be kept under the provisions of
these Rules and Regulations or sewer connection permits.
(2) Inspecting the plant facilities or any monitoring equipment.
(3) Sampling any discharge of wastewater to the treatment works.
(4) Inspecting and/or sampling RCRA or other type waste or
substances.
B. Authorized personnel of the PVSC shall be provided immediate access
to all the facilities directly or indirectly connected to the PVSC
treatment works during normal working hours and at such other times
as may be necessary during emergencies as determined by the PVSC.
All users shall provide easy access to the sewerage facility to be
inspected and shall promptly remove any permanent or temporary
obstruction at the verbal or written request of the Chief Executive
Officer.
C. No person shall interfere with, delay, resist or refuse entrance to an
authorized PVSC inspector attempting to inspect any facility involved
directly or indirectly with a discharge of wastewater to the PVSC
treatment works.
§ A505-3 PATERSON CODE § A505-6
A505:1038
§ A505-6. Trade secrets; confidentiality agreement.
§ A505-7. Reconsideration of decisions, actions and determinations;
appeals procedure; fee; notification of hearing; decisions.
A. Any person required to furnish information to PVSC for any purpose
may request that such information or any part thereof be classified as
trade secrets. In the event that such request is granted, the designated
material shall be treated as proprietary information and shall not be
made available for public inspection. The PVSC shall have the right to
forward such request to an appropriate state or federal agency for a
determination as to whether the information submitted is in fact a trade
secret. All information shall be held confidential until a determination is
made by an appropriate federal and/or state agency(ies). Also, all
determinations of confidentiality will be on an item-by-item basis such
that a determination of one (1) part of a submittal to be public
information will not open up the whole submittal. In no event, however,
shall the physical or chemical characteristics of a user's industrial
waste be classified as a trade secret.
B. The industrial user or his representative shall have the right to require
that anyone not directly employed by the PVSC sign a confidentiality
agreement approved by the PVSC. This agreement shall not include
information concerning pretreatment facilities or discharge monitoring.
A. Any person adversely affected by any decision, action or determination
made by or on behalf of the PVSC in implementing any of the provisions
of these Rules and Regulations may request a reconsideration of such
decision, action or determination. Such request shall be in writing
addressed to the Chief Executive Officer and shall be filed with the
Clerk of the PVSC within ten (10) days of the action in dispute.
B. The request shall set forth the action being appealed, the reasons for
the appeal and the proposed alternative to such action. The Chief
Executive Officer shall review the request for reconsideration and shall
grant or deny the request within ten (10) days of its receipt. The Chief
Executive Officer shall notify all parties of record within ten (10) days of
his decision. In the event that the Chief Executive Officer fails to act
within ten (10) days, the request shall be deemed to be denied.
C. Any person adversely affected by any action of the Chief Executive
Officer in implementing any of the provisions of these Rules and
Regulations may appeal said action by filing a written notice of appeal
with the Clerk directed to the Chairman of the PVSC. Said notice shall
be filed within ten (10) days of the action being challenged. It shall set
forth fully the action being challenged, the grounds for the appeal and
the proposed alternative action requested. Said appeal shall be
accompanied by a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.) which shall be
refunded in the event that the appeal is granted. The Chairman or any
Commissioner so designated by him shall conduct a public hearing
within thirty (30) days of the filing of the request for appeal. The burden
§ A505-6 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-7
A505:1039
§ A505-8. Publication of enforcement actions and violators.
of proof shall be on the appellant, who may appear personally or
through counsel and who shall have the right to present evidence and
cross-examine witnesses. All affected member municipalities shall be
given fifteen (15) days' written notice of the hearing and shall have the
right to participate therein. Public notice of said hearing shall also be
published as is required by law.
D. The Chairman or the Commissioner so designated by him shall issue a
report of said hearing and a recommendation to the Commissioners for
action on the appeal within fourteen (14) days after the completion of
the public hearing. Said report and recommendations shall be acted
upon by the Commissioners within thirty (30) days thereafter. Such
action shall be considered a final ruling on the appeal. No decision,
action or determination of the Chief Executive Officer shall be stayed by
the appeal procedure authorized under this section.
A. In addition to any other public participation requirements contained in
40 CFR 25 or its revisions, the PVSC shall publish, at least annually, a
list of the industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12)
months, significantly violated applicable pretreatment standards or
other pretreatment requirements. The list shall be published in those
large daily newspapers with sufficient scope to cover the entire PVSC
sewer district.
B. For the purpose of this provision, a user is in significant noncompliance
if it violated the provisions contained in § A505-32 of the Rules and
Regulations or any subsequent modifications promulgated by USEPA.
§ A505-7 PATERSON CODE § A505-8
A505:1040
ARTICLE II
Sewerage Construction and Sewer Use
§ A505-9. Approval of plans for construction of connections.
§ A505-10. Application for change in use of sewer.
If a person who is not an industrial user contemplates a modification to the
use of an existing sanitary sewer such that the user intends to introduce
industrial wastes or discharge more than the equivalent of twenty-five
thousand (25,000) gallons per day of sanitary waste, a sewer connection
application shall be submitted to the PVSC and, if required, a permit issued
prior to the commencement of the discharge. The discharge of industrial or
sanitary wastes without a sewer connection permit, as stated in this section,
constitutes a violation of these Rules and Regulations.
A. Direct connection to PVSC facility. No person, other than employees of
the PVSC or persons contracted to do work for the PVSC shall connect
directly to or cause to be connected directly to or alter or cause to be
altered any PVSC-owned sewer, sewage pumping station or other
facility without first filing an application to construct a connection and
obtaining approval of the construction plans from the Chief Executive
Officer. This application is in addition to the sewer connection
application required in § A505-18.
B. Connection to municipally owned collection systems. No person shall
connect to or cause to be connected to or alter or cause to be altered
any municipally owned sewer, sewage pumping plant or other facility
without first obtaining approval of the sewerage construction plans as
required by local ordinances. A PVSC sewer connection application
shall be submitted as required by § A505-18.
§ A505-9 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-10
A505:1041

ARTICLE III
Regulations Concerning Industrial Users
§ A505-11. Sewer connection permit required; temporary permit;
letter of authorization.
§ A505-12. New industrial users.
New industrial users who desire to locate into the PVSC sewer district
or existing industrial users who desire to commence operations at a new
facility within the PVSC sewer district shall apply for and receive a sewer
connection permit, temporary permit or letter of authorization, as the case
may be, prior to the commencement of operations at the new facility.
Although a sewer connection application may be submitted to the PVSC at
any time, the PVSC shall issue a permit only after the user either procures
title to the property or signs a lease agreement with the property owner.
§ A505-13. Temporary authority granted to existing industrial
users.
All industrial users discharging wastes directly or indirectly to the PVSC
treatment works prior to the effective date of these Rules and Regulations
are hereby granted temporary authority to discharge these wastes. This
temporary authority shall expire ninety (90) days after the adoption of these
Rules and Regulations unless prior to that date the discharger has filed an
application for a sewer connection permit pursuant to §§ A505-11, A505-16
and A505-18 of these Rules and Regulations. In such a case, this temporary
authority shall expire on the date the sewer connection permit is issued.
Any person discharging pursuant to the temporary authority provided for
hereby is subject to all provisions of these Rules and Regulations, and
such authority may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the terms
and provisions set forth in §§ A505-20 and A505-21 of these Rules and
Regulations.
A. Except as provided in Subsections B and C of this section and
§ A505-13, no industrial user shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any wastes, either directly or indirectly, into the PVSC treatment works
without first obtaining an appropriate permit issued by the PVSC.
B. The Chief Executive Officer may issue a temporary permit in lieu of a
sewer connection permit. A temporary permit shall be issued for a
period not to exceed one (1) year and may be renewed for one (1)
additional period until either the effective date of a sewer connection
permit or a period not to exceed one (1) year, whichever is less.
C. The Chief Executive Officer may issue a letter of authorization in lieu of
a sewer connection permit. A letter of authorization carries the same
duties and responsibilities as a sewer connection permit except that it is
issued for a specific purpose of short duration.
§ A505-11 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-14
A505:1043
§ A505-14. Renewal of permits.
If a permittee wishes to continue discharging to the PVSC treatment works,
he shall apply for a renewal of his sewer connection permit no later than
six (6) months prior to the expiration date of the permit then in force. The
application shall be contained in a form prepared by the PVSC which will
be mailed to the user no less than nine (9) months before the expiration
date. Renewal of the permit shall be contingent upon the permittee having
complied with the terms and conditions of the expired permit.
§ A505-15. Duration of permits and letters of authorization.
§ A505-16. Amended permit required for changes to facilities or
processing.
Any industrial user that proposes to make any changes in its facility or
processing which significantly affects either the quality or quantity of its
discharge to the PVSC treatment works shall apply for an amended permit.
Forms may be procured from the PVSC.
§ A505-17. Transferability of permits; changes in ownership or
corporate structure.
Sewer connection permits, temporary permits or letters of authorization are
issued to a specific user for a specific operation and are not transferable.
A permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner,
new industrial user or a new or changed operation. The permittee shall
notify the Chief Executive Officer within fourteen (14) days of any change in
ownership or corporate structure where such change affects responsibility
for compliance with these Rules and Regulations.
§ A505-18. Application for sewer connection permit, temporary
permit or letter of authorization.
A. Permits shall normally be issued for a period of five (5) years. A permit
may be issued for a period of less than five (5) years if the Chief
Executive Officer determines that a five-year permit is not needed.
B. A letter of authorization shall be issued for a period not to exceed one
(1) year. Prior to the expiration of this period, the user shall notify the
PVSC if authorization is required beyond the one (1) year authorized.
The Chief Executive Officer may reissue the letter of authorization for a
period not to exceed one (1) additional year. At the end of this second
period, the discharge shall either cease or be subject to a sewer
connection permit.
A. Persons desiring a sewer connection permit to discharge shall complete
a PVSC application form and forward it to the PVSC. Persons desiring a
temporary permit or letter of authorization shall supply all information
requested by the PVSC. Upon receipt of all required information, the
sewer connection application or request shall be processed, and if
§ A505-14 PATERSON CODE § A505-18
A505:1044
§ A505-19. Permit conditions; changes to permit.
required and upon approval, a sewer connection permit, temporary
permit or letter of authorization shall be issued.
B. The application shall be approved if the applicant has complied with all
applicable requirements of these Rules and Regulations and furnished
to the Chief Executive Officer all requested information and if the Chief
Executive Officer determines that the expected discharge will not
interfere with the treatment process, pass through the treatment
process inadequately treated or contaminate the sludge produced and
that there is adequate capacity in the PVSC treatment works to convey,
treat and dispose of the industrial wastes. The Chief Executive Officer
shall make a determination within ninety (90) days of receipt of all
required information.
C. An application or request submitted by a corporation shall be signed by
a corporate officer or other executive officer so designated. An
application or request signed by an individual other than a corporate
officer shall include a corporate resolution granting the individual the
authority to make the application or request on behalf of the
corporation. An application or request submitted by a user other than a
corporation shall be signed by a proprietor or general partner.
A. Sewer connection permits shall be issued with at least the following
applicable conditions:
(1) Monitoring requirements for user charge.
(2) Monitoring requirements for pretreatment.
(3) Prohibitions and limitations on industrial waste discharged to the
sanitary sewer.
(4) Compliance schedules.
(5) Reporting requirements.
(6) Management requirements and responsibilities.
(7) Special conditions applicable to industrial users on a case-by-case
basis.
B. Temporary permits or letters of authorization may contain the
conditions listed in Subsection A but shall be established to safeguard
the treatment plant and prevent violations of any permit issued to or
condition imposed upon the PVSC.
C. The terms and conditions of any permit may be subject to modifications
and change by the Chief Executive Officer during the life of any permit,
as limitations or requirements as identified in §§ A505-22 and A505-23
are modified and changed. The industrial user shall be informed of any
proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the
§ A505-18 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-19
A505:1045
§ A505-20. Suspension of permit; hearing; reinstatement.
§ A505-21. Revocation of permit; hearing; issuance of new permit.
effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in any permit
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
A. The Chief Executive Officer may, without formal notice, suspend any
permit for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days when such
suspension is necessary in order to stop a discharge which reasonably
appears to present an imminent or substantial hazard to the public
health, safety or welfare of persons.
B. The Chief Executive Officer may, after serving notice on the permittee,
including the opportunity to respond, suspend any permit for a period
not to exceed forty-five (45) days when such a suspension is necessary
in order to stop a discharge which presents or may present an
endangerment to the environment or which threatens to interfere with
the operation of the PVSC treatment works.
C. Any user notified of a suspension of his permit shall immediately cease
and desist the discharge of all wastes regulated by that permit. In the
event of a failure of the industrial user to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the Chief Executive Officer shall take such steps as
are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance.
D. Any suspended user may file with the Chief Executive Officer a request
for a hearing with the Commissioners. Such a request shall not stay the
suspension. In the event of such request, the Commissioners shall,
within fourteen (14) days of the receipt by the Chief Executive Officer of
such request, hold a hearing on the suspension and shall either confirm
or revoke the action of the Chief Executive Officer. Reasonable notice of
the hearing shall be given to the suspended user as provided for in
§ A505-3. At this hearing, the suspended user may appear personally or
through counsel, cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in his
own behalf.
E. In the event that the Commissioners fail to meet within the time set
forth above or fail to make a determination within seventy-two (72)
hours after the close of the hearing, the order of suspension shall be
stayed until a determination is made either confirming or revoking the
action of the Chief Executive Officer.
F. The Chief Executive Officer shall reinstitute the permit upon proof of
satisfactory compliance with all discharge requirements. The PVSC
counsel may, upon recommendation of the Chief Executive Officer,
commence and prosecute such legal actions as may be appropriate to
enforce the provisions of this section.
A. The Commissioners may revoke any permit upon a finding that the user
has demonstrated a refusal, inability or failure to take reasonable steps
§ A505-19 PATERSON CODE § A505-21
A505:1046
§ A505-22. Prohibited industrial wastes.
No person shall discharge or deposit or cause or allow to be discharged or
deposited into the treatment works or public sewer any waste which causes
or contains the following:
to comply with any of the provisions of these Rules and Regulations.
No revocation shall be ordered until a hearing has been held by the
Commissioners, where the user shall have the right to be represented
by counsel, cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in his own
behalf. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the user and to the
municipality wherein the user is located, in accordance with § A505-3,
at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Any user whose permit has been revoked shall immediately cease and
desist all discharge of wastes regulated by that permit. The Chief
Executive Officer may disconnect or permanently block from the public
sewer the connection of any user whose permit has been revoked if
such action is necessary to ensure compliance with the order or
revocation.
C. Before the discharge of wastes may be commenced by the user, he must
apply for and receive a new permit, pay all charges, penalties and such
other sums as may be owed and comply with the conditions contained in
any signed consent order or judgment. Costs incurred by the PVSC and
municipality in revoking the permit and disconnecting the connection
shall be paid by the user before a new permit is issued.
A. Explosive wastes. Wastes in such quantity which may create a fire or
explosion hazard to the treatment works, collection system or to the
operation of the system, including but not limited to wastewater with a
closed cup flash point of less than one hundred forty degrees
Fahrenheit (140° F.) or sixty degrees Centigrade (60° C.) using the test
methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Additional quantitative limitations
on explosive wastes are specified in Appendix B.191
B. Corrosive wastes. Wastes in such quantity which will cause corrosion or
deterioration of the treatment works. Unless a higher limit is otherwise
stated in the sewer connection permit issued to a user, all wastes shall
have a pH not less than five (5). Unless otherwise stated in the sewer
connection permit, all wastes shall have a pH not more than ten point
five (10.5). Prohibited materials include but are not limited to acids,
sulfides, concentrated chloride or fluoride compounds, etc.
C. Solids or viscous wastes. Solids or viscous wastes in amounts which
would cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or otherwise interfere
with the proper operation of the treatment works. Prohibited materials
191. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Pretreatment Limitations, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ A505-21 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-22
A505:1047
include but are not limited to uncomminuted garbage, bones, hides or
fleshings, cinders, sand, stone or marble dust, glass, etc.
D. Oils and grease.
(1) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(2) Any industrial wastes containing floatable fats, wax, grease or oils.
(3) Any industrial wastes containing more than one hundred (100)
milligrams per liter of petroleum-based oil or grease.
E. Noxious materials.
(1) Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(2) Noxious liquids or gases which, in sufficient quantity, either singly
or by interaction with other wastes, are capable of creating a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are or may be sufficient to prevent
entry into a sewer for its maintenance and repair.
F. Radioactive wastes. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration that they do not comply with regulations or orders issued
by the appropriate authority having control over their use and which
will or may cause damage or hazards to the treatment works or
personnel operating the system.
G. Interference. Any waste, including oxygen demanding wastes (BOD,
etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which an industrial user knows or has reason to know
will interfere with the PVSC treatment works.
H. Excessive discharge rate. Industrial wastes discharged in a slug or such
volume or strength so as to cause a treatment process upset and
subsequent loss of treatment efficiency.
I. Heat.
(1) Any discharge in excess of one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150° F.) [sixty-five degrees Centigrade (65° C.)].
(2) Heat in amounts which would inhibit biological activity in the PVSC
treatment works resulting in a treatment process upset and
subsequent loss of treatment efficiency.
J. Unpolluted waters. Any unpolluted water, including but not limited to
cooling water and uncontaminated stormwater, which will increase the
hydraulic load on the treatment system, except as approved by the
PVSC.
§ A505-22 PATERSON CODE § A505-22
A505:1048
§ A505-23. Compliance with pretreatment standards; more
stringent standards to apply; baseline monitoring reports.
K. Dilution water. Any water added for the purpose of diluting wastes
which would otherwise exceed applicable maximum concentration
limits.
L. Violations. Wastes which cause the PVSC treatment plant to violate its
NJPDES permit, applicable receiving water standards, permit
regulating sludge which is produced during treatment or any other
permit issued to the PVSC.
M. Ultrahazardous toxics. Those wastes designated by the EPA as
sufficiently toxic that they shall not be discharged to the sanitary sewer
in any concentrations.
N. Trucked pollutants. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at
discharge points designated by the Chief Executive Officer, and only
after approval is issued by the PVSC.
O. Groundwater. Any groundwater, whether contaminated or
uncontaminated, unless specifically authorized by the PVSC.
P. Stormwater. Any stormwater, whether contaminated or
uncontaminated, unless specifically authorized by the PVSC.
A. No person shall discharge, deposit or cause or allow to be discharged or
deposited into the treatment works or public sewer any waste which
violates any pretreatment standard. As pretreatment standards for
toxic or other hazardous pollutants are promulgated by the USEPA for a
given industrial category, all industrial users within that category shall
conform to the USEPA timetable as well any numeric limitations
imposed by the USEPA. When the PVSC adopts a local limit that affects
the discharge from any user, that limitation shall apply to the affected
user. The failure of the PVSC to modify the applicable permit prior to its
listed expiration date shall not exempt the user from compliance.
B. In addition, a user shall comply with any more stringent standards or
limits as determined by the PVSC, NJDEP or USEPA. The PVSC may
impose case-by-case limitations on individual permittees using its best
professional judgment when necessary to prevent the upset or
interference with the PVSC treatment process or pass-through of
pollutants which may impair its ability to meet effluent, sludge or air
pollution limits or to protect treatment plant worker health and safety.
The PVSC may also adjust the local limits to permit emission trading as
described in Appendix B, Section B-104.192
C. When PVSC local pretreatment limits become effective, except as
modified herein, all affected users shall submit baseline monitoring
192. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Pretreatment Limitations, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ A505-22 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-23
A505:1049
§ A505-24. Upsets; noncompliance with standards; burden of proof.
reports, compliance schedules and compliance reports as described in
the Federal General Pretreatment Regulations, 40 CFR 403.12, and
Appendix B.193 All affected users shall submit a baseline monitoring
report, as defined in 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (c), except that this report
shall be submitted to the PVSC within ninety (90) days of the effective
date. The PVSC may, for a compelling reason, modify the requirements
contained in the federal regulations on a case-by-case basis, in order
to address an individual situation. Local pretreatment limitations
established by the PVSC shall be contained in Appendix B.
A. If, for any reason, the discharge from a user does not comply with or
will be unable to comply with any prohibitions or limitations contained
in these Rules and Regulations, municipal ordinance or the permit, the
user shall notify the Chief Executive Officer within two (2) hours after
becoming aware of the incident so that corrective action may be taken
to protect the treatment works.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
noncompliance if the following requirements are met. A user who
wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate,
through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other
relevant evidence, that:
(1) An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operations
and maintenance procedures; and
(3) The user has submitted the following information to the PVSC
within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset,
except that a written submission must be provided within five (5)
days if the information is provided verbally:
(a) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of the
noncompliance.
(b) The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and time,
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is
expected to continue.
(c) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
C. The industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall
have the burden of proof. The user shall control production on all
193. Editor's Note: Appendix B, Pretreatment Limitations, is included at the end of this
chapter.
§ A505-23 PATERSON CODE § A505-24
A505:1050
§ A505-25. Pretreatment facilities.
§ A505-26. Industrial waste reporting.
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with the
prohibitions or limitations upon reduction, loss or failure of its
pretreatment facility until it is restored or an alternative method of
treatment is provided. This requirement shall apply to the situation
where, among other things, the primary source of power to the
pretreatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
A. A pretreatment facility or device may be required by the Chief
Executive Officer to treat or monitor industrial wastes prior to
discharge to the public sewer or PVSC treatment works. Where
pretreatment or construction necessary to control or monitor wastes is
required, prior to the issuance of or as prescribed in the permit,
schematics, detailed plans and specifications, process descriptions and
other pertinent data or information relating to such pretreatment
facility or device shall first be filed with the Chief Executive Officer.
Such filing shall not exempt the user nor the facility from compliance
with any applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation or order of any
governmental authority or from these Rules and Regulations. Any
subsequent alterations or additions to such pretreatment or flowcontrol
facilities shall not be made without notice to the PVSC and,
where required, submission of detailed plans and specifications.
B. If inspection of pretreatment facilities and devices by authorized
personnel of the PVSC reveals such systems are not installed or
operating in conformance with the plans and procedures submitted to
the PVSC or are not operating in compliance with the effluent
limitations required by the PVSC, the industrial user shall make those
modifications necessary to meet those requirements. All pretreatment
systems judged by the Chief Executive Officer to require engineering
design shall have plans prepared and signed by an engineer of suitable
discipline. If pretreatment or control of waste flows is required, such
facilities shall be maintained in good working order and operated as
efficiently as possible by the owner or operator at his own cost and
expense, subject to the requirements of these Rules and Regulations
and all other applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
A. Unless a different schedule is specified in the permit, each affected user
shall submit a user charge self-monitoring report monthly on forms
provided or specified by the PVSC. Each report shall be due twenty-one
(21) days after the reporting period ends. If the 21st day falls on a
Saturday, Sunday or PVSC holiday, then the report shall be due on the
next PVSC workday following. A report shall be submitted for each
outlet as specified in the permit.
B. If a user fails to submit a user charge self-monitoring report as required
by his permit, the Chief Executive Officer shall estimate the use for that
§ A505-24 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-26
A505:1051
period. Estimates for reports due in October may be made within five
(5) working days after the due date. If a user fails to submit a user
charge self-monitoring report and the Chief Executive Officer estimates
the usage for that period, this estimate shall become the current year
actual usage for that period, and no adjustment shall be made. In
addition, no adjustments shall be made to the next year estimated
usage if the estimate is prepared using this method.
C. Each user whose permit requires him to do so shall submit a periodic
pretreatment discharge monitoring report on forms provided or
specified by the PVSC. These reports are due thirty-five (35) days after
the reporting period ends.
D. The pretreatment discharge monitoring report may include but, at the
discretion of the Chief Executive Officer, shall not be limited to nature
of processes, volume, rates of flow, mass discharge emission rate,
production quantities, hours or days of operation, concentrations of
pollutants or other information necessary to demonstrate compliance
with applicable pretreatment limitations.
E. All industrial users subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards shall, at a minimum, comply with the reporting requirements
contained in 40 CFR 403.12 and subsequent revisions, including but not
limited to baseline monitoring reports, compliance progress reports,
compliance date reports and periodic self-monitoring reports.
F. Individual analytical results for BOD, TSS or any other parameter as
required by the permit shall be reported on the date that the sample
was removed from the sampling device for analysis. (For example, if a
sampling device drew a sample from 8:00 a.m. Monday to 8:00 a.m.
Tuesday and it was removed on Tuesday for analysis, then the sample
would be dated Tuesday).
G. Any user may meet the due date requirement for submission of a report
by submitting the document via facsimile or electronic data submission,
provided that the document is received at the PVSC administrative
offices between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any date up to
and including the due date. In addition, a hard copy of this same report
shall be due within four (4) days of the transmission of the facsimile or
electronic data submission. The hard copy shall also contain a notation
indicating the date and time the report was transmitted via facsimile or
electronic data submission. Failure to submit the hard copy within four
(4) days specified shall result in the report being considered as not
having been received and shall constitute a violation of these Rules and
Regulations.
H. The following procedure shall be used when reporting analytical
results:
(1) The pollutant limit will define the precision, or number of digits to
the right or left of the decimal point, to be reported.
§ A505-26 PATERSON CODE § A505-26
A505:1052
§ A505-27. Industrial waste monitoring.
(2) Calculated results shall be rounded off to the same precision as
defined for that pollutant in the limit.
(3) Zeros in the pollutant limit are included in order to determine the
precision.
(4) The following procedure shall be followed when rounding off
results:
(a) Round off by dropping digits that are irrelevant. If the digit 6,
7, 8 or 9 is to be dropped, increase the preceding digit by one
(1) unit.
(b) If the digit 0, 1, 2, 3 or 4 is to be dropped, do not alter the
preceding digit.
(c) If the digit 5 is to be dropped, round off the preceding digit to
the nearest even number (2.25 becomes 2.2 while 2.35
becomes 2.4).
I. The PVSC shall, by resolution, define key fields on various periodic
report forms. These key fields must be accurate at the time the report is
received at the PVSC. Errors or omissions in any key field will subject
the permittee to mandatory minimum fines. This fine is in addition to
any other fine to which the permittee may be subject. If the PVSC
returns an incomplete report to a permittee with a request that it be
completed and resubmitted to the PVSC, the permittee shall be subject
to a fine for a late report as defined in Appendix C194 if the corrected
report is not received within the time period specified. Appendix C
contains the fine schedule.
A. All industrial users who discharge or propose to discharge waste to the
PVSC treatment works shall maintain such records as are necessary to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of these Rules and
Regulations, any permit and any applicable State or Federal
Pretreatment Standards or requirements.
B. Such records shall be made available upon request by the Chief
Executive Officer. All such records relating to compliance with
pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the
NJDEP and officials of the USEPA upon demand. A summary of such
data indicating the industrial user's compliance with these Rules and
Regulations shall be prepared and submitted to the Chief Executive
Officer as designated in the permit, utilizing forms contained in
Appendix D.195
194. Editor's Note: Appendix C, Fines, is included at the end of this chapter.
195. Editor's Note: The forms are available at the office of the City Clerk.
§ A505-26 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-27
A505:1053
C. Each designated industrial user shall install, at his own cost and
expense, suitable monitoring equipment to facilitate the accurate
observation, sampling and measurement of industrial wastes. Such
equipment shall be kept safe, secured from unauthorized entry or
tampering and accessible at all times. Except as provided for in
Subsection E, monitoring equipment shall be calibrated as
recommended by the manufacturer, except that LEL recorders shall be
calibrated daily and pH recorders shall be calibrated at least weekly,
whichever is more frequent.
D. Notwithstanding the requirements of §§ A505-24 and A505-25, a user
shall notify the PVSC as soon as possible, but in no case later than two
(2) hours from becoming aware of it, if a sampling, monitoring,
recording or other device required in accordance with these Rules and
Regulations becomes inoperable. Unless modified by the PVSC, the user
shall submit a written report to the PVSC, Attention: Industrial and
Pollution Control Department, within five (5) working days of the
occurrence, detailing what occurred, why it happened, what will be
done to correct the problem and a date when the problem will be
corrected. If corrective action is expected to take more than two (2)
months from the date of the occurrence, the user shall submit monthly
progress reports until such times as the problem is corrected. This
provision shall not apply during flow meter calibration or to other
instrument calibrations that do not exceed thirty (30) minutes.
E. An industrial user who claims a lower discharge volume than is
indicated by his water consumption, due to retention of water in his
product, discharge to a storm sewer, river or ditch, a higher
evaporation rate than is allowed by the PVSC or for other reasons, shall
provide the PVSC with an acceptable method for accurately
determining his discharge volume to the sanitary sewer. An industrial
user with more than one (1) discharge point to the sanitary sewer shall
provide the PVSC with accurate discharge volumes for each outlet. In
the event that the PVSC determines that said volumes are not accurate,
the Chief Executive Officer may require the installation of flow
measuring equipment. Unless this requirement is modified by the
individual permit, flow measuring devices, used in determination of
effluent volumes and which are required to be installed in accordance
with Subsection C, shall be calibrated annually, or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer. The PVSC may require a user to
notify the PVSC at least seven (7) days prior to any flow meter
calibration.
F. When more than one (1) industrial user can discharge into a common
sewer, the Chief Executive Officer may require installation of separate
monitoring equipment for each industrial user. When there is a
significant difference in wastewater constituents and characteristics
produced by different operations of a single industrial user, the Chief
Executive Officer may require that separate monitoring facilities be
installed for each separate discharge.
§ A505-27 PATERSON CODE § A505-28
A505:1054
§ A505-28. Compliance determination; sampling; inspections;
certification of nonuse.
§ A505-29. Analyses of industrial wastes.
A. Compliance determinations with respect to any permit prohibitions and
limitations may be made by the PVSC on the basis of instantaneous
grab samples, sequential samples or composite samples of the waste
stream or on vapors emanating from the waste stream. Sequential or
composite samples may be taken over a twenty-four-hour period or
even a longer or shorter time span, as deemed necessary by the Chief
Executive Officer, to meet the needs of specific circumstances.
B. The PVSC may inspect the monitoring facilities of an industrial user at
any time to determine compliance with the requirements of these Rules
and Regulations as specified in § A505-4. In any event, the PVSC shall
conduct at least one (1) inspection and sampling visit per calendar year
at each permittee, excluding those users issued a temporary permit or
letter of authorization.
C. An industrial user may demonstrate compliance with a categorical
pretreatment limit by certifying nonuse only if permitted in the
applicable regulation. A user may demonstrate compliance with a state
or local limit by certifying nonuse, as described herein, unless
prohibited by the applicable regulations. Prior to claiming nonuse, the
user shall analyze at least three (3) separate, daily composite samples
for the regulated pollutants over a two-week period. The user shall then
submit the result of the analyses with the following statement in its next
required report. The statement shall read: "I certify under penalty of
law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure
that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the persons who manage the system
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted, to the best of my knowledge, information and
belief, is true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are
significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment, for knowing violations."
[403.6(a)(2)(ii) revised by 53 FR 40610, October 17, 1988]
D. The PVSC will accept the certification described in Subsection C above,
provided that the concentration of the affected pollutants is at or below
the threshold value specified in Appendix B, Table B-2.196 The industrial
user shall continue to submit this certification for each subsequent
monitoring period during which it applies, using the wording as
described above.
196. Editor's Note: Table B-2 is located in Section B-103.3 of Appendix B, included at the end
of this chapter.
§ A505-28 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-29
A505:1055
§ A505-30. Frequency of sampling and analyses.
§ A505-31. Enforcement response plans.
A. Laboratory analysis of industrial waste samples shall be performed by
laboratories certified by the NJDEP in wastewater analyses for the
parameters to be analyzed. Test procedures identified in 40 CFR 136,
Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants, shall be utilized for all
analyses.
B. All laboratory procedures, other than those permitted by 40 CFR 136,
shall be considered as alternate procedures. The Chief Executive
Officer may permit an industrial user to substitute an alternate
procedure, provided that the USEPA had previously approved use of the
method by the laboratory performing the analysis and a suitable
application had been submitted to the PVSC. Acceptable comparability
data shall be included in the application.
C. Sample collection, handling and preservation techniques contained in
40 CFR 136 shall be followed for all parameters. Samples shall be
maintained within the range of one degree Centigrade (1° C.) to four
degrees Centigrade (4° C.) while being collected, after collection and
during transport to the laboratory for analysis. Suitable logs and/or
records shall be maintained at the monitoring station and at the
analyzing laboratory to demonstrate proper temperature control.
A. Industrial wastes shall be sampled and analyzed by the user for user
charge and, where required, pretreatment. The frequency of sampling
and analysis shall be specified in the permit and shall be based on
frequencies contained in federal, state and local regulations. The Chief
Executive Officer may increase the frequency on a temporary basis if
deemed necessary to verify data submitted by the user or to aid in
determining the user's compliance with these Rules and Regulations.
B. If a permittee analyzes his industrial wastes for parameters not
required in the permit or at a greater frequency than specified in the
permit, these results shall also be included in the periodic monitoring
reports submitted to the PVSC.
A. In order to fulfill its responsibilities under federal and state laws and
regulations, the PVSC shall develop and implement an enforcement
response plan (ERP), hereinafter referred to as the "plan." The plan
shall be incorporated into the PVSC Rules and Regulations by a
resolution of the Commissioners and shall be subject to modification as
needed in order to keep it consistent with federal and/or state laws and
regulations. This plan shall contain detailed procedures indicating how
the PVSC will investigate and respond to instances of user
noncompliance.
B. At a minimum, it shall:
§ A505-29 PATERSON CODE § A505-31
A505:1056
§ A505-32. Criteria for significant noncompliance.
(1) Describe how the PVSC will investigate instances of
noncompliance.
(2) Describe the types of escalating enforcement responses the PVSC
will take in response to all anticipated types of user violations and
the time periods within which response will take place.
(3) Identify by title the official(s) responsible for implementing each
type of enforcement response.
(4) Adequately reflect the PVSC's primary responsibility to enforce all
applicable pretreatment requirements and standards, as provided
in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1) and (2) and any subsequent changes.
A. A user is in significant noncompliance (SNC) if its violation(s) meet one
(1) or more of the following criteria:
(1) Chronic violations of pretreatment standards.
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations.
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard that the PVSC
determines caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass-through.
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or
has resulted in the PVSC's exercise of its emergency authority
under § A505-20 of these Rules and Regulations.
(5) Failure to meet within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date a
compliance schedule milestone contained in its permit,
enforcement order or consent order for starting construction or
completing construction.
(6) Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days of the due date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance
with compliance schedules.
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(8) Any other violation or group of violations which the PVSC
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of
the local pretreatment program.
B. A user who is in significant noncompliance as defined in this section is
not necessarily a significant noncomplier as defined by New Jersey
Statutes or regulations.
§ A505-31 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-32
A505:1057

ARTICLE IV
User Charge
§ A505-33. User classes.
The following user classes are established in accordance with federal
regulations: industrial, large commercial, tax-exempt and residential/small
commercial. The PVSC reserves the right to change the class of any user as
conditions warrant. See Appendix A for specific definitions.197
§ A505-34. Billing and collection responsibilities.
A. In order to fulfill its responsibilities under the user charge system, the
PVSC shall:
(1) Collect usage date for industrial, large commercial and tax-exempt
users and municipalities.
(2) Determine the total assessment for each municipality, including the
amounts to be collected through ad valorem taxation and direct
billing.
(3) Prepare invoices to bill each municipality for its total assessment.
(4) Develop and maintain data necessary to calculate charges and
prepare invoices for each industrial, large commercial and taxexempt
user to assist municipalities in their billing and collection.
(5) Establish procedures for the billing and collection of the total
charge from each municipality.
(6) Monitor the municipal billing and collection procedures to ensure
that user charges are properly billed and collected.
B. In order to fulfill its responsibilities under the user charge system, each
participating municipality shall:
(1) Include the ad valorem portion of the user charge assessment
either in the development of local tax rates or in its own approved
direct billing system.
(2) Notify the PVSC of any new or changes in identification for
industrial, large commercial or tax-exempt users.
(3) Establish and implement procedures for the billing and collection
of the applicable charges from each industrial, large commercial
and tax-exempt user.
(4) Remit total municipal assessment to the PVSC.
(5) Submit a listing of delinquent industrial, large commercial and taxexempt
users to the PVSC on a timely basis.
197. Editor's Note: Appendix A, Definitions, is located at the end of this chapter.
§ A505-33 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-34
A505:1059
§ A505-35. Calculation of user charges.
(6) Make records available to the PVSC for compliance review.
A. Except for those municipalities that have adopted an alternative
method, the user charge for the residential/small commercial class shall
be based on the assessed valuation for the property as maintained in
the applicable municipal tax records. Each municipality may, with the
prior approval of the PVSC, adopt an alternate method, much as direct
billing, provided that it complies with applicable federal and state
regulations.
B. The user charge for the industrial users shall be based on the user's
actual volume and strength contribution to the PVSC treatment works
during each measurement year. Strength shall be determined by the
total suspended solids (TSS) and five-day biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD5) analytical test methods. Where the Chief Executive Officer
determines that an alternative method is necessary, other test methods
will be employed to determine the equivalent BOD. A direct billed user
shall also receive a credit for any ad valorem tax which may be paid as
follows: In those municipalities which collect user charges from
residential/small commercial users through ad valorem taxes, industrial
and large commercial users will pay a portion of their user charge
through their ad valorem taxes. In these municipalities, the direct billed
user will receive a credit against the user charge for payments included
in his ad valorem taxes.
C. The user charge for the large commercial users shall be based on the
user's actual volume discharged during each measurement year and
residential strength standards as determined periodically by the Chief
Executive Officer.
D. Each nonindustrial tax-exempt user shall be placed in one (1) of four (4)
classes based on volume for the purpose of determining their user
charge. The user charge for the largest class shall be based on the
user's actual volume discharged and residential strength standards for
BOD and TSS, as determined periodically by the Chief Executive
Officer. Actual volume shall be determined by the volume consumed
during the measurement year, as closely as can be reasonably
determined.
E. The user charge for the remaining three (3) tax-exempt classes shall be
based on the average volume consumed by a representative number of
users within that class. Residential strength standards, as determined
periodically by the Chief Executive Officer, shall be used to determine
BOD and TSS contribution. All tax-exempt users in each of these three
(3) classes shall receive the same user charge. Users shall be moved
from one class to another based on the actual volume data as
determined by the Chief Executive Officer. The Chief Executive Officer
shall review the average volume consumed data every two (2) years and
recommend adjustments to the average volume consumed figures. The
§ A505-34 PATERSON CODE § A505-35
A505:1060
§ A505-36. Payment of user charges.
§ A505-37. Change of user class.
In order for each municipality to keep the PVSC informed of all new or
changed users, the following shall be submitted to the PVSC in a timely
manner:
Commissioners shall, by resolution every two (2) years, set volume
standards to apply to each of the four (4) classes of nonindustrial, taxexempt
users.
A. The PVSC shall calculate the user charges to be paid by the direct billed
users as follows:
(1) The user charge shall be estimated in advance for each calendar
year.
(2) The estimated user charge shall be modified by an adjustment from
the prior year (except in the first year of the implementation of the
user charge system).
(3) During each measurement year, industrial and other designated
users shall submit quarterly self-monitoring reports to the PVSC.
These reports will provide data to enable the PVSC to calculate the
actual usage for that measurement year. This will also apply where
PVSC calculates the actual usage because a user fails to supply the
self-monitoring report.
(4) The current year actual usage shall be compared to the current
year estimated usage, and any difference shall result in an
adjustment to that year and be applied to the next year's estimated
usage as explained in Subsection A(2) above.
B. The PVSC shall prepare invoices and mail to each municipality four (4)
times a year. Full payment is due on February 1, May 1, August 1 and
November 1. The collection from each user within the municipality shall
be the responsibility of that municipality. According to New Jersey State
law, interest will be accrued at twelve percent (12%) per annum on the
unpaid principal.
C. Municipalities shall not modify the PVSC portion of the user charge
assessed to an individual user. The Chief Executive Officer shall have
the right to review municipal records to ensure that proper collections
are being made. Records shall be maintained for at least three (3)
years.
A. The name and address.
B. The name and telephone number of the contact official.
C. Times when the facility is open and when the contact official is present.
§ A505-35 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-37
A505:1061

ARTICLE V
Administration and Enforcement
§ A505-38. Statutory authority; violations; civil liability; fine.
§ A505-39. Fees.
A. These Rules and Regulations are adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 58:14-35
and appropriate state laws and regulations, federal statutes and
municipal ordinances.
B. Any violation of the Rules and Regulations, including the failure to pay
fees, charges or surcharges imposed, or any conditions or limitation of
a permit issued pursuant thereto shall be subject to such penalties as
are provided by law. Said penalties shall be in addition to any sanctions
authorized under these Rules and Regulations.
C. In addition to such penalties as may be provided by law, any person
violating these Rules and Regulations shall be civilly liable for such
damages as may result to the PVSC as a result of said violations.
D. Notwithstanding any other provisions of these Rules and Regulations,
any user who fails to comply with the Rules and Regulations shall be
liable to a fine in an amount not to exceed fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.) per day for each day or part thereof that such violation
exists. Any user who fails to submit a self-monitoring, compliance or
other report when due shall be liable to a fine not less than the amount
established in Appendix C.198
A. Upon the effective date of this subsection, all users that submit a sewer
connection application, a request for a temporary permit or a request
for a letter of authorization shall pay an application fee to the PVSC.
This fee will offset, in whole or in part, the administrative costs incurred
by the PVSC to review the application or request. If a determination is
made that a permit of any type is not required, a portion of the
application fee shall be refunded to the user. The PVSC may by
resolution revise the schedule of fees to be paid and refunded.
B. Upon the effective date of this subsection, all users that are issued a
permit of any type shall pay a permit fee to the PVSC. This fee will
offset, in whole or in part, the administrative costs incurred by the
PVSC to monitor the permittee's compliance with the PVSC Rules and
Regulations, as well as state and federal regulations, from the effective
date of the permit until the permit, temporary permit or letter of
authorization expires, is terminated or is revoked. The PVSC may by
resolution revise the schedule of permit fees to be paid. A new permit
fee shall be paid for each subsequent permit renewed. The permit fee
shall be due at the PVSC within ninety (90) days of the effective date of
the permit. No portion of this fee shall be reimbursed.
198. Editor's Note: Appendix C, Fines, is included at the end of this chapter.
§ A505-38 PASSAIC VALLEY SEWERAGE § A505-39
A505:1063
§ A505-40. Severability.
If any provision, paragraph, word, section or Article of these Rules and
Regulations is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections and Articles not affected
shall continue in full force and effect.
§ A505-41. Repealer.
All Rules and Regulations and parts thereof inconsistent or conflicting with
any part of the Rules and Regulations are hereby repealed to the extent of
such inconsistency or conflict.
§ A505-42. Effective date; filing of copies.
C. Each industrial user or other user of the PVSC treatment works shall
reimburse the PVSC for those costs incurred if a compliance sample is
sent to an outside laboratory for an analysis of one (1) or more
parameters which the PVSC is not certified to perform. This
reimbursement provision does not apply if the PVSC is certified to
perform the analysis but does not. This provision can be invoked no
more than two (2) times per year per parameter.
D. Each user against whom a charge is assessed shall remit the amount
due within sixty (60) days of receipt of the notice unless specific
procedures are established on a case-by-case basis.
A. These Rules and Regulations shall be in full force and effect on the 12th
day of August 1982 and supersede those Rules and Regulations
previously approved by the PVSC.
B. A certified copy of the Rules and Regulations shall be filed with the
Municipal Clerk of each participating municipality.
§ A505-39 PATERSON CODE § A505-42
A505:1064
Chapter A513
TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 435.
Public telephones — See Ch. 452.
Cable television franchise — See Ch. A495.
§ A513-1. Consent granted; powers of company.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:17-10, N.J.S.A. 48:17-11, and
N.J.S.A. 48:17-12, permission and consent is hereby granted to Bell Atlantic
- New Jersey (the "company"), its successors and assigns to install, operate,
inspect, maintain, repair, replace and remove its communication facilities
and other transmission or process equipment, including underground
facilities, such as conduits, manholes, cables, wires and all other facilities
appurtenant thereto, and aboveground facilities, such as cables, wires,
antennas, poles, posts, supports, guys, pedestals, cable termination and
distribution cabinets and other facilities appurtenant thereto, in, through,
upon, along, over, under and across all of the various public streets, ways,
which include the roads, avenues, rights-of-way, sidewalks, highways,
bridges, waterways, and other public places and parts thereof, throughout
their entire length, and to effect the necessary street opening and lateral
connections to curb poles, property lines and other facilities in the City of
Paterson (the "city") for said company's local and through lines and other
communication facilities in connection with the transaction of its business.
In the event that any public street or way where the company has facilities
is vacated by the city, the city agrees to reserve unto said company the
rights granted the company by the present ordinance.
§ A513-2. Location of poles, posts and other facilities.
All poles, posts, pedestals, cabinets or other facilities shall be located and
placed back of the curblines where shown on the Official Map(s) of the city;
the poles and posts, however, shall be located within eighteen (18) inches
of the face of such curbline or as may otherwise be mutually agreed by
both parties or at the points or places now occupied by the poles, posts,
pedestals, cabinets or other facilities of the company, its successors and
assigns and, where there are no curblines, at other convenient points or
places in, upon, along, adjacent or across the public streets and ways as
may be mutually agreed upon between the parties.
§ A513-3. Placement of communication facilities underground;
manholes.
The company may bury its local and through communication facilities such
as cables, conduit, manholes and associated equipment, fixtures, process
§ A505-42 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § A513-3
A513:1065
equipment and appurtenances within the rights-of-way of the various public
streets and ways and at such locations as shall be mutually agreed upon by
the parties for said company's local and through lines and communications
facilities. Underground and associated facilities, as aforementioned, shall
be placed at least eighteen (18) inches below the surface of said public
interest and ways, and with the exception of lateral branches to curb poles
and property lines and other facilities, the same shall generally not be
constructed more than ten (10) feet from the curbline, unless obstructions
make it necessary to deviate from such course or unless the parties
mutually agree to another location. Manholes shall be located at such points
along the line of underground conduits as may be necessary or convenient
for placing, maintaining and operating the facilities, as aforementioned,
which the company may from time to time use in connection with its
underground conduit system and shall be so constructed as to conform
to the cross-sectional and longitudinal grade of the surface so as not to
interfere with the safety or convenience of persons or vehicles.
§ A513-4. Prior notification of construction; street opening or
excavation permit required; restoration of streets.
Before proceeding with any new construction or relocation work in an area
covered by this ordinance, the company shall give prior notice, in writing,
thereof to the city, through its designated representative, of its intention
to perform such work. The company shall obtain such street opening or
excavation permits as may be lawfully required by any applicable
ordinances regulating such openings or excavations.199 Any such area
affected by the company in constructing its facilities shall be restored to
as good condition as it was before the commencement of work thereon. No
public streets or ways shall be encumbered for a period longer than shall be
reasonable to execute the work.
§ A513-5. Indemnification.
The company agrees to indemnify and save harmless the city from and
against all claims and liabilities resulting from any injury or damage to the
person or property of any person, firm or corporation caused by or arising
out of road conditions resulting from any negligent or faulty excavations,
installation or maintenance connected with the work or equipment of said
company, and not attributable to the fault or negligence of the city, except
that if such injury or damage shall be caused by the joint concurring
negligence or fault of the company and the city, the same shall be borne by
them to the extent of their respective fault or negligence.
§ A513-6. New curblines.
Whenever a curbline shall be established on streets where one does not now
exist or where an established curbline shall be relocated in order to widen
199. Editor's Note: See Ch. 435, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. III, Street Openings and
Excavations.
§ A513-3 PATERSON CODE § A513-6
A513:1066
an existing street in conjunction with road construction being performed by
the city, the company shall change the location of its aboveground facilities
covered by this ordinance in accordance with applicable law so that the
same shall be back of and adjacent to the new curbline, so long as the city
has acted in accordance with applicable law and with reasonable care in
establishing the new curbline and providing notice thereof.
§ A513-7. Shared use of company's poles, posts and other
structures.
Any company or corporation having legal authority to place its facilities
in the public streets and ways of the city may jointly use the company's
poles, posts, pedestals or other structures for all lawful purposes, provided
that the company consents to such use, on terms and conditions acceptable
to the company and not inconsistent with the provisions of the present
ordinance.
§ A513-8. Company to provide space on poles and in conduits.
The company shall provide space, to the extent available, on its poles so
long as said poles are occupied by the company and space, to the extent
available, in its main conduits existing on the date of passage of this
ordinance, but not exceeding one (1) duct of standard size, for the sole
benefit of the city during the pendency of this ordinance. Such space shall
be provided for the exclusive use of the city, which use shall be limited
to accommodating the wires or electrical conductors required for one-way
signal control in connection with municipal police patrol, fire alarm signal
control and traffic signal control systems only; but for no other uses or
purposes, either alone or in conjunction therewith; nor for circuits for
the supply of electrical energy for traffic or other signals; nor for wires,
conductors, cable or the equivalent which provide a means of transmitting
any signal to private, commercial or residential location, and which is
normally provided by a nongovernmental supplier; provided, further, that no
such use or attachment by the city shall interfere with the plant or facilities
of or the use thereof by the company. All costs or expenses incurred by the
company in connection therewith shall be paid by the city. It shall be the
obligation of the city to attach its wires to the poles or place its electric
conductors in the conduits or manholes of the company, provided that
before proceeding with said work, either by itself or by a person, firm or
corporation engaged to perform such work, the city shall give the company
thirty (30) days' prior notice, in writing. All such work shall be performed
under the supervision of said company. The city will indemnify and save
harmless the company from and against all claims, liabilities or demands
arising in any manner in connection with the city's wires or facilities or
their installation, maintenance, operation or removal or the city's use or
enjoyment of the company's plant or facilities provided under this § A513-8.
§ A513-6 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § A513-9
A513:1067
§ A513-9. Takeover of streets by county or state.
If any or all of said streets or ways are later taken over by the County
of Passaic or the State of New Jersey, such county or state shall have
such rights and privileges and be subject to the same terms, conditions
and limitations of use as apply herein to the city; provided, however, that
satisfactory prior arrangements as may be necessary are made with the city
and the company for the full protection of the respective interest of each.
§ A513-10. Applicability to city.
The term "city," as used in this ordinance, shall be held to apply to and
include any form of municipality or government into which the city or any
part thereof may at any time hereafter be changed, annexed or merged.
§ A513-11. Communication facilities covered by consent agreement.
The permission and consent hereby granted shall apply to and cover all
communication facilities (except those listed below) of the company existing
at any time and related structures, process equipment and appurtenances
heretofore or hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed,
located, relocated, replaced, maintained, repaired or operated by the
company, its predecessors, successors or assigns within the city. This
ordinance shall cancel and supersede all prior consent ordinances between
the city and the company regarding the subject matter hereof.
§ A513-12. Compliance with other laws; governance of public pay
telephones.
This ordinance specifically grants permission to Bell Atlantic - New Jersey
to operate its lines, poles and equipment in the public ways. This ordinance
shall not be construed as to exempt the company from complying with
any and all city ordinances relating to the installation of telephones within
the City of Paterson, including but not limited to Chapter 452, Telephones,
Public, and any amendments thereto. Moreover, the company is not
authorized by this ordinance to operate public pay telephones on the streets
and public ways of the City of Paterson, and any such telephones shall be
governed by all ordinances and/or separate agreement(s) with the City of
Paterson.
§ A513-13. Safe and continuous service to be provided.
The company shall maintain its property within the city and shall comply
with applicable law for the provision of safe, adequate and proper service
at just and reasonable rates and safeguard the public interest in continuous
and uninterrupted service within the city.
§ A513-14. Illegal or unenforceable provisions.
In the event that any provision herein shall for any reason be illegal or
unenforceable under applicable law, such illegality or unenforceability shall
§ A513-9 PATERSON CODE § A513-14
A513:1068
not affect any other provisions of this ordinance, and this ordinance shall
be construed as if such illegal or unenforceable provision(s) had never been
contained herein.
§ A513-15. Advertising costs of ordinance; notification of adoption;
approval by company and Board of Regulatory Commissioners.
The company shall pay the expenses incurred for advertising required in
connection with the passage of this ordinance, from the date of its first
reading, within thirty (30) days after the company has received a bill
for said advertising from the publisher. Following final passage of this
ordinance, the City Clerk shall provide the company with written notice
thereof by certified mail. As provided by applicable law, this ordinance and
any subsequent amendments shall not become effective until acceptance
thereof by the company and approval thereof by the Board of Regulatory
Commissioners.
§ A513-16. Severability.
If any section of this ordinance or part thereof shall be declared to be invalid
or inoperative, such section to the extent that it is not invalid or inoperative
shall not be affected thereby and should be enforced and effectuated.
§ A513-17. Codification of ordinance.
The Municipal Clerk shall have this ordinance codified and incorporated in
the official copies of the Paterson Code.
§ A513-18. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect upon the passage, approval and publication
as required by law.
§ A513-19. Conflict in numbering; numbering changes authorized.
The Municipal Clerk and the Corporation Counsel may change any chapter
numbers, Article numbers and section numbers if codification of this
ordinance reveals a conflict between those numbers and the existing code,
in order to avoid confusion and possible accidental and/or inadvertent
repealers of existing provisions.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ A513-14 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1069
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
79-001
2-20-1979 Dogs See Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No.
79-002
2-06-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-003
2-06-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-004
2-06-1979 Bond: For the purchase of a
data processing system
*
Ord. No.
79-005
2-06-1979 Fire insurance claims Superseded by Ord.
No. 90-016
Ord. No.
79-006
Not adopted
Ord. No.
79-007
2-20-1979 Bond: Reconstruction of
combined sewers
*
Ord. No.
79-008
2-20-1979 Acquisition of property: 42
Mary Street
*
Ord. No.
79-009
2-20-1979 Granting an easement: 83
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
79-010
2-20-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Slow down
bumpers in Eastside Park
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-011
2-20-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: One-way
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-012
2-20-1979 Easement amendment: 87
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
79-013
3-06-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-014
3-20-1979 Acquisition of property *
Ord. No.
79-015
5-01-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-016
3-20-1979 Bond: Reconstruction of
sanitary sewers
*
Ord. No.
79-017
3-06-1979 Changing street names *
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1070
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
79-018
3-20-1979 Bond: Construction of cable
communication facility
*
Ord. No.
79-019
3-20-1979 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
79-020
3-20-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-021
3-20-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-022
Not adopted
Ord. No.
79-023
4-03-1979 Acquisition of property *
Ord. No.
79-024
5-15-1979 Acquisition of property *
Ord. No.
79-025
4-17-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Slowdown
bumpers on Colonial Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-026
4-17-1979 Acquisition of property:
Marshall Street Industrial
Park
*
Ord. No.
79-027
4-17-1979 Appropriation: School
improvement; bond issue
*
Ord. No.
79-028
4-17-1979 Appropriation: School
improvements; bond issue
*
Ord. No.
79-029
4-17-1979 Appropriation: School
improvements; bond issue
*
Ord. No.
79-030
4-17-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Prohibiting
right turns from Redwood
Avenue to Granite Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-031
5-1-1979 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
79-032
5-1-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Crosby Place
two-way, parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-033
5-1-1979 Salaries: Fire Captains *
Ord. No.
79-034
5-1-1979 Salaries: Rank differential,
Fire Division, Department of
Public Safety
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1071
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
79-035
5-1-1979 Public indecency and
obscenity
Superseded at time
of adoption of Code;
see now Ch. 345
Ord. No.
79-036
5-1-1979 Granting an easement:
Disposition Parcel 8
*
Ord. No.
79-037
5-1-1979 Acquisition of property:
Block 978, Lot 4
*
Ord. No.
79-038
5-15-1979 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
79-039
5-15-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-040
5-15-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-041
5-15-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-042
5-15-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-043
6-04-1979 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
79-044
6-04-1979 Bond: Street improvements *
Ord. No.
79-045
6-04-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Jefferson
Street two-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-046
6-04-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Holsman
Street two-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-047
6-04-1979 Granting an easement:
Public service electric and
gas company
*
Ord. No.
79-048
6-4-1979 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
79-049
6-4-1979 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 95-002; see Ch.
449
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1072
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
79-050
6-4-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-051
6-19-1979 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
79-052
6-19-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: 22nd Avenue
angle parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-053
6-19-1979 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
79-054
6-19-1979 Bond: Redevelopment of
blighted area
*
Ord. No.
79-055
6-22-1979 Fire Division rules and
regulations
Ord. No.
79-056
7-17-1979 Cable television franchise Superseded by Ord.
No. 86-013
Ord. No.
79-057
7-3-1979 Animals amendment Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No.
79-058
7-3-1979 Granting consent for
installation of steam lines
beneath Paterson Street
*
Ord. No.
79-059
7-17-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: One-way
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-060
7-17-1979 Parking Authority
amendment
Ch. 71
Ord. No.
79-061
10-9-1979 Municipal Court Judges Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
79-062
7-17-1979 Salaries: Raising the
salaries of various city
employees
*
Ord. No.
79-063
7-17-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-064
7-17-1979 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
79-065
7-17-1979 Bond: City improvements;
bond issue
*
Ord. No.
79-066
7-17-1979 Bond: For redevelopment of
a blighted area
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1073
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
79-067
8-7-1979 Garage sales See Ch. 249
Ord. No.
79-068
8-7-1979 Acquisition of property:
2-14 Spruce Street
*
Ord. No.
79-069
8-7-1979 Street vacation: Ellison
Street
*
Ord. No.
79-070
8-7-1979 Street dedication: Ellison
Street
*
Ord. No.
79-071
8-7-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signals
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-072
8-7-1979 Specifying cartway widths
for various streets
*
Ord. No.
79-073
8-14-1979 Street vacation: Jackson
Street
*
Ord. No.
79-074
8-7-1979 Lease agreement: Park East
Terrace
*
Ord. No.
79-075
8-7-1979 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 94-019
Ord. No.
79-076
8-7-1979 Sale of Seton Hall *
Ord. No.
79-077
8-7-1979 Bond: For acquisition of
public works equipment
*
Ord. No.
79-078
9-4-1979 Bond: For acquisition of
communication equipment
*
Ord. No.
79-079
8-21-1979 Bond: Street improvements *
Ord. No.
79-080
8-21-1979 Providing for construction
of sidewalks and curbs
*
Ord. No.
79-081
8-21-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Bus stops
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-082
Not adopted
Ord. No.
79-083
9-4-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-084
9-4-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Christina Lane
and Angela Lane one-way
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1074
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
79-085
Not adopted
Ord. No.
79-086
9-4-1979 Bond: Various
improvements
*
Ord. No.
79-087
9-4-1979 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
79-088
9-4-1979 Street dedication: Van
Houten Street and Mill
Street
*
Ord. No.
79-088
9-18-1979 Granting an easement: Fire
Department
*
Ord. No.
79-089
9-18-1979 Accepting an easement *
Ord. No.
79-090
9-18-1979 Bicycles amendment Not desired by
governing body
Ord. No.
79-091
9-18-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-092
10-9-1979 Fees for court transcripts Ch. 377, Art. IV
Ord. No.
79-093
10-9-1979 Marshall Street Industrial
Park redevelopment plan
amendment
*
Ord. No.
79-094
10-2-1979 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
79-095
10-23-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: 13th Avenue
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-096
10-23-1979 Jackson Street urban
renewal plan amendment
*
Ord. No.
79-097
11-13-1979 Street vacation: Van Winkle
Street
*
Ord. No.
79-098
11-13-1979 Street vacation: Canal
Street
*
Ord. No.
79-099
11-13-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Pennington
Street and Graham Avenue
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-100
12-4-1979 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 363
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1075
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
79-101
11-13-1979 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Broadway
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
79-102
11-13-1979 Bond: For a new
Administration Building
*
Ord. No.
79-103
11-20-1979 Acquisition of property:
Various properties
*
Ord. No.
79-104
11-20-1979 Salaries: Department of
Public Safety, Police and
Fire Divisions
*
Ord. No.
79-105
12-11-1979 Street vacation: Carbon
Street
*
Ord. No.
79-106
1-22-1980 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 94-019
Ord. No.
79-107
Not adopted
Ord. No.
79-108
12-18-1979 Boating and bathing Ch. 143
Ord. No.
79-109
12-18-1979 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 113, Art. I
Ord. No.
79-110
12-18-1979 Training Officer, Emergency
Medical Technician
Services; Salaries
*
Ord. No.
79-111
12-18-1979 Code adoption Superseded; see
Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No.
79-112
12-18-1979 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
79-113
12-18-1979 Bond: Sanitary sewerage
system improvements
*
Ord. No.
79-114
12-27-1979 Great Falls Historic District
redevelopment plan
amendment
*
Ord. No.
79-115
12-27-1979 Acquisition of property:
Mid-Main Street parking
area
*
Ord. No.
80-001
1-8-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-002
1-8-1980 Salaries: Various city
employees
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1076
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
80-003
1-22-1980 Insurance Fund Commission Superseded by Ord.
No. 86-019
Ord. No.
80-004
1-22-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Ellison Street
and Pennsylvania Avenue
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-005
2-5-1980 Rent leveling amendment Chs. 5 and 381
Ord. No.
80-006
Not adopted
Ord. No.
80-007
3-4-1980 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
80-008
2-12-1980 Bond: Stormwater drainage
system improvement
*
Ord. No.
80-009
3-4-1980 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
80-010
3-19-1980 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
80-011
3-4-1980 Fingerprinting fees
amendment
Ch. 377, Art. II
Ord. No.
80-012
3-4-1980 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
80-013
3-4-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: East 26th
Street parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-014
3-4-1980 Bond: Construction of a new
park
*
Ord. No.
80-015
3-4-1980 Bond: Sanitary sewerage
system improvements
*
Ord. No.
80-016
3-19-1980 Salaries: Various city
employees
*
Ord. No.
80-017
3-19-1980 Appropriation: School
improvements; bond issue
*
Ord. No.
80-018
4-1-1980 Garbage and refuse removal
and disposal amendment
Ch. 427, Art. II
Ord. No.
80-019
4-22-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking
violations
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-020
Not adopted
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1077
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
80-021
4-22-1980 Sewage disposal contract *
Ord. No.
80-022
4-22-1980 Conveying sewerage system
to City of Paterson
Sewerage Authority
*
Ord. No.
80-023
5-6-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Taxi stands
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-024
5-6-1980 Tennis court fees
amendment
Not desired by
governing body
Ord. No.
80-025
5-20-1980 Bond: Street improvements *
Ord. No.
80-026
6-4-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-027
6-4-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Sherwood
Avenue weight limit
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-028
Not adopted
Ord. No.
80-029
6-4-1980 Home improvement tax
abatement
Superseded by Ord.
No. 81-011
Ord. No.
80-030
6-4-1980 Street dedication: Mountain
Avenue and Carlisle Avenue
*
Ord. No.
80-031
6-17-1980 Salaries: Increasing salary
maximums for various city
employees
*
Ord. No.
80-032
6-17-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-033
6-17-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Edmund
Avenue parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-034
9-2-1980 Street vacation: Spring
Street
*
Ord. No.
80-035
9-2-1980 Intermunicipal agreement
for data processing services
*
Ord. No.
80-036
10-7-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: East 27th
Street and 22nd Avenue
stop intersection
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1078
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
80-037
10-7-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Passaic Street
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-038
9-16-1980 Appropriation: For the
relocation of certain utility
lines
*
Ord. No.
80-039
9-16-1980 Street dedication: Stoney
Road Drive
*
Ord. No.
80-040
Not adopted
Ord. No.
80-041
10-7-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Ellison Street
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-042
10-7-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-043
10-7-1980 Street vacation: Danforth
Avenue
*
Ord. No.
80-044
10-7-1980 Street vacation: Webster
Avenue
*
Ord. No.
80-045
10-7-1980 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
80-046
11-3-1980 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
80-047
11-3-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Madison
Avenue and 21st Avenue no
right on red
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-048
Not adopted
Ord. No.
80-049
11-3-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Union Avenue
and West Broadway no right
on red
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-050
11-3-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Totowa Avenue
truck parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-051
11-3-1980 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
80-052
11-3-1980 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Arts. I and
II
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1079
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
80-053
Not adopted
Ord. No.
80-054
11-3-1980 Appropriation: School
improvements; bond issue
*
Ord. No.
80-055
12-2-1980 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 94-019
Ord. No.
80-056
Not adopted
Ord. No.
80-057
12-2-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Quinn Street
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-058
12-2-1980 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
80-059
12-2-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: East 27th
Street angle parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-060
12-2-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: East 35th
Street angle parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-061
12-2-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Fourth Avenue
angle parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-062
12-2-1980 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Garfield
Avenue one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
80-063
1-6-1981 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
80-064
12-16-1980 Appropriation: For the
purchase of a backhoe
loader
*
Ord. No.
81-001
1-20-1981 Appropriation: For
construction of Paterson
Public Safety Complex
*
Ord. No.
81-002
2-17-1981 Acquisition of property:
Railroad Avenue
*
Ord. No.
81-003
Not adopted
Ord. No.
81-004
2-3-1981 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
81-005
2-3-1981 Emergency fuel oil delivery Ch. 267, Art. I
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1080
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
81-006
Not adopted
Ord. No.
81-007
2-17-1981 Interlocal agreement for
data processing services
*
Ord. No.
81-008
3-3-1981 Lease agreement: 175
Market Street
*
Ord. No.
81-009
3-3-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: East 27th
Street angle parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-010
3-3-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Paterson Street
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-011
3-3-1981 Tax abatement on added
assessments, residential
neighborhoods
Superseded by Ord.
No. 93-029
Ord. No.
81-012
Not adopted
Ord. No.
81-013
3-3-1981 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
81-014
3-17-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Angle parking -
Fourth Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-015
3-21-1981 Bond: Acquisition of
sanitary sewerage system
*
Ord. No.
81-016
Not adopted
Ord. No.
81-017
4-6-1981 Secondhand dealers Ch. 399
Ord. No.
81-018
5-19-1981 Fire prevention amendment Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-019
4-21-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: No parking on
Paterson Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-020
4-21-1981 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
81-021
Not adopted
Ord. No.
81-022
Not adopted
Ord. No.
81-023
Not adopted
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1081
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
81-024
5-19-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Violations
procedure
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-025
5-19-1981 Food and beverage vending
machines amendment
Ch. 227
Ord. No.
81-026
5-19-1981 Retail food establishments
amendment
Ch. 231
Ord. No.
81-027
5-19-1981 Vital statistics records
amendment
Ch. 377, Art. I
Ord. No.
81-028
5-19-1981 Street vacation: Bridge
Street
*
Ord. No.
81-029
5-19-1981 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 94-019
Ord. No.
81-030
5-19-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Taxi stands
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-031
6-3-1981 Fee for Tuberculosis Clinic
services
Ch. 263, Art. I
Ord. No.
81-032
6-3-1981 Creating the position of
Senior Mechanic in
Department of Public
Works; Salaries
*
Ord. No.
81-033
6-3-1981 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 113, Art. I
Ord. No.
81-034
6-3-1981 Amusement parlors
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. III
Ord. No.
81-035
6-3-1981 Fees for police motor
vehicle accident reports
Ch. 377, Art. III
Ord. No.
81-036
6-3-1981 Fire Division amendment Ch. 39
Ord. No.
81-037A
6-3-1981 Creating positions of
Civilian Supervisor and
Emergency Medical
Technician Records Clerk;
Salaries
*
Ord. No.
81-037B
6-16-1981 Fire prevention amendment Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-038
6-16-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Street
cleaning, parking
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1082
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
81-039
6-16-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-040
6-29-1981 Sewer user charges Ch. 407, Art. II
Ord. No.
81-040A
6-29-1981 Municipal Utilities Authority Ch. 65
Ord. No.
81-041
7-28-1981 Sale of real estate to
Municipal Utilities Authority
*
Ord. No.
81-042
8-4-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-043
8-4-1981 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
81-044
8-4-1981 Interlocal agreement for
joint budget accounting
system
*
Ord. No.
81-045
8-4-1981 Lease agreement: 125
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
81-046
8-4-1981 Cable television Superseded by Ord.
No. 86-013
Ord. No.
81-047
Not adopted
Ord. No.
81-048
8-4-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Chestnut
Street one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-049
Not adopted
Ord. No.
81-050
8-4-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
parking meters
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-051
10-27-1981 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
81-052
9-15-1981 Salaries: Increases for
certain officers
*
Ord. No.
81-053
9-1-1981 Secondhand dealers
amendment
Ch. 399
Ord. No.
81-054
9-1-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Van Houten
Street one-way
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1083
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
81-055
9-1-1981 Urban renewal plan
amendment
*
Ord. No.
81-056
9-1-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-057
9-1-1981 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
81-058
2-2-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Truck routes
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-059
9-1-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-060
9-1-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone -
Van Houten Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-061
9-1-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-062
9-1-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-062A
9-15-1981 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
81-063
9-15-1981 Lease agreement: 359
Hamilton Avenue
*
Ord. No.
81-064
9-15-1981 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
Ord. No.
81-065
10-6-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: No parking on
Prince Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-066
9-15-1981 Garage sales amendment See Ch. 249
Ord. No.
81-067
9-15-1981 Bond: Various
improvements
*
Ord. No.
81-068
9-15-1981 Bond: Construction of public
safety complex
*
Ord. No.
81-069
10-6-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal - East 27th Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-070
9-15-1981 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1084
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
81-071
10-20-1981 Street vacation: Ploch
Street
*
Ord. No.
81-072
10-20-1981 Street dedication: Curtis
Place extension
*
Ord. No.
81-073
10-20-1981 Street vacation: Swineburn
Street
*
Ord. No.
81-074
11-2-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
parking meters
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-075
11-2-1981 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment
Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No.
81-076
11-2-1981 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
Ord. No.
81-077
11-2-1981 Specifying street widths *
Ord. No.
81-078
11-2-1981 Bond: Construction of public
safety complex
*
Ord. No.
81-079
11-17-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
parking meters
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-080
12-15-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-081
Not adopted
Ord. No.
81-082
12-1-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-083
12-1-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-084
12-1-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Taxi stands
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-085
12-15-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: No parking -
Cianci Street, Ellison Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-086
12-1-1981 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Cianci Street, Curtis Place
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-087
12-1-1981 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1085
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
81-087A
1-19-1982 Fingerprinting fees
amendment
Ch. 377, Art. II
Ord. No.
81-088
12-22-1981 Bond: Purchase of
equipment
*
Ord. No.
81-089
12-22-1981 Bond: Various
improvements
*
Ord. No.
81-090
3-2-1982 Bond: Amending various
bond issues
*
Ord. No.
81-091
1-5-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Barclay Street
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-092
1-5-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Mary Street
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-093
1-5-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Bus stop - Main
Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
81-094
3-2-1982 Lease agreement: 125
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
81-095
1-19-1982 Easement: New Jersey Bell
Telephone Company urban
renewal project
*
Ord. No.
81-096
2-16-1982 Alarm systems Ch. 109
Ord. No.
81-097
2-16-1982 Bond: Construction of sewer
improvements
*
Ord. No.
81-098
2-16-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking
penalties
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-001
3-2-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-002
3-2-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Truck routes
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-003
4-13-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-003
4-13-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking
penalties
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1086
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
82-004
Not adopted
Ord. No.
82-005
4-20-1982 Appropriation: School
improvement
*
Ord. N o.
82-006
5-4-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-007
6-1-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-008
6-22-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: No stopping or
standing - 4th Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-009
6-22-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: No stopping or
standing - East 33rd Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-010
6-22-1982 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
82-011
6-22-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Beech Street
as a play street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-012
7-20-1982 Bond: Fire equipment
Ord. No.
82-013
Not adopted
Ord. No.
82-014
8-10-1982 Amusement parlors
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. III
Ord. No.
82-015
8-10-1982 Street vacation: East 31st
Street and 13th Avenue
*
Ord. No.
82-016
9-7-1982 Bond: Construction of public
safety complex
*
Ord. No.
82-017
9-7-1982 Easement: Cookie Mill #2
Realty Company
*
Ord. No.
82-018
9-7-1982 Acquisition of property: For
historic preservation
*
Ord. No.
82-019
10-5-1982 Salaries: Police Chauffeur *
Ord. No.
82-020
10-5-1982 Creating position of
Municipal Jail Guard and
Court Attendant; Salaries
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1087
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
82-021
10-5-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
parking meters
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-022
10-5-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
parking meters
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-023
10-5-1982 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 435, Art. VIII
Ord. No.
82-024
10-19-1982 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 435, Art. VII
Ord. No.
82-025
10-19-1982 Appropriation: Construction
of new park
*
Ord. No.
82-026
10-19-1982 Food vending vehicles
amendment
Ch. 243
Ord. No.
82-027
11-4-1982 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 435, Art. VIII
Ord. No.
82-028
11-4-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking in
public safety complex
parking lot
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-029
11-16-1982 Changing street name:
Graham Avenue to Rosa
Parks Boulevard
*
Ord. No.
82-030
11-16-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
parking meters
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-031
11-16-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking - Colt
Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-032
11-16-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: No left turn -
Church Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-033
11-16-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-034
12-7-1982 Bond: School improvements *
Ord. No.
82-035
12-7-1982 Bond: Seton Hall Building
improvements
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1088
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
82-036
12-21-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-037
12-21-1982 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: North First
Street one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
82-038
12-21-1982 Vacating open taxes on
Market Street property
*
Ord. No.
83-001
1-4-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
parking meters
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-002
1-18-1983 Acquisition of property: 20
River Street
*
Ord. No.
83-003
1-18-1983 Lease agreement: 135
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
83-004
1-18-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-005
2-3-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-006
2-3-1983 Limiting expenses claimed
by Ward Commissioners
*
Ord. No.
83-007
2-15-1983 Acquisition of property: 28
and 55 Jefferson Street
*
Ord. No.
83-008
2-15-1983 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 109
Ord. No.
83-009
2-15-1983 Bond: Improvement of fire
equipment
*
Ord. No.
83-010
3-1-1983 Numbering of buildings
amendment
Ch. 169
Ord. No.
83-011
3-1-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-012
Not adopted
Ord. No.
83-013
3-15-1983 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 113, Art. I
Ord. No.
83-014
3-15-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1089
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
83-015
4-5-1983 Auctioneers and auctioneers
amendment
Ch. 125
Ord. No.
83-016
4-5-1983 Dancing academies
amendment
Ch. 191, Art. II
Ord. No.
83-017
4-5-1983 Entertainment and shows
amendment
Ch. 203
Ord. No.
83-018
4-5-1983 Auctions and auctioneers
amendment
Ch. 125
Ord. No.
83-019
4-5-1983 Bazaars amendment Ch. 129
Ord. No.
83-020
4-5-1983 Public billiard and pool
rooms amendment
Ch. 133
Ord. No.
83-021
4-5-1983 Auctions and auctioneers
amendment
Ch. 125
Ord. No.
83-022
4-5-1983 Retail food establishments
amendment
Ch. 231
Ord. No.
83-023
4-5-1983 Dance halls amendment Ch. 191, Art. I
Ord. No.
83-024
4-5-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-025
4-5-1983 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 113, Art. I
Ord. No.
83-026
4-5-1983 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
83-027
4-19-1983 Increasing budget
appropriations
*
Ord. No.
83-028
Not adopted
Ord. No.
83-029
4-19-1983 Acceptance of property: 150
Hamilton Street
*
Ord. No.
83-030
4-19-1983 Coin-operated laundries
amendment
Ch. 301
Ord. No.
83-031
4-19-1983 Motor vehicle junk dealers
amendment
Ch. 287
Ord. No.
83-032
4-19-1983 Junkyards amendment Ch. 291
Ord. No.
83-033
4-19-1983 Retail florists amendment Ch. 223
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1090
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
83-033A
5-3-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Prohibiting
parking in certain parking
lot
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-034
4-19-1983 Appropriation: Completion
of Traffic Operation Center
*
Ord. No.
83-034A
5-3-1983 Open-air parking lots
amendment
Ch. 359
Ord. No.
83-035
4-19-1983 Acquisition of property: 216
River Street
*
Ord. No.
83-035A
5-3-1983 Amusement parlors
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. III
Ord. No.
83-036
4-19-1983 Acquisition of property: 5
Mill Street
*
Ord. No.
83-037A
5-3-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-038
5-17-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-039
5-17-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-040
5-17-1983 Acquisition of property: 167
North Fourth Street
*
Ord. No.
83-041
5-17-1983 Maintenance of sewer
laterals and house
connections
Ch. 407, Art. III
Ord. No.
83-042
6-8-1983 Private clubs Not desired by
governing body
Ord. No.
83-043
6-8-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking
regulations
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-044
6-21-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Prohibiting
parking on Fair Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-045
6-8-1983 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. II
Ord. No.
83-046
6-8-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1091
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
83-047
6-8-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-048
6-8-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-049
6-8-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-050
6-8-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-051
6-8-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-052
6-21-1983 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
Ord. No.
83-053
6-21-1983 Acquisition of property:
51-55 Garfield Avenue
*
Ord. No.
83-054
6-21-1983 Acquisition of property:
362-364 Van Houten Street
*
Ord. No.
83-055
6-21-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Prohibiting
parking in city-owned lot
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-056
6-21-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-057
6-21-1983 Appropriation: Construction
of cable communication
facility
*
Ord. No.
83-058
6-21-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-059
6-21-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-060
8-2-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-061
8-2-1983 Acquisition of property:
220-228 West Broadway
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1092
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
83-062
8-2-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking meter
rates
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-063
8-2-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-064
8-2-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-065
8-2-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-066
8-2-1983 Approving redevelopment
plan
*
Ord. No.
83-067
8-2-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-068
8-2-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-069
8-2-1983 Acquisition of property: 36
Park Avenue
*
Ord. No.
83-070
8-2-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Prohibiting
parking in Board of
Education lots
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-071
8-2-1983 Real property canvassing Not desired by
governing body
Ord. No.
83-072
9-6-1983 Salaries: Increasing
minimum rates for certain
employees
*
Ord. No.
83-073
9-6-1983 Longevity pay Ch. 77, Art. I
Ord. No.
83-074
Not adopted
Ord. No.
83-075
9-6-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-076
9-6-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1093
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
83-077
9-6-1983 Bond: Capital improvements *
Ord. No.
83-078
9-20-1983 Appropriation: Amending
appropriation for
construction of cable
communication facility
*
Ord. No.
83-079
9-20-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-080
9-20-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-081
9-20-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-082
9-20-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-083
9-20-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-084
9-20-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-085
9-20-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-086
10-4-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-087
11-1-1983 Acquisition of property: 192
and 194 Railroad Avenue
*
Ord. No.
83-088
11-15-1983 Salaries: Increase in salary
maximums for certain
employees
*
Ord. No.
83-089
11-15-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-090
11-15-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1094
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
83-091
12-6-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-092
12-6-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-093
12-6-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-094
12-6-1983 Salaries: Increase in salary
maximums for Fire Division
employees
*
Ord. No.
83-095
12-6-1983 Salaries: Increasing salary
maximums for fire fighters
*
Ord. No.
83-096
12-6-1983 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
83-097
12-20-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-098
12-20-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-099
12-20-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-100
12-20-1983 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
83-101
12-20-1983 Acquisition of property: 53
Twentieth Avenue
*
Ord. No.
83-102
12-20-1983 Salaries: Increases in
salaries for Fire Division
*
Ord. No.
83-103
12-20-1983 Salaries: Increases in salary
for Deputy Fire Chief
*
Ord. No.
83-104
12-20-1983 Salaries: Increase in salary
for Fire and Police Chiefs
*
Ord. No.
83-105
12-20-1983 Salaries: Increases in salary
for Deputy Police Chief
*
Ord. No.
83-106
12-20-1983 Authorizing exchange of
properties: Marshall Street
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1095
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
84-001
1-3-1984 Bond: Construction of
Traffic Operations and
Cable Communications
Center
*
Ord. No.
84-002
1-3-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-003
1-3-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-004
1-3-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-005
1-17-1984 Bond: Acquisition of
property from DOT
*
Ord. No.
84-006
1-17-1984 Bond: School improvements *
Ord. No.
84-007
1-17-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-008
1-17-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-009
1-17-1984 Salaries: Increasing salary
for housing police officers
*
Ord. No.
84-010
2-7-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Repealing
certain provisions
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-011
Not adopted
Ord. No.
84-012
2-7-1984 Acquisition of property:
289-291 Summer Street
*
Ord. No.
84-013
2-7-1984 Acquisition of property:
291-293 Summer Street
*
Ord. No.
84-014
2-7-1984 Acquisition of property:
293-295 Summer Street
*
Ord. No.
84-015
2-7-1984 Acquisition of property:
65-67 Auburn Street
*
Ord. No.
84-016
2-7-1984 Acquisition of property:
69-71 Auburn Street
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1096
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
84-017
2-7-1984 Acquisition of property:
219-221 Park Avenue
*
Ord. No.
84-018
2-7-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-019
2-7-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-020
2-7-1984 Salaries: Increasing salaries
for Fire Division
*
Ord. No.
84-021
3-6-1984 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. I
Ord. No.
84-022
3-6-1984 Bond: Refunding of
emergency appropriation
*
Ord. No.
84-023
3-6-1984 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment
Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No.
84-024
3-6-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-025
3-20-1984 Bond: Capital improvements *
Ord. No.
84-026
3-20-1984 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
84-027
3-20-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: East 23rd and
East 24th Streets one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-028
4-3-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Prohibiting
parking on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-029
4-3-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Prohibiting
parking on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-030
4-3-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-031
4-3-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Designating
various stop intersections
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-032
4-3-1984 Fire prevention amendment Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1097
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
84-033
4-3-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-034
Not adopted
Ord. No.
84-035
4-17-1984 Maintenance of sewer
laterals and house
connections amendment
Ch. 407, Art. III
Ord. No.
84-036
4-17-1984 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
84-037
4-17-1984 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 94-019
Ord. No.
84-038
4-17-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Elm Street
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-039
4-17-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-040
4-17-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-041
5-1-1984 Emergency medical
technician certification
Ch. 31
Ord. No.
84-042
5-1-1984 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment;
prohibited animals
Ch. 121, Arts. I and
V
Ord. No.
84-043
5-1-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Vreeland Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-044
5-1-1984 Lease agreement: 125
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
84-045
5-1-1984 Bond: Acquisition of rescue
truck
*
Ord. No.
84-046
5-1-1984 Acquisition of property:
Memorial Drive and Bridge
Street intersection
*
Ord. No.
84-047
5-1-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1098
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
84-048
5-1-1984 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment
Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No.
84-049
5-1-1984 Urban renewal plan
modification
*
Ord. No.
84-050
5-15-1984 Bond: Construction of
handicapped access ramps
*
Ord. No.
84-051
5-15-1984 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 363
Ord. No.
84-052
6-6-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-053
6-6-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Presidential Boulevard
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-054
6-6-1984 Changing street name:
Lewis Street to Lindbergh
Place
*
Ord. No.
84-055
6-6-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-056
6-6-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking - East
22nd Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-057
6-6-1984 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
84-058
6-19-1984 Maintenance of sewer
laterals and house
connections amendment
Ch. 407, Art. III
Ord. No.
84-059
6-19-1984 Tax exemption and
abatement, commercial and
industrial structures
Superseded by Ord.
No. 93-029
Ord. No.
84-060
6-19-1984 Acquisition of property:
181-183 Harrison Street
*
Ord. No.
84-061
6-19-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-062
6-19-1984 Spray paint sales Repealed by Ord.
No. 86-028
Ord. No.
84-063
7-10-1984 Acquisition of property: 164
Jackson Street
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1099
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
84-064
7-24-1984 Bond: Capital improvements *
Ord. No.
84-065
7-24-1984 Bond: Creation of Fine Arts
and Technical High School
*
Ord. No.
84-066
7-24-1984 Emergency fuel oil delivery;
plumbing emergencies
amendment
Ch. 267, Art. II
Ord. No.
84-067
7-24-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking - Sheridan Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-068
7-24-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking - Godwin Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-069
7-24-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking - St. Joseph's
Hospital
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-070
7-24-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-071
7-24-1984 Street vacation: portion of
East 32nd Street
*
Ord. No.
84-072
7-24-1984 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
84-073
8-7-1984 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
84-074
8-7-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-075
8-7-1984 Salaries of Zoning Board of
Adjustment
*
Ord. No.
84-076
8-7-1984 Lease agreement: 125
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
84-077
8-7-1984 Street vacation: portion of
Mulberry Street
*
Ord. No.
84-078
8-21-1984 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
84-079
8-21-1984 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1100
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
84-080
8-21-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking - Main
Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-081
8-21-1984 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
84-082
8-21-1984 Authorizing purchase of
property
*
Ord. No.
84-083
9-4-1984 Lease agreement: 393 21st
Avenue
*
Ord. No.
84-084
9-4-1984 Bond: Acquisition of
vehicles and equipment
*
Ord. No.
84-085
9-4-1984 Graffiti Ch. 255, Art. I
Ord. No.
84-086
9-18-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Bus stops -
Main Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-087
9-18-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Bus stops -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-088
9-18-1984 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
84-089
9-18-1984 Transferring assets to
Traffic Cable
Communications
Corporation
*
Ord. No.
84-090
10-2-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Various streets
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-091
10-2-1984 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
84-092
10-2-1984 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
84-093
10-2-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-094
10-2-1984 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1101
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
84-095
10-16-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Bus stops -
Grand and New Streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-096
10-16-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Weight limit -
Pennington Street and Rosa
Parks Boulevard
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-097
10-16-1984 Tax abatement on added
assessments, residential
neighborhoods amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 93-029
Ord. No.
84-098
10-16-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Riverview Towers property
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-099
Not adopted
Ord. No.
84-100
Not adopted
Ord. No.
84-101
11-7-1984 Naming a new street:
Industrial Avenue
*
Ord. No.
84-102
11-7-1984 Acquisition of property: 51
Graham Avenue
*
Ord. No.
84-103
11-7-1984 Acquisition of property: 380
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
84-104
11-7-1984 Salaries: Increasing salaries
for Health Division
employees
*
Ord. No.
84-105
11-7-1984 Salaries: Increasing salary
maximums and longevity for
Fire Division
*
Ord. No.
84-106
11-7-1984 Providing compensation for
members of Fire Division
*
Ord. No.
84-107
11-20-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Weight limits -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-108
11-20-1984 Bond: Waterworks facilities
improvements
*
Ord. No.
84-109
11-20-1984 Granting tax abatement to
Bascom Food Products
*
Ord. No.
84-110
11-20-1984 Acquisition of property: 41
Mary Street
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1102
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
84-111
11-20-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-112
11-27-1984 Bond: Construction of public
safety complex
*
Ord. No.
84-113
12-4-1984 Library Board of Trustees
amendment
Ch. 59
Ord. No.
84-114
12-4-1984 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
84-115
12-4-1984 Lease agreement: Computer
capacity
*
Ord. No.
84-116
12-4-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-117
12-4-1984 Acquisition of property:
Paterson Parking Authority
*
Ord. No.
84-118
12-4-1984 Tax abatement for Auto
Shack-Pike Associates
*
Ord. No.
84-118A
12-18-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Permit parking
- Clark and De Grasse
Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-119
12-18-1984 Rodent control Ch. 385
Ord. No.
84-120
12-18-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
84-121
12-18-1984 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-001
2-5-1985 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Arts. I, II
and III
Ord. No.
85-002
2-5-1985 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
85-003
2-5-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Various streets
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-004
4-2-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1103
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
85-005
3-5-1985 Bond: School improvements *
Ord. No.
85-005
4-2-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-006
2-5-1985 Tax abatement for Samuel
and Rhoda Chalfin/IPF
International Inc.
*
Ord. No.
85-007
2-5-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-008
2-5-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-009
2-5-1985 Lease agreement: Computer
capacity
*
Ord. No.
85-010
7-9-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-011
2-19-1985 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
Ord. No.
85-012
8-6-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-013
2-19-1985 Lease agreement: 22
Spruce Street
*
Ord. No.
85-014
2-19-1985 Lease agreement: 133
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
85-015
2-19-1985 Lease agreement: 125
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
85-016
2-19-1985 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
85-017
2-19-1985 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
85-018
2-19-1985 Illegal conversions Superseded by Ord.
No. 85-068
Ord. No.
85-019
2-19-1985 Lead-based paint Ch. 351
Ord. No.
85-020
3-5-1985 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1104
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
85-021
3-5-1985 Disposition agreement for
certain property
*
Ord. No.
85-022
3-5-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-023
3-22-1985 Bond: Westside Park
rehabilitation project
*
Ord. No.
85-024
3-22-1985 Bond: Reconstruction of
sanitary sewers
*
Ord. No.
85-025
3-22-1985 Tax abatement for Peter and
Judith Cofrancesco
*
Ord. No.
85-026
3-22-1985 Lead-based paint
amendment
Ch. 351
Ord. No.
85-027
4-2-1985 Acquisition of property:
11-13 Amity Street
*
Ord. No.
85-028
Not adopted
Ord. No.
85-029
4-2-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-030
4-2-1985 Acquisition of property:
34-46 Temple Street
*
Ord. No.
85-031
4-16-1985 Approving redevelopment
plan
*
Ord. No.
85-032
4-16-1985 Tax abatement for Joseph
D'Amario
*
Ord. No.
85-033
Not adopted
Ord. No.
85-034
4-16-1985 Bond: Construction of
Sandy Hill Sewer Project
Phase II
*
Ord. No.
85-035
5-7-1985 Bond: Traffic signal systems *
Ord. No.
85-036
Not adopted
Ord. No.
85-037
5-7-1985 Acquisition of property: 28
North Third Street
*
Ord. No.
85-038
5-14-1985 Lease agreement:
Firefighting apparatus
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1105
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
85-039
5-21-1985 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
85-040
5-21-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-041
5-21-1985 Acquisition of property: 157
Fair Street
*
Ord. No.
85-042
5-21-1985 Tax abatement agreement *
Ord. No.
85-043
5-21-1985 Bond: New firehouse *
Ord. No.
85-044
5-21-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Midblock
crosswalk - Paterson Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-045
6-3-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-046
6-3-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-047
6-3-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-048
6-3-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-049
6-3-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-050
6-3-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-051
6-3-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-052
6-3-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-053
Not adopted
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1106
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
85-054
6-3-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-055
6-18-1985 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
85-056
6-18-1985 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
85-057
6-18-1985 Acquisition of property: 217
Park Avenue
*
Ord. No.
85-058
Adopted as Ord. No.
85-063
Ord. No.
85-059
6-18-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control device
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-060
6-18-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Speed limits -
Getty Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-061
6-18-1985 Changing street name *
Ord. No.
85-062
8-6-1985 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
85-063
8-6-1985 Acquisition of property:
Various tracts
*
Ord. No.
85-064
Not adopted
Ord. No.
85-065
7-9-1985 Acquisition of property: 342
Hamilton
*
Ord. No.
85-066
7-9-1985 Bike paths amendment Not desired by
governing body
Ord. No.
85-067
7-9-1985 Redesignating property on
Atlantic Street
*
Ord. No.
85-068
8-6-1985 Illegal conversions Ch. 187
Ord. No.
85-069
7-9-1985 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
85-070
8-6-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Riverview Towers
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-071
8-6-1985 Garbage and refuse removal
and disposal amendment
Ch. 427, Art. II
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1107
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
85-072
Not adopted
Ord. No.
85-073
8-6-1985 Acquisition of property: 15
Bergen Street
*
Ord. No.
85-074
8-27-1985 Disposition agreement: 83
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
85-075
8-27-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Speed limits -
Broadway
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-076
8-27-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-077
8-27-1985 Fire safety Ch. 215
Ord. No.
85-078
9-10-1985 Disposition agreement: 24-6
Van Houten Street
*
Ord. No.
85-079
9-10-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Speed limits -
Madison Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-080
9-10-1985 Disposition agreement and
sale of property: Marshall
Street project
*
Ord. No.
85-081
9-24-1985 Bond: Construction of public
school
*
Ord. No.
85-082
9-10-1985 Bond: Westside Park
Rehabilitation Project
*
Ord. No.
85-083
9-10-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-084
9-10-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-085
9-24-1985 Sewer use regulations;
disposal of wastewater
Not desired by
governing body
Ord. No.
85-086
9-24-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Bus stop -
Crooks Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-087
9-24-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1108
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
85-088
10-8-1985 Street vacation: portion of
Camden Street
*
Ord. No.
85-089
10-8-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
85-090
10-22-1985 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
85-091
10-22-1985 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
85-092
10-22-1985 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
85-093
10-22-1985 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
85-094
10-22-1985 Bond: New firehouse *
Ord. No.
85-094A
11-12-1985 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 435, Art. II
Ord. No.
85-095
11-12-1985 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 435, Art. II
Ord. No.
85-096
11-12-1985 Maintenance of sewer
laterals and house
connections amendment
Ch. 407, Art. III
Ord. No.
85-097
11-12-1985 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
85-098
11-12-1985 Lease agreement: 38- 46
Elm Street
*
Ord. No.
85-099
11-12-1985 Fire safety amendment Ch. 215
Ord. No.
85-100
11-26-1985 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
85-101
Not adopted
Ord. No.
85-102
Not adopted
Ord. No.
85-103
11-26-1985 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1109
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
85-104
12-10-1985 Creating title of Public
Safety Communications
Operator
*
Ord. No.
85-105
12-10-1985 Compensation for police
officers
*
Ord. No.
85-106
Not adopted
Ord. No.
85-107
12-23-1985 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
85-108
12-23-1985 Changing street name *
Ord. No.
85-109
12-23-1985 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Railroad Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-001
1-14-1986 Bond: School improvements *
Ord. No.
86-002
1-14-1986 Bond: Amending previous
bond ordinance
*
Ord. No.
86-002
1-28-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-002
1-28-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-002
1-28-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Carrelton Drive
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-003
1-14-1986 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
86-003
1-28-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-003
1-28-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking - East
23rd Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-003
4-1-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-003
4-1-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone -
Redwood Avenue
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1110
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
86-004
1-14-1986 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
86-004
2-14-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-004
4-1-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone -
Sheridan Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-004
4-1-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking - 21st
Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-005
1-14-1986 Lead-based paint
amendment
Ch. 351
Ord. No.
86-005
3-11-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-005
4-1-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking - East
11th Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-005
4-8-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Bus stops -
Various locations
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-006
1-14-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-006
3-11-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-006
4-1-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking - East
32nd Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-006
4-22-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone -
21st Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-007
1-28-1986 Salary and title: School
crossing guard
*
Ord. No.
86-008
2-14-1986 Payment of salaries Ch. 89
Ord. No.
86-009
2-14-1986 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1111
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
86-009
4-1-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-010
1-28-1986 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
86-010
4-1-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-011
2-25-1986 Lease agreement: 125
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
86-012
3-11-1986 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
86-013
3-11-1986 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
86-013
3-18-1986 Cable television franchise Ch. A495
Ord. No.
86-014
3-25-1986 Vacating open taxes on
certain property
*
Ord. No.
86-015
3-25-1986 Vacating open taxes on
certain property
*
Ord. No.
86-016
5-27-1986 Street vacation: portion of
Lowe Street
*
Ord. No.
86-017
5-14-1986 Bond: Rehabilitation of
Danforth Memorial Library
*
Ord. No.
86-017
5-27-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-018
5-14-1986 Conveying city-owned land;
Clinton Street
*
Ord. No.
86-019
5-14-1986 Insurance Fund Commission Ch. 53
Ord. No.
86-020
5-14-1986 Street vacation: portion of
Lawrence Street
*
Ord. No.
86-021
6-10-1986 Bond: Acquisition of street
sweepers
*
Ord. No.
86-022
6-24-1986 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
86-023
6-24-1986 Disposition agreement: Dale
Avenue redevelopment area
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1112
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
86-024
6-24-1986 Disposition agreement:
75-81 Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
86-025
6-24-1986 Bond: Capital improvements *
Ord. No.
86-026
8-19-1986 Street vacation: 6th Avenue *
Ord. No.
86-027
8-19-1986 Street vacation: Lawrence
Street
*
Ord. No.
86-028
8-19-1986 Repeals Ord. No. 84- 062
(spray paint sales)
Repealer only
Ord. No.
86-029
8-19-1986 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
86-030
8-19-1986 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
86-031
8-19-1986 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
86-032
9-9-1986 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
86-033
Not adopted
Ord. No.
86-034
9-9-1986 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 435, Art. IV
Ord. No.
86-035
9-9-1986 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
86-036
9-9-1986 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
86-037
9-9-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Stop
intersection - Van Houten
Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-038
10-28-1986 Street vacation: Elberon
Avenue
*
Ord. No.
86-039
10-28-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Ellison Street parking lot
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-040
11-25-1986 Tax abatement for
Alexander Oldja
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1113
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
86-041
10-28-1986 Bond: Acquisition of
computer equipment
*
Ord. No.
86-042
11-10-1986 Street vacation: Kearney
Street
*
Ord. No.
86-043
Not adopted
Ord. No.
86-044
11-10-1986 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking of
buses - East 24th and East
25th Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
86-045
12-9-1986 Street vacation amendment:
Lowe Street
*
Ord. No.
86-046
1-6-1987 Responsibility to provide
minimum temperature
amendment
Ch. 267, Art. I
Ord. No.
86-047
12-23-1986 Conveying city-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
86-048
12-23-1986 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
87-001
1-13-1987 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Riverview Towers
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
87-002
1-27-1987 Lease agreement: 133
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
87-003
2-10-1987 Acquisition of property:
West Broadway
*
Ord. No.
87-004
2-10-1987 Lease agreement: 359
Hamilton Avenue
*
Ord. No.
87-005
2-10-1987 Lease agreement: 76 North
Bergen Street
*
Ord. No.
87-006
2-24-1987 Approving redevelopment
plan
*
Ord. No.
87-007
3-10-1987 Bond: Refunding water
system bond
*
Ord. No.
87-008
Not adopted
Ord. No.
87-009
3-10-1987 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking meters
amendment
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
87-010
4-14-1987 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1114
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
87-011
4-14-1987 Lease agreement: Market
Street parking lot
*
Ord. No.
87-012
4-28-1987 Bond: Amending Bond
Ordinance No. 86-025
*
Ord. No.
87-013
4-28-1987 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
87-014
4-28-1987 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
87-015
4-28-1987 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
87-016
5-26-1987 Salaries: Increasing salary
minimums and maximums
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
87-017
5-26-1987 Vacating Midtown Park
property
*
Ord. No.
87-018
5-26-1987 Bond: Department of Public
Works amendment
*
Ord. No.
87-019
6-9-1987 Conveying city-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
87-020
6-9-1987 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Lackawanna Plaza
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
87-021
Not adopted
Ord. No.
87-022
6-23-1987 Street dedication -
Memorial Drive
*
Ord. No.
87-023
6-23-1987 Traffic signalization system Ch. 455
Ord. No.
87-024
8-18-1987 Acquisition of property:
41-43 River Street
*
Ord. No.
87-025
8-18-1987 Lease agreement: 125
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
87-026
8-18-1987 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Deletion of
handicapped parking signs
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
87-027
8-18-1987 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
87-028
9-1-1987 Bond: Capital improvements *
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1115
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
87-029
9-8-1987 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 94-019
Ord. No.
87-030
Not adopted
Ord. No.
87-031
9-24-1987 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment
Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No.
87-032
10-13-1987 Junkyards amendment Ch. 291
Ord. No.
87-033
Not adopted
Ord. No.
87-034
10-27-1987 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
87-035
10-27-1987 Lease agreement: Circle
Avenue firehouse
*
Ord. No.
87-036
10-27-1987 Lease agreement: 76 North
Bergen Street
*
Ord. No.
87-037
10-27-1987 Littering amendment Ch. 313, Art. II
Ord. No.
87-038
10-27-1987 Garbage and refuse removal
and disposal amendment
Ch. 427, Art. II
Ord. No.
87-039
11-10-1987 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
87-040
11-10-1987 Street vacation: Newark
Avenue
*
Ord. No.
87-041
11-10-1987 Prohibited animals
amendment
Ch. 121, Art. V
Ord. No.
87-042
11-10-1987 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment
Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No.
87-043
11-10-1987 Acquisition of property: 137
Holsman Street
*
Ord. No.
87-044
11-20-1987 Lease agreement: 133
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
87-045
12-8-1987 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
87-046
12-22-1987 Requiring payment of
delinquent taxes for renewal
of certain licenses
Repealed by Ord.
Nos. 91-008 and
91-012
Ord. No.
88-001
1-26-1988 Bond: Public Works storage
facility
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1116
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
88-002
1-26-1988 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
88-003
1-26-1988 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
88-004
2-9-1988 Disposition agreement:
River-Main development
area
*
Ord. No.
88-005
2-23-1988 Bond: Fire Department
equipment
*
Ord. No.
88-006
2-23-1988 Lease agreement: Norman
Weir School
*
Ord. No.
88-007
2-23-1988 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment
Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No.
88-008
2-23-1988 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
88-009
Not adopted
Ord. No.
88-010
3-8-1988 Street vacation: Ann Street *
Ord. No.
88-011
Not adopted
Ord. No.
88-012
4-26-1988 Authorizing conveyance of
property to Parking
Authority
*
Ord. No.
88-013
4-26-1988 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Street cleaning
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
88-014
5-24-1988 Conveying city-owned
property: Various tracts
*
Ord. No.
88-015
5-24-1988 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 363
Ord. No.
88-016
5-24-1988 Bond: Refunding of general
improvement bonds
*
Ord. No.
88-017
6-14-1988 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 435, Art. II
Ord. No.
88-018
6-14-1988 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
88-019
Not adopted
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1117
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
88-020
Not adopted
Ord. No.
88-021
6-28-1988 Lease agreement: 133
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
88-022
6-14-1988 Bond: Amending bond
ordinance No. 87-018
*
Ord. No.
88-022A
6-28-1988 Bond: Capital improvements *
Ord. No.
88-023
7-12-1988 Conveyance of property
amendment
*
Ord. No.
88-024
7-12-1988 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
88-025
7-12-1988 Lease agreement: 2 Spruce
Street
*
Ord. No.
88-026
7-12-1988 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
88-027
7-12-1988 Environmental Health Act
agreement; lead agency
*
Ord. No.
88-028
8-23-1988 Disposition agreement:
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
88-029
8-23-1988 Lease agreement: Kiosk No.
1
*
Ord. No.
88-030
9-13-1988 Street vacation: Dewey
Street
*
Ord. No.
88-031
9-27-1988 Bond: Reappropriating
excess funds
*
Ord. No.
88-032
10-11-1988 Community service Ch. 1, Art. II
Ord. No.
88-033
11-9-1988 Salaries: Increasing salary
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
88-034
10-25-1988 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
88-035
10-25-1988 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Various streets
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
88-036
10-25-1988 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1118
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
88-037
10-25-1988 Continuation of tax
abatement: 231-237 Sixth
Avenue
*
Ord. No.
88-038
11-9-1988 Garbage and refuse removal
and disposal amendment
Ch. 427, Art. II
Ord. No.
88-039
11-9-1988 Lease agreement: 423 East
18th Street
*
Ord. No.
88-040
10-25-1988 Zoning and land
development amendment;
Historic Preservation
Commission
Ch. 45
Ord. No.
88-041
11-22-1988 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 363
Ord. No.
88-042
11-22-1988 Bond: Rehabilitation of
various parks
*
Ord. No.
88-043
12-13-1988 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Ellison Street parking lot
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
88-044
12-27-1988 Lease agreement: Paterson
Board of Education
*
Ord. No.
88-045
12-27-1988 Sale of ice Ch. 279
Ord. No.
88-046
12-27-1988 Fats, bones and meat refuse Ch. 427, Art. III
Ord. No.
88-047
12-27-1988 Animals; food and beverage
vending machines; retail
food establishments; food
vending vehicles; and
slaughterhouses
amendments
Ch. 121, Arts. III
and IV; Chs. 227;
231; 243; and 407,
Art. I
Ord. No.
89-001
1-10-1989 Approving funding for
acquisition of easement
*
Ord. No.
89-002
2-13-1989 Purging taxes for 319 12th
Avenue
*
Ord. No.
89-003
1-24-1989 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
89-004
2-14-1989 Street vacation: Lafayette
Street
*
Ord. No.
89-005
2-14-1989 Administrative of
government amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1119
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
89-006
3-14-1989 Conveying city-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
89-007
3-14-1989 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
89-008
3-14-1989 Lease agreement: Van
Houten House
*
Ord. No.
89-009
Not adopted
Ord. No.
89-010
3-14-1989 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Ellison Street parking lot
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
89-011
3-28-1989 Bond: Amending Bond
Ordinance No. 87-028
*
Ord. No.
89-012
3-28-1989 Disposition agreement
amendment
*
Ord. No.
89-013
3-28-1989 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Various streets
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
89-014
3-28-1989 Lease agreement: Van
Houten House
*
Ord. No.
89-015
3-28-1989 Spray paint sales Ch. 255, Art. II
Ord. No.
89-016
4-11-1989 Brush, grass and weeds
amendment
Ch. 149, Art. I
Ord. No.
89-017
4-11-1989 Litter in motor vehicles Ch. 313, Art. III
Ord. No.
89-018
4-11-1989 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
89-019
4-25-1989 Creating various new job
titles
*
Ord. No.
89-020
4-25-1989 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Regulating
traffic on various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
89-021
5-9-1989 Acquisition of property:
Murray Avenue
*
Ord. No.
89-022
5-23-1989 Bond: Reconstruction of city
yard
*
Ord. No.
89-023
5-23-1989 Bond: Construction of public
safety complex
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1120
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
89-024
5-23-1989 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: No left turns -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
89-025
5-23-1989 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: No left turns -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
89-026
5-23-1989 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: No right turns
on red - Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
89-027
5-23-1989 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
89-028
5-23-1989 Disposition agreement: Sale
of property
*
Ord. No.
89-029
6-13-1989 Disposition agreement: Sale
of property
*
Ord. No.
89-030
5-23-1989 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
89-031
6-13-1989 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
89-032
6-13-1989 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
89-033
6-13-1989 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installation of
traffic control signals
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
89-034
6-27-1989 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
89-035
6-27-1989 Conveying city-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
89-036
6-27-1989 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
89-037
7-25-1989 Changing street name *
Ord. No.
89-038
6-27-1989 Junkyards amendment Ch. 291
Ord. No.
89-038A
8-29-1989 Recycling Ch. 427, Art. IV
Ord. No.
89-039
6-27-1989 Motor vehicle junk dealers
amendment
Ch. 287
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1121
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
89-040
6-27-1989 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Public safety
complex lot
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
89-041
6-27-1989 Street vacation:
Montgomery Street
*
Ord. No.
89-042
6-27-1989 Bond: Acquisition of
communication equipment
*
Ord. No.
89-043
6-27-1989 Returned check fee Ch. 15
Ord. No.
89-044
6-27-1989 Lease agreement: Granting
extra time for firehouse
conversion to homeless
shelter
*
Ord. No.
89-045
9-12-1989 Environmental Health Act
agreement
*
Ord. No.
89-046
Not adopted
Ord. No.
89-047
9-26-1989 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
Ord. No.
89-048
9-26-1989 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. II
Ord. No.
89-049
9-26-1989 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 94-019
Ord. No.
89-050
9-26-1989 Creating various new job
titles
*
Ord. No.
89-051
9-26-1989 Bond: Renovation of
intersections
*
Ord. No.
89-052
9-26-1989 Bond: Capital improvements *
Ord. No.
89-053
10-24-1989 Authorizing agreement
creating driveway easement
*
Ord. No.
89-054
10-24-1989 Waiving additional penalties Ch. 1, Art. II
Ord. No.
89-055
10-24-1989 Street vacation: Dakota
Street
*
Ord. No.
89-056
11-13-1989 Salaries: Increasing salary
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
89-057
11-13-1989 Lease agreement: 133
Ellison Street
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1122
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
89-058
11-28-1989 Bond: Capital improvements *
Ord. No.
89-059
11-28-1989 Bond: Amending Bond
Ordinance No. 87-028
*
Ord. No.
89-060
11-28-1989 Salaries: Increasing salary
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
89-061
11-28-1989 Lease agreement: 76 Gould
Avenue
*
Ord. No.
89-062
2-13-1990 Disposition agreement:
I.P.C. Urban Renewal
Associates
*
Ord. No.
89-063
11-28-1989 Authorizing execution of
driveway easement
*
Ord. No.
89-064
12-12-1989 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. II
Ord. No.
89-065
12-12-1989 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking space
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
89-066
12-28-1989 Salaries: Increase in salary
for Finance Director
*
Ord. No.
89-067
12-28-1989 Salaries: Increase in salary
for Deputy Director of the
Department of Law
*
Ord. No.
89-068
12-28-1989 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 94-019
Ord. No.
89-069
12-28-1989 Recycling amendment Ch. 427, Art. IV
Ord. No.
90-001
1-23-1990 Lease agreement: 423 East
19th Street
*
Ord. No.
90-002
2-13-1990 Purge taxes: 319 12th
Avenue
*
Ord. No.
90-003
2-13-1990 Acquisition of property:
Cianci and Elm Streets
*
Ord. No.
90-004
2-13-1990 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
90-005
3-13-1990 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
90-006
3-27-1990 Health care services
agreement
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1123
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
90-007
3-27-1990 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
90-008
4-10-1990 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
90-009
4-10-1990 Taxicabs amendment Superseded by Ord.
No. 94-019
Ord. No.
89-010
Not adopted
Ord. No.
90-011
4-24-1990 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Overnight
permit parking - Van Houten
Street and Washington
Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
90-012
4-24-1990 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
90-013
4-24-1990 Garbage and refuse removal
and disposal amendment
Ch. 427, Art. II
Ord. No.
90-014
4-24-1990 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Removal of
handicapped parking sign
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
90-015
5-9-1990 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
90-016
5-9-1990 Fire insurance claims Ch. 283, Art. I
Ord. No.
90-017
5-9-1990 Lease agreement: United
States Bureau of Census
*
Ord. No.
90-018
8-28-1990 Bond: Riverfront Park and
Walkway Project
*
Ord. No.
90-019A
5-22-1990 Disposition agreement
amendment
*
Ord. No.
90-019B
6-12-1990 Disposition agreement
amendment
*
Ord. No.
90-020A
5-22-1990 Conveying city-owned
property: 82 North Main
Street
*
Ord. No.
90-020B
6-26-1990 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
90-021A
5-22-1990 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Weight limit -
Danforth Avenue Culvert
Bridge
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1124
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
90-021B
6-26-1990 Lease agreement: West
Broadway parking lot
*
Ord. No.
90-022
6-26-1990 Accepting surrender of
homesteaders interest
*
Ord. No.
90-023
6-26-1990 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking space
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
90-024
6-26-1990 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
90-025
6-26-1990 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
90-026
6-26-1990 Changing street name *
Ord. No.
90-027
8-28-1990 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking space
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
90-028
7-24-1990 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking space
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
90-029
7-24-1990 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
90-030
8-28-1990 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Permit parking
- Colt Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
90-031
9-11-1990 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
90-032
9-11-1990 Changing street name *
Ord. No.
90-033
9-11-1990 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
90-034
9-11-1990 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: 30-Minute
parking - Ellison Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
90-035
9-11-1990 Health services agreement
Ord. No.
90-036
9-25-1990 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Ellison Street parking lot
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1125
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
90-037
10-23-1990 Bond: Capital improvements *
Ord. No.
90-038
10-23-1990 Reappropriating excess
funds
*
Ord. No.
90-039
11-11-1990 Smoking Superseded by
state statute; see
now Ch. 421
Ord. No.
90-040
11-12-1990 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Stop
intersection - Lexington and
Crosby Avenues
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
90-041
11-12-1990 Acquisition of property: 72
Mercer Street
*
Ord. No.
90-042
11-27-1990 Bond: Capital improvements *
Ord. No.
90-043
12-11-1990 Changing street name *
Ord. No.
90-044
12-11-1990 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Carroll Street
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
91-001
1-8-1991 Creating various new job
titles
*
Ord. No.
91-002
1-8-1991 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
Ord. No.
91-003
1-22-1991 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. II
Ord. No.
91-004
Not adopted
Ord. No.
91-005
1-22-1991 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
91-006
1-22-1991 Noise Ch. 337
Ord. No.
91-007
2-13-1991 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Ellison Street parking lot
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
91-008
3-12-1991 Repeal of Ord. No. 87- 046
(requiring payment of taxes
prior to issuance or renewal
of certain licenses)
Repealer only
Ord. No.
91-009
2-26-1991 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1126
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
91-010
3-12-1991 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking - Paterson Health
Center
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
91-011
3-12-1991 Smoking amendment Superseded by
state statute; see
now Ch. 421
Ord. No.
91-012
3-26-1991 Repeal of Ord. No. 87- 046
(requiring payment of taxes
prior to issuance or renewal
of certain licenses)
Repealer only
Ord. No.
91-013
Not adopted
Ord. No.
91-014
3-12-1991 Street vacation: 19th
Avenue
*
Ord. No.
91-015
3-26-1991 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
91-016
4-9-1991 Tax refunds for religious
organizations
*
Ord. No.
91-017
4-9-1991 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking space
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
91-018
4-9-1991 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Stop
intersection - Dey Street at
Paxton Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
91-019
4-23-1991 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
91-020
4-23-1991 Repealing disposition
agreement
*
Ord. No.
91-021
4-23-1991 Environmental Health Act
agreement
*
Ord. No.
91-022
5-14-1991 Bond: Sewer reconstruction *
Ord. No.
91-023
5-14-1991 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
91-024
5-14-1991 Fire safety amendment Ch. 215
Ord. No.
91-025
5-28-1991 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1127
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
91-026
5-28-1991 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Stop
intersection - Rosa Parks
Boulevard and 12th Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
91-027
5-28-1991 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Timothy Street
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
91-028
6-11-1991 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Ward Street
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
91-029
6-11-1991 Fingerprinting fees
amendment
Ch. 377, Art. II
Ord. No.
91-030
6-25-1991 Bond: Budget deficit *
Ord. No.
91-031
6-25-1991 Garage sales and flea
markets amendment
Ch. 249
Ord. No.
91-032
6-25-1991 Conveying property: 190
Spring Street
*
Ord. No.
91-033
6-25-1991 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
91-034
7-9-1991 Food vending vehicles
amendment
Ch. 243
Ord. No.
91-035
6-25-1991 Disposition agreement
amendment
*
Ord. No.
91-036
6-25-1991 Approving redevelopment
plan amendment
*
Ord. No.
91-037
7-9-1991 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 109
Ord. No.
91-038
7-9-1991 Purging a portion of taxes
on certain property
*
Ord. No.
91-039
7-9-1991 Health care services
amendment
*
Ord. No.
91-040
7-9-1991 Authorizing city to enter
into a contract
*
Ord. No.
91-041
7-9-1991 Conveyance of city- owned
land: 22-24 and 28-30
Jefferson Street
*
Ord. No.
91-042
7-23-1991 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
91-043
7-23-1991 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1128
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
91-044
8-13-1991 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
91-045
8-27-1991 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
91-046
9-10-1991 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
91-047
9-24-1991 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Clinton Street -
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
91-048
9-24-1991 Conveying city-owned land:
25-27 Jefferson Street
*
Ord. No.
91-049
11-12-1991 Bond: Reappropriating
excess funds
*
Ord. No.
91-050
11-12-1991 Bond: Reappropriating
excess funds
*
Ord. No.
91-051
11-12-1991 Bond: Reappropriating
excess funds
*
Ord. No.
91-052
11-12-1991 Bond: Reappropriating
excess funds
*
Ord. No.
91-053
11-12-1991 Changing street name *
Ord. No.
91-054
11-12-1991 Setting limits on
appropriation to cover
expenses of Ward
Commissioners
*
Ord. No.
91-055
11-26-1991 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Kipp Place oneway
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
91-056
11-26-1991 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
91-057
12-17-1991 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
92-001
1-21-1992 Authorizing easement *
Ord. No.
92-002
1-21-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Various streets
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-003
1-21-1992 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1129
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
92-004
Not adopted
Ord. No.
92-005
2-25-1992 Salaries: Increasing salary
for certain employees
*
Ord. No.
92-006
2-25-1992 Cooperative pricing
agreement
*
Ord. No.
92-007
4-14-1992 Bond: Acquisition of
Department of Public Safety
equipment
*
Ord. No.
92-008
3-24-1992 Health care service
agreements
*
Ord. No.
92-009
4-14-1992 Food handler's certificate
and retail food
establishments
amendments; fees for tests
conducted by Health
Division; lead-based paint
amendment; vital statistics
records amendment
Ch. 231; Ch. 235;
Ch. 263, Art. II; Ch.
351; Ch. 377, Art. I
Ord. No.
92-010
4-28-1992 Environmental Health Act
agreement
*
Ord. No.
92-011
4-28-1992 Lease agreement: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
92-012
4-28-1992 Health care services
agreements
*
Ord. No.
92-013
4-28-1992 Health care services
agreements
*
Ord. No.
92-014
4-28-1992 Inspection and certification
of housing units prior to
title transfer
See Ch. 175, Art. II
Ord. No.
92-015
4-28-1992 Builders and contractors
amendment
Ch. 153
Ord. No.
92-016
4-28-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking space
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-017
4-14-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Morris Street
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-018
4-28-1992 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1130
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
92-019
5-13-1992 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
92-020
Adopted as Ord. No.
92-029
Ord. No.
92-021
5-19-1992 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
92-022
5-19-1992 Fire Division amendment Ch. 39
Ord. No.
92-023
5-19-1992 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
92-024
Defeated
Ord. No.
92-025
5-26-1992 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
92-026
5-26-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Spruce Street
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-027
Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Mid-block
crosswalk on Ellison Street
Defeated
Ord. No.
92-028
6-9-1992 Bond: Capital improvements *
Ord. No.
92-029
6-9-1992 Handicapped parking policy Ch. 259
Ord. No.
92-030
6-9-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: No left turn -
Various streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-031
6-9-1992 Conveying city-owned land:
25-57 Jefferson Street
*
Ord. No.
92-032
6-23-1992 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
92-033
6-23-1992 Purging taxes on city-owned
land
*
Ord. No.
92-034
6-23-1992 Noise amendment Ch. 337
Ord. No.
92-035
7-14-1992 Redevelopment plan
approval
*
Ord. No.
92-036
7-28-1992 Changing street name *
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1131
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
92-037
7-28-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone -
124-126 Broadway
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-038
7-28-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Time limit
parking - Maryland Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-039
Lease agreement: Market
Street parking lot
Defeated
Ord. No.
92-040
8-25-1992 Bond: Supplemental
appropriation for public
safety complex
*
Ord. No.
92-041
Defeated
Ord. No.
92-042
8-11-1992 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 113, Art. I
Ord. No.
92-043
8-11-1992 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
92-044
8-11-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone -
Smith Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-045
8-25-1992 Disposition agreement
repealer
Ord. No.
92-046
8-25-1992 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
92-047
8-25-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Rossiter
Avenue - No stopping or
standing
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-048
11-10-1992 Public telephones Ch. 452
Ord. No.
92-049
9-22-1992 Graffiti amendment Ch. 255, Art. I
Ord. No.
92-050
10-13-1992 Request for interlocal
agreement for hauling of
leaves
*
Ord. No.
92-051
10-13-1992 Recycling amendment Ch. 427, Art. IV
Ord. No.
92-052
10-13-1992 Purging taxes on certain
property
*
Ord. No.
92-053
10-13-1992 Health care services
agreement
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1132
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
92-054
10-27-1992 Noise amendment Ch. 337
Ord. No.
92-055
10-27-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking -
Public safety complex
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-056
10-27-1992 Amusement parlors
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. III
Ord. No.
92-057
10-27-1992 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
Ord. No.
92-058
10-27-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Installing fourway
stop intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-059
10-27-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Creating a
four-way stop
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-060
10-27-1992 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
92-061
10-27-1992 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 113, Art. I
Ord. No.
92-062
10-27-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
92-063
10-27-1992 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
92-064
10-27-1992 Lease agreement: 133
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
92-065
10-27-1992 Bond: Reconstruction of
sewer main
*
Ord. No.
92-066
11-24-1992 Lease agreement: 72
McBride Avenue
*
Ord. No.
92-067
11-10-1992 Zoning and land
development amendment;
Historic Preservation
Commission
Ch. 45
Ord. No.
92-068
12-15-1992 Lease agreement: Vacant lot
- 26 Hamilton Street
*
Ord. No.
92-069
12-15-1992 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
at various locations
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1133
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
92-070
12-15-1992 Tax abatements on added
assessments, residential
neighborhoods amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 93-029
Ord. No.
93-001
1-9-1993 Taxicabs and auto livery
amendment
Superseded by Ord.
No. 94-019
Ord. No.
93-002
1-19-1993 Lead-based paint
amendment
Ch. 351
Ord. No.
93-003
1-19-1993 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
93-004
2-23-1993 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
93-005
3-9-1993 Lease agreement repealed,
re: Municipal Utilities
Authority
*
Ord. No.
93-006
3-9-1993 Lease agreement: Hunziker,
Jones, Champion and Carras
*
Ord. No.
93-007
3-9-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Emergency no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
93-008
3-23-1993 Street vacation, portion of
21st Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
93-009
4-13-1993 Lease of land: 295
Broadway
*
Ord. No.
93-010
4-13-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone
on portion of Genesee
Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
93-011
4-13-1993 Handicapped parking policy
amendment
Ch. 259
Ord. No.
93-012
5-25-1993 Bonds; various capital
improvements
*
Ord. No.
93-013
5-25-1993 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
93-014
6-9-1993 Conveyance of city- owned
land
*
Ord. No.
93-015
6-9-1993 Repealing a disposition
agreement
*
Ord. No.
93-016
6-9-1993 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1134
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
93-017
6-9-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Repealing a
handicapped parking space
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
93-018
Not adopted
Ord. No.
93-019
7-13-1993 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
93-020
7-13-1993 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
93-021
7-20-1993 Bond *
Ord. No.
93-022
7-27-1993 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
Ord. No.
93-023
7-27-1993 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
93-024
7-27-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: No parking
zones on Sherwood Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
93-025
8-24-1993 Bond *
Ord. No.
93-026
8-24-1993 Bond *
Ord. No.
93-027
8-24-1993 Bond *
Ord. No.
93-028
8-10-1993 Lease on McBride Avenue
extension parking lot
*
Ord. No.
93-029
8-24-1993 Tax exemptions and
abatements for
improvements
Superseded by Ord.
No. 07-044
Ord. No.
93-030
8-24-1993 Conveyance of land *
Ord. No.
93-031
9-14-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
93-032
9-28-1993 Capital improvements *
Ord. No.
93-033
9-28-1993 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
93-034
9-28-1993 Acquisition of property *
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1135
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
93-035
Not adopted
Ord. No.
93-036
10-12-1993 Lease of Ivanhoe
Wheelhouse
*
Ord. No.
93-037
10-12-1993 Lease of city-owned vacant
lot
*
Ord. No.
93-038
10-26-1993 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
93-039
10-26-1993 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
93-040
10-26-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: One-way
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
93-041
11-9-1993 Acquisition of property *
Ord. No.
93-042
11-9-1993 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
93-043
11-9-1993 Handicapped parking policy
amendment
Ch. 259
Ord. No.
93-044
11-23-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: One-way
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
93-045
12-21-1993 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking during
school hours
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
93-046
1-18-1994 Bond *
Ord. No.
93-047
1-18-1994 Bond *
Ord. No.
94-001
1-18-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Mid-block
crosswalk
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-002
1-18-1994 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
94-003
1-18-1994 Lease for commercial space *
Ord. No.
94-004
1-18-1994 Lease for commercial space *
Ord. No.
94-005
1-18-1994 Interlocal agreement,
hauling leaves
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1136
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
94-006
1-18-1994 Disposition agreement for
sale of property
*
Ord. No.
94-007
1-18-1994 Increase budget cap rate *
Ord. No.
94-008
2-15-1994 Animal control services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
94-009
2-15-1994 Animal control services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
94-010
2-15-1994 Animal control services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
94-011
2-15-1994 Salary *
Ord. No.
94-012
2-15-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-013
2-15-1994 Salary *
Ord. No.
94-014
2-15-1994 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
94-015
2-15-1994 Conveyance of land *
Ord. No.
94-016
3-8-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Handicapped
parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-017
3-8-1994 Disposition agreement
repealed
*
Ord. No.
94-018
3-8-1994 Contract regarding
affordable housing controls
*
Ord. No.
94-019
3-8-1994 Taxicabs Ch. 449, Part 1
Ord. No.
94-020
3-8-1994 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
94-021
3-22-1994 Lead-based paint
amendment
Ch. 351
Ord. No.
94-022
3-22-1994 Acceptance of property *
Ord. No.
94-023
3-22-1994 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
94-024
3-22-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1137
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
94-025
3-22-1994 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
94-026
4-12-1994 Enterprise zone
development corporation;
designation of enterprise
zone
Ch. 35, Art. I
Ord. No.
94-027
4-12-1994 Block parties Ch. 137
Ord. No.
94-028
4-26-1994 Bond *
Ord. No.
94-029
4-26-1994 Bond *
Ord. No.
94-030
4-26-1994 Bond *
Ord. No.
94-031
4-26-1994 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
94-032
4-26-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-033
5-3-1994 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
94-034
Failed
Ord. No.
94-035
5-17-1994 Bond *
Ord. No.
94-036
5-24-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-037
6-14-1994 Autocabs, rented motor
vehicles and limousines
amendment
Ch. 449, Part 2
Ord. No.
94-038
6-14-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: One-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-039
6-14-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: One-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-040
6-28-1994 Lease of tower space *
Ord. No.
94-041
6-28-1994 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
94-042
6-28-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: One-way
streets
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1138
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
94-043
6-28-1994 Amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. III
Ord. No.
94-044
7-12-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Parking
prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-045
7-12-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: One-hour
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-046
7-12-1994 Telephone franchise Ch. A513
Ord. No.
94-047
7-26-1994 Smoking amendment Superseded by
state statute; see
Ch. 421
Ord. No.
94-048
7-26-1994 Bond *
Ord. No.
94-049
7-26-1994 Bond *
Ord. No.
94-050
7-26-1994 Bond *
Ord. No.
94-051
7-26-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Prohibited left
turn
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-052
7-26-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Prohibited left
turn
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-053
Tabled; see Ord.
No. 94-066
Ord. No.
94-054
8-9-1994 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
94-055
8-9-1994 Acceptance of enterprise
zone
Ch. 35, Art. II
Ord. No.
94-056
Failed
Ord. No.
94-057
8-23-1994 Traffic work zones Ch. 435, Art. IX
Ord. No.
94-058
8-23-1994 Purging open taxes *
Ord. No.
94-059
Tabled and number
not used; see Ord.
No. 94-066
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1139
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
94-060
Failed (see Ord. No.
94-064)
Ord. No.
94-061
9-13-1994 Historic trust preservation
agreement
*
Ord. No.
94-062
9-27-1994 Disposition agreement Rescinded by Ord.
No. 95-066
Ord. No.
94-063
9-27-1994 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Street cleaning
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
94-064
Failed
Ord. No.
94-065
Amended at first
reading; see Ord.
No. 94-066
Ord. No.
94-066
10-11-1994 Constables Ch. 21
Ord. No.
94-067
10-11-1994 Sale of property *
Ord. No.
94-068
10-11-1994 Registration of sexual
offenders
Ch. 411
Ord. No.
94-069
10-25-1994 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
94-070
11-9-1994 Bond *
Ord. No.
94-071
11-9-1994 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
94-072
11-9-1994 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
94-073
11-9-1994 Lease agreement *
Ord. No.
94-074
Failed 11-9-1994
Ord. No.
94-075
11-9-1994 Lease agreement *
Ord. No.
94-076
11-22-1994 Food vending vehicles
amendment
Ch. 243
Ord. No.
94-077
12-20-1994 Budget cap rate increase *
Ord. No.
94-078
12-20-1994 Special Improvement
District, Bunker Hill Area
Ch. 92, Art. I
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1140
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
95-001
1-10-1995 Lease of property *
Ord. No.
95-002
1-24-1995 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 449, Part 1
Ord. No.
95-003
1-24-1995 Autocabs, rented motor
vehicles and limousines
amendment
Ch. 449, Part 2
Ord. No.
95-004
1-24-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-005
1-24-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-006
1-24-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-007
Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
95-008
Not adopted; see
Ord. No. 95-013
Ord. No.
95-009
Failed
Ord. No.
95-010
Failed
Ord. No.
95-011
2-21-1995 Food vending vehicles
amendment
Ch. 243
Ord. No.
95-012
2-21-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited at all times
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-013
2-21-1995 Traffic work zones
amendment
Ch. 435, Art. IX
(vetoed by Mayor
3-8-1995 and
passed by Council
over Mayor's veto
3-14-1995)
Ord. No.
95-014
3-14-1995 Lease agreement *
Ord. No.
95-015
3-14-1995 Fowl and birds amendment Ch. 121, Art. IV
Ord. No.
95-016
3-14-1995 Lead-based paint
amendment
Ch. 351
Ord. No.
95-017
3-28-1995 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1141
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
95-018
3-28-1995 Renaming portion of street *
Ord. No.
95-019
3-28-1995 Cigarette vending machines Ch. 179
Ord. No.
95-020
3-28-1995 Lead-based paint
amendment
Ch. 351
Ord. No.
95-021
3-28-1995 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
95-022
4-11-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-023
4-25-1995 Fire Division amendment Ch. 39
Ord. No.
95-024
4-25-1995 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
95-025
4-25-1995 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 363
Ord. No.
95-026
4-25-1995 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
95-027
5-9-1995 Littering amendment;
Vehicles obstructing snow
removal
Ch. 313; Ch. 435,
Art. X
Ord. No.
95-028
5-23-1995 Real estate signs Ch. 414, Art. I
Ord. No.
95-029
5-23-1995 Potentially dangerous dogs Ch. 121, Art. VII
Ord. No.
95-030
5-23-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-031
Failed
Ord. No.
95-032
5-23-1995 Conveyance of land *
Ord. No.
95-033
Tabled; see Ord.
No. 95-039
Ord. No.
95-034
6-13-1995 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
95-035
6-13-1995 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
95-036
6-13-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: relocating taxi
stand
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1142
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
95-037
7-25-1995 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
95-038
7-25-1995 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
95-039
6-27-1995 Bond *
Ord. No.
95-040
7-25-1995 Bond *
Ord. No.
95-041
6-27-1995 Sale of city-owned property *
Ord. No.
95-042
6-27-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-043
6-27-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: prohibiting
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-044
6-27-1995 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
95-045
7-11-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking meter
zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-046
7-11-1995 Conveyance of city-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
95-047
7-11-1995 Returned checks
amendment
Ch. 90
Ord. No.
95-048
Deleted; see Ord.
No. 95-050
Ord. No.
95-049
7-25-1995 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
95-050
8-8-1995 Bond *
Ord. No.
95-051
8-8-1995 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
95-052
8-8-1995 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
95-053
8-22-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-054
9-5-1995 Construction, repair and
maintenance of streets and
sidewalks amendment
Ch. 435, Art. II
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1143
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
95-055
9-12-1995 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
95-056
9-12-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking meter
zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-057
10-10-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-058
10-24-1995 Bond *
Ord. No.
95-059
10-24-1995 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
95-060
10-24-1995 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
95-061
11-28-1995 Easement agreement *
Ord. No.
95-062
11-28-1995 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
95-063
11-28-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-064
11-28-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-065
11-28-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: yield to
pedestrians
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-066
11-28-1995 Rescind disposition
agreement
*
Ord. No.
95-067
12-19-1995 Bond *
Ord. No.
95-068
12-19-1995 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
Ord. No.
95-069
12-19-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-070
12-19-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
95-071
12-19-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking zone
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1144
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
95-072
12-19-1995 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-001
1-23-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-002
1-23-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-003
1-23-1996 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
96-004
1-23-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-005
1-23-1996 Bond *
Ord. No.
96-006
1-23-1996 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
96-007
1-23-1996 Easement agreement *
Ord. No.
96-008
1-23-1996 Salaries *
Ord. No.
96-009
1-23-1996 Salaries *
Ord. No.
96-010
1-23-1996 Municipal Court
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
96-011
Failed 2-20-1996
Ord. No.
96-012
2-20-1996 Bond *
Ord. No.
96-013
Failed 2-20-1996
Ord. No.
96-014
2-20-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: truck routes
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-015
2-20-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: traffic control
signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-016
2-20-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited certain hours
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1145
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
96-017
2-20-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-018
3-12-1996 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
96-019
3-12-1996 Peddlers and hawkers
amendment
Ch. 367, Art. IV
Ord. No.
96-020
Failed
Ord. No.
96-021
3-12-1996 Bond *
Ord. No.
96-022
3-26-1996 Fire Division amendment Ch. 39
Ord. No.
96-023
3-26-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-024
3-26-1996 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 185
Ord. No.
96-025
3-26-1996 Authority to allow Eva's
Sheltering Programs, Inc.,
to operate on city property
*
Ord. No.
96-026
Tabled
Ord. No.
96-027
4-9-1996 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
96-028
4-9-1996 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
96-029
4-9-1996 Disorderly conduct Ch. 195
Ord. No.
96-030
4-23-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-031
4-23-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-032
4-23-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-033
4-23-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-034
Failed
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1146
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
96-035
5-15-1996 Lead-based paint
amendment
Ch. 351
Ord. No.
96-036
5-28-1996 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
96-037
5-28-1996 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
96-038
6-11-1996 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
96-039
6-11-1996 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
96-040
6-11-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited certain hours
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-041
6-11-1996 Zoning and land
development agreement
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
96-042
6-25-1996 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
96-043
6-25-1996 Lease of property *
Ord. No.
96-044
Tax abatement agreement Failed
Ord. No.
96-045
7-16-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited certain hours for
street cleaning
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-046
7-16-1996 Salaries *
Ord. No.
96-047
7-16-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: truck parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-048
7-30-1996 Repeal of disposition
agreement
*
Ord. No.
96-049
7-30-1996 Fire Division amendment Ch. 39
Ord. No.
96-050
8-13-1996 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
96-051
Failed
Ord. No.
96-052
8-13-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: right on red
prohibited
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1147
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
96-053
8-13-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: thirty- minute
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-054
8-27-1996 Bond *
Ord. No.
96-055
8-27-1996 Reappropriations *
Ord. No.
96-056
8-27-1996 Bond *
Ord. No.
96-057
8-27-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: thirty- minute
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-058
8-27-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-059
8-27-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-060
9-10-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: left turn
prohibition
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-061
9-10-1996 Extension of Ord. No.
96-035
*
Ord. No.
96-062
9-10-1996 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking lots
adjoining Public Safety
Complex
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
96-063
10-22-1996 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
96-064
11-12-1996 Distributors of mechanical
amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. II
Ord. No.
96-065
11-12-1996 Disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 195
Ord. No.
96-066
11-12-1996 Amusement parlors
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. III
Ord. No.
96-067
11-12-1996 Distributors of mechanical
amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. II
Ord. No.
96-068
11-12-1996 Coin-operated laundries
amendment
Ch. 301
Ord. No.
96-069
11-12-1996 Public telephones
amendment
Ch. 452
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1148
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
96-070
11-12-1996 Alcoholic beverages
licensing; regulations
amendment
Ch. 113, Art. I
Ord. No.
96-071
Failed
Ord. No.
96-072
11-12-1996 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
96-073
11-12-1996 Renaming street *
Ord. No.
96-074
11-26-1996 Bond *
Ord. No.
96-075
11-26-1996 Bond *
Ord. No.
96-076
11-26-1996 Bond amendment *
Ord. No.
96-077
12-17-1996 Lead-based paint
amendment
Ch. 351
Ord. No.
96-078
Tabled
Ord. No.
96-079
12-17-1996 Easement granted to United
States postal service
*
Ord. No.
97-001
1-21-1997 Tax abatement agreement
for Minardi Baking
Company
*
Ord. No.
97-002
2-18-1997 Bond *
Ord. No.
97-003
2-18-1997 Bond amendment *
Ord. No.
97-004
2-18-1997 Bond *
Ord. No.
97-005
2-18-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: penalties for
illegal parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-006
2-18-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited at any time
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-007
2-18-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: time limit
parking
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1149
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
97-008
2-18-1997 Easement agreement with
Paterson Public School
District
*
Ord. No.
97-009
3-11-1997 Bond *
Ord. No.
97-010
3-11-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited at any time
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-011
3-11-1997 Lease of property *
Ord. No.
97-012
3-11-1997 Administration amendment Ch. 5
Ord. No.
97-013
3-11-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking meters
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-014
3-11-1997 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
97-015
3-11-1997 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
97-016
3-11-1997 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
97-017
Number not used
Ord. No.
97-018
Number not used
Ord. No.
97-019
Number not used
Ord. No.
97-020
4-8-1997 Autocabs, rented motor
vehicles and limousines
amendment
Ch. 449, Part 2
Ord. No.
97-021
4-8-1997 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 109
Ord. No.
97-022
5-13-1997 Bond *
Ord. No.
97-023
5-13-1997 Bond *
Ord. No.
97-024
4-22-1997 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
97-025
5-27-1997 Prohibited animals
amendment
Ch. 121, Art. V
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1150
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
97-026
5-27-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-027
5-27-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-028
5-27-1997 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
97-029
Failed
Ord. No.
97-030
Failed
Ord. No.
97-033
Tabled
Ord. No.
97-034
6-24-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: traffic signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-035
6-24-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: stop sign
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-036
7-8-1997 Downtown Paterson Special
Improvement District
Ch. 92, Art. II
Ord. No.
97-037
7-8-1997 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
97-038
Failed
Ord. No.
97-039
Failed
Ord. No.
97-040
Failed
Ord. No.
97-041
7-8-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: prohibited
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-042
Failed
Ord. No.
97-043
7-22-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-044
7-22-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-045
8-12-1997 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
97-046
8-12-1997 Appropriation *
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1151
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
97-047
8-26-1997 Amendment to
redevelopment plan for
Great Falls Historic District
*
Ord. No.
97-048
8-26-1997 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
97-049
8-26-1997 Disposition agreement with
and conveyance to Paterson
Parking Authority
*
Ord. No.
97-050
9-9-1997 Conveyance of city-owned
land to Community Baptists
Church
*
Ord. No.
97-051
9-23-1997 Bazaars amendment Ch. 129
Ord. No.
97-052
Failed
Ord. No.
97-053
Failed
Ord. No.
97-054
11-10-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: midblock
crosswalk
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-055
10-28-1997 Bond amendment *
Ord. No.
97-056
10-28-1997 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
97-057
10-28-1997 Disposition agreement with
and conveyance to Paterson
Parking Authority
*
Ord. No.
97-058
Failed
Ord. No.
97-059
Failed
Ord. No.
97-060
11-25-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited at all times
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
97-061
Failed
Ord. No.
97-062
Failed
Ord. No.
97-063
Failed
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1152
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
97-064
Failed
Ord. No.
97-065
12-16-1997 Time limitation on
demolition permits
Ch. 161, Art. II
Ord. No.
97-066
Not adopted; see
Ord. No. 98-011
Ord. No.
97-067
12-16-1997 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: no stopping
and standing
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-001
1-6-1998 Bond *
Ord. No.
98-002
1-20-1998 Bond *
Ord. No.
98-003
1-20-1998 Bond *
Ord. No.
98-004
1-20-1998 Bond *
Ord. No.
98-005
1-20-1998 Bond amendment *
Ord. No.
98-006
1-20-1998 Bond amendment *
Ord. No.
98-007
1-20-1998 Advertising tobacco
products and alcoholic
beverages near school
property
Ch. 102, Art. I
Ord. No.
98-008
1-20-1998 Advertising devices for
alcoholic beverages
Ch. 113, Art. III
Ord. No.
98-009
1-20-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-010
1-20-1998 Purging of taxes *
Ord. No.
98-011
1-20-1998 Property registration Ch. 371
Ord. No.
98-012
3-3-1998 Bazaars amendment Ch. 129
Ord. No.
98-013
3-24-1998 Animal control service
agreement with Borough of
Prospect Park
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1153
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
98-014
3-24-1998 Animal control service
agreement with Borough of
Haledon
*
Ord. No.
98-015
3-24-1998 Animal control service
agreement with Borough of
North Haledon
*
Ord. No.
98-016
3-10-1998 Housing-property
maintenance amendment
Ch. 271
Ord. No.
98-017
3-10-1998 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
98-018
3-10-1998 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
98-019
3-10-1998 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
98-020
3-10-1998 Easement agreement with
Bell Atlantic - New Jersey
*
Ord. No.
98-021
3-24-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: no parking
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-022
3-24-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-023
3-24-1998 Service agreement *
Ord. No.
98-024
3-24-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-025
3-24-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-026
3-24-1998 Disposition agreement *
Ord. No.
98-027
4-14-1998 Bond *
Ord. No.
98-028
4-14-1998 Refunding bond *
Ord. No.
98-029
4-14-1998 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
98-030
Tabled
Ord. No.
98-031
4-14-1998 Conveyance of city-owned
land
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1154
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
98-032
Tabled
Ord. No.
98-033
Tabled
Ord. No.
98-034
4-14-1998 Conveyance of city-owned
land
*
Ord. No.
98-035
4-28-1998 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 435, Arts. IV
and VIII
Ord. No.
98-036
4-28-1998 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
98-037
4-28-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: dropoff and
pickup zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-038
4-28-1998 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
98-039
4-28-1998 Lease of Van Houten House *
Ord. No.
98-040
4-28-1998 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
98-041
4-28-1998 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
98-042
4-28-1998 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
98-043
4-28-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: vehicles
exceeding four tons
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-044
Failed
Ord. No.
98-045
5-26-1998 Bond *
Ord. No.
98-046
Not adopted
Ord. No.
98-047
Not adopted
Ord. No.
98-048
6-23-1998 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
98-049
6-23-1998 Fire Division amendment Ch. 39
Ord. No.
98-050
6-23-1998 Lease agreement *
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1155
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
98-051
Failed
Ord. No.
98-052
6-23-1998 Amendment to
redevelopment plan for
Great Falls Historic District
*
Ord. No.
98-053
7-28-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-054
7-28-1998 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
98-055
Failed
Ord. No.
98-056
8-11-1998 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
98-057
8-11-1998 Temporary installation of
traffic control signal
*
Ord. No.
98-058
8-25-1998 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
98-059
8-25-1998 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
98-060
8-25-1998 Purging of taxes *
Ord. No.
98-061
8-25-1998 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 113
Ord. No.
98-062
9-8-1998 Lease agreement *
Ord. No.
98-063
9-8-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-064
9-8-1998 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 363
Ord. No.
98-065
9-22-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-066
9-22-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: dropoff and
pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-067
9-22-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: left turn
prohibition
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1156
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
98-068
9-22-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: left turn
prohibition
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-069
Not adopted
Ord. No.
98-070
10-13-1998 Easement agreement with
Paterson Community Mutual
Homes
*
Ord. No.
98-071
10-13-1998 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment
Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No.
98-072
10-27-1998 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
98-073
10-27-1998 Food and beverage vending
machines amendment; retail
food establishments
amendment; food handler's
certificate amendment; food
vending vehicles
amendment; fees for tests
conducted by Health
Division amendment; vital
statistics records
amendment
Chs. 227; 231; 235;
243; 263, Art. II and
377, Art. I
Ord. No.
98-074
10-27-1998 Bond *
Ord. No.
98-075
11-10-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: right turn
prohibition
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-076
11-24-1998 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
98-077
12-15-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-078
12-15-1998 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: left turn
prohibition
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
98-079
Conveyance of city-owned
land
Failed
Ord. No.
99-001
1-19-1999 Conveyance of city-owned
land
*
Ord. No.
99-002
1-19-1999 Health care service
agreement
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1157
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
99-003
1-19-1999 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
99-004
1-19-1999 Authorizing purchase of
Riverside Vets property
*
Ord. No.
99-005
Taxicabs amendment
antenna tower space
Tabled
Ord. No.
99-006
2-16-1999 Acquisition of certain
parcels in the Great Falls
Historic District
*
Ord. No.
99-007
2-16-1997 Agreement for lease of
antenna tower space
*
Ord. No.
99-008
Lease with Downtown
Paterson Special
Improvement District, Inc.
Tabled
Ord. No.
99-009
Bond Tabled
Ord. No.
99-010
Bond Tabled
Ord. No.
99-011
3-9-1999 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
99-012
3-9-1999 Rental agreement for senior
citizen nutrition sites
*
Ord. No.
99-013
3-23-1999 Animal control service
agreement with Boroughs of
Haledon and North Haledon
*
Ord. No.
99-014
Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited
Tabled
Ord. No.
99-015
3-23-1999 Health care service
agreement with
Municipality of Hackensack
*
Ord. No.
99-016
3-23-1999 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 449, Part 1
Ord. No.
99-017
Lease with Downtown
Paterson Special
Improvement District, Inc.
Tabled
Ord. No.
99-018
3-23-1999 Bond *
Ord. No.
99-019
4-13-1999 Municipal Court:
organization; judges; staff
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1158
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
99-020
4-13-1999 Municipal Court:
organization; judges; staff
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
99-021
4-13-1999 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
99-022
4-13-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: angle parking;
one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-023
4-13-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited certain hours
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-024
4-13-1999 Lease with the Downtown
Paterson Special
Improvement District, Inc.
*
Ord. No.
99-025
4-27-1999 Health care service
agreement with Borough of
Haledon
*
Ord. No.
99-026
5-11-1999 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 449, Part 1
Ord. No.
99-027
5-25-1999 Bazaars amendment Ch. 129
Ord. No.
99-028
5-25-1999 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
99-029
6-9-1999 Agreement with Passaic
County Board of Social
Services
*
Ord. No.
99-030
6-9-1999 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
99-031
6-9-1999 Privately financed sewers
amendment
Ch. 407, Art. I
Ord. No.
99-032
6-9-1999 Street openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 435, Art. III
Ord. No.
99-033
6-9-1999 Hoisting materials over
public thoroughfares
amendment
Ch. 435, Art. I
Ord. No.
99-034
6-9-1999 Bond *
Ord. No.
99-035
6-9-1999 Agreement with the City of
Newark
*
Ord. No.
99-036
6-22-1999 Purging of taxes *
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1159
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
99-037
6-22-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-038
7-27-1999 Lease with Millicent Glenn *
Ord. No.
99-039
7-27-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: prohibited
parking repealer
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-040
7-27-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: prohibited
parking repealer
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-041
9-14-1999 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
99-042
8-24-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: time limit
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-043
8-24-1999 Bond *
Ord. No.
99-044
9-14-1999 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
99-045
9-14-1999 Agreement with City of
Clifton
*
Ord. No.
99-046
9-14-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: prohibited
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-047
Tabled
Ord. No.
99-048
9-28-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: school zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-049
9-28-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
repealed
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-050
Tabled
Ord. No.
99-051
10-19-1999 Agreement with County of
Passaic
*
Ord. No.
99-052
10-19-1999 Prohibited animals
amendment
Ch. 121, Art. V
Ord. No.
99-053
Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-054
Not adopted
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1160
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
99-055
11-9-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-056
11-9-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: midblock
crosswalk
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-057
11-9-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-058
11-9-1999 Streets and sidewalks:
construction, repair and
maintenance amendment
Ch. 435, Art. II
Ord. No.
99-059
11-23-1999 Bazaars amendment Ch. 129
Ord. No.
99-060
11-23-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: prohibited
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
99-061
11-23-1999 Fee for discovery Ch. 25, Art. III
Ord. No.
99-062
Failed
Ord. No.
99-063
Failed
Ord. No.
99-064
Failed
Ord. No.
99-065
12-21-1999 Health care service
agreements
*
Ord. No.
99-066
12-21-1999 Littering prohibited;
handbill distribution
amendment
Ch. 313, Art. II
Ord. No.
20-002
2-22-2000 Bond *
Ord. No.
20-005
2-29-2000 Conveyance of city-owned
land
*
Ord. No.
20-006
2-29-2000 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
20-007
2-29-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: time limit
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
20-008
3-14-2000 Lease agreement with
Passaic County Community
College
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1161
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
20-009
3-14-2000 Rental agreements for
senior citizen nutrition sites
*
Ord. No.
20-010
3-14-2002 Animal control service
agreements
*
Ord. No.
20-011
3-14-2000 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
NOTE: Due to a numbering error, the remaining
ordinance numbers for 2000 are out of sequence.
Ord. No.
20-112
3-28-2000 Street vacation: portion of
Spring Street
*
Ord. No.
20-113
3-28-2000 Conveyance of city-owned
land
*
Ord. No.
20-114
3-28-2000 Bond *
Ord. No.
20-119
4-25-2000 Agreement with Passaic
County Board of Social
Services
*
Ord. No.
20-120
4-25-2000 Agreement with Passaic
County for food service
*
Ord. No.
20-121
4-25-2000 Terminating and canceling
disposition agreement
*
Ord. No.
20-127
6-27-2000 Salaries: increase in salary
for members of Municipal
Council
*
Ord. No.
20-128
6-27-2000 Salaries: increase in salary
for department directors
and Mayor
*
Ord. No.
20-129
7-25-2000 Conveyance of City-owned
land
*
Ord. No.
20-131
7-25-2000 Historic trust preservation
agreement
*
Ord. No.
20-032
8-22-2000 Street vacation: portion of
Spring Street
*
Ord. No.
20-033
8-22-2000 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
20-034
9-12-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: prohibited
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
20-039
10-24-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zones
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1162
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
20-040
10-24-2000 Auto cabs, rented motor
vehicles and limousines
amendment
Ch. 449, Part 2
Ord. No.
20-041
10-24-2000 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
20-046
12-19-2000 Tattooing and body piercing Ch. 441
Ord. No.
01-001
1-23-2001 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
01-004
2-13-2001 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
01-006
2-27-2001 Appropriation ($55,000) *
Ord. No.
01-007
2-27-2001 Bond ($998,000) *
Ord. No.
01-008
3-13-2001 Rental agreements: senior
citizen nutrition sites
*
Ord. No.
01-009
3-13-2001 Health services agreement *
Ord. No.
01-010
3-13-2001 Animal control service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
01-011
3-13-2001 Animal control service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
01-014
3-27-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: prohibited
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
01-015
3-27-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
01-019
4-24-2001 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
01-020
4-24-2001 Technical and professional
support services agreement
*
Ord. No.
01-036
7-17-2001 Bond *
Ord. No.
01-037
7-17-2001 Purging of taxes *
Ord. No.
01-038
7-17-2001 Purging of taxes *
Ord. No.
01-043
8-28-2001 Rent Leveling Board
amendment
Ch. 381
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1163
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
01-050
10-9-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: taxi stands
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
01-051
10-9-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: no stopping or
standing
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
01-052
10-9-2001 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
01-057
11-27-2001 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
01-059
12-18-2001 Emergency appropriation *
Ord. No.
01-060
12-18-2001 Health care service
agreement with City of
Clifton
*
Ord. No.
02-001
3-12-2002 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
02-002
2-12-2002 Conveyance of city-owned
land
*
Ord. No.
02-003
2-12-2002 Lease agreement with
Paterson Public Schools
*
Ord. No.
02-004(A)
2-26-2002 Filming Ch. 212
Ord. No.
02-004(B)
4-9-2002 Health care service
agreement with Borough of
Haledon
*
Ord. No.
02-005(A)
2-26-2002 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
02-005(B)
4-9-2002 Rental agreements for
senior citizen nutrition sites
*
Ord. No.
02-006(A)
2-26-2002 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
02-006(B)
4-9-2002 Redevelopment plan for
Phase I of River Corridor
CD-014
*
Ord. No.
02-007(A)
2-26-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: dropoff and
pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
02-007(B)
5-15-2002 Health care service
agreement with City of
Hackensack
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1164
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
02-009
5-28-2002 Support service agreement
with City of Newark
*
Ord. No.
02-010
5-28-2002 Health care service
agreement with Borough of
Prospect Park
*
Ord. No.
02-011
5-28-2002 Health care service
agreement with Borough of
Haledon
*
Ord. No.
02-013
6-11-2002 Health care service
agreement with Borough of
West Paterson
*
Ord. No.
02-014
6-11-2002 Health care service
agreement with Borough of
Hawthorne
*
Ord. No.
02-015
6-11-2002 Health care service
agreement with
Municipality of Clifton
*
Ord. No.
02-016
6-11-2002 Leasing portion of Mill
Street from Franklin Mill
Associates, LLC
*
Ord. No.
02-017
6-25-2002 Health care service
agreement with City of
Passaic
*
Ord. No.
02-018
6-25-2002 Health care service
agreement with Borough of
Totowa
*
Ord. No.
02-019
7-30-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: dropoff and
pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
02-020
7-30-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
02-021
7-30-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
02-022
8-20-2002 Agreement with Passaic
County Board of Social
Services
*
Ord. No.
02-023
8-20-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: vehicles
exceeding four tons
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
02-024
8-20-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: penalties for
illegal parking
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1165
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
02-025
9-10-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: dropoff and
pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
02-026
9-10-2002 Conveyance of city-owned
land amendment
*
Ord. No.
02-027
9-24-2002 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
02-028
9-24-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: fifteen- minute
parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
02-029
10-8-2002 Conveyance of city-owned
land
*
Ord. No.
02-030
10-8-2002 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
02-031
10-8-2002 Acquisition of property *
Ord. No.
02-032
10-22-2002 Bond *
Ord. No.
02-034
11-12-2002 Bond *
Ord. No.
02-035
11-12-2002 Leasing portion of
Christopher Hope
Community Center
*
Ord. No.
02-036
11-12-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
02-037
11-12-2002 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: dropoff and
pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
02-038
11-26-2002 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
02-039
12-17-2002 Lease of parking lot at 111
Broadway repealer
*
Ord. No.
02-040
12-17-2002 Lease of parking lot at 131
Broadway repealer
*
Ord. No.
02-041
12-17-2002 Street vacation: portion of
Crosby Place
*
Ord. No.
02-042
12-17-2002 Health care service
agreement with City of
Clifton
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1166
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
02-043
12-17-2002 Health care service
agreement with
Municipality of Clifton
*
Ord. No.
02-044
12-17-2002 Emergency medical
technician certification
amendment
Ch. 31
Ord. No.
02-045
12-17-2002 Bond *
Ord. No.
03-001
Use of mobile telephones Tabled
Ord. No.
03-002
1-21-2003 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
03-003
1-21-2003 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
03-004
2-25-2003 Use of cell phones while
operating a vehicle
Preempted by state
law
Ord. No.
03-005
2-11-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: 15-minute
parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
03-006
2-11-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: 15-minute
parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
03-007
2-11-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
Not included
Ord. No.
03-008
2-25-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: drop-off and
pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
03-009
2-25-2003 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
03-010
2-25-2003 Refunding bond *
Ord. No.
03-011
Redevelopment plan for
Phase II of River Corridor
CD-104
Tabled
Ord. No.
03-012
3-11-2003 Acquisition of property:
redevelopment areas
*
Ord. No.
03-013
3-11-2003 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
03-014
3-11-2003 Operating agreement: 38-46
Elm Street
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1167
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
03-015
4-8-2003 Animal control service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
03-016
4-8-2003 Animal control service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
03-017
4-8-2003 Animal control service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
03-018
4-8-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Dale Avenue
15-minute parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
03-019
4-22-2003 Littering amendment Ch. 313
Ord. No.
03-020
4-22-2003 Junkyards amendment Ch. 291
Ord. No.
03-021
5-27-2003 Bond: capital improvements *
Ord. No.
03-022
5-13-2003 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
03-023
5-27-2003 Distributors of mechanical
amusement devices
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. II
Ord. No.
03-024
6-10-2003 Immunization services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
03-025
6-10-2003 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
03-026
6-10-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: drop-off and
pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
03-027
6-10-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: College
Boulevard two-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
03-028
6-24-2003 Conveyance of land *
Ord. No.
03-029
6-24-2003 Lease of property *
Ord. No.
03-030
6-24-2003 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
03-031
6-24-2003 Public construction
contracts
Ch. 373
Ord. No.
03-032
7-15-2003 Nutrition site rental
agreements
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1168
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
03-033
Ice cream peddlers Failed
Ord. No.
03-034
7-29-2003 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
03-035
8-19-2003 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
03-036
Administration of
government amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
03-037
Police Division amendment Tabled
Ord. No.
03-038
Fire Division amendment Tabled
Ord. No.
03-039
9-9-2003 Conveyance of property to
Parking Authority
*
Ord. No.
03-040
9-9-2003 Conveyance of property to
Housing Authority
Repealed by Ord.
No. 06-023
Ord. No.
03-041
9-9-2003 Conveyance of property to
Parking Authority
*
Ord. No.
03-042
9-9-2003 Conveyance of property to
Parking Authority
*
Ord. No.
03-043
9-9-2003 Appropriation: road
improvements
*
Ord. No.
03-044
9-9-2003 Health services agreement *
Ord. No.
03-045
9-9-2003 Appropriation: revaluation *
Ord. No.
03-046
9-9-2003 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
03-047
9-23-2003 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 449, Part 1
Ord. No.
03-048
9-23-2003 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
03-049
Administration of
government amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
03-050
Police Division amendment Tabled
Ord. No.
03-051
Fire Division amendment Tabled
Ord. No.
03-052
9-23-2003 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1169
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
03-053
10-14-2003 Professional services
support agreement
*
Ord. No.
03-054
Police Division amendment Tabled
Ord. No.
03-055
Administration of
government amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
03-056
Fire Division amendment Tabled
Ord. No.
03-057
10-14-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
penalties
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
03-058
10-14-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
prohibited certain hours for
street cleaning
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
03-059
10-28-2003 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
03-060
10-28-2003 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
03-061
10-28-2003 Fire Division amendment Ch. 39
Ord. No.
03-062
10-28-2003 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
03-063
10-28-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: 21st Avenue
one-way
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
03-064
11-12-2003 Appropriation: park
improvements
*
Ord. No.
03-065
11-12-2003 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: no parking
East 7th Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
03-066
11-25-2003 Constables amendment Ch. 21
Ord. No.
03-067
1-27-2004 Mercantile establishments Ch. 322
Ord. No.
03-068
12-16-2003 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 113
Ord. No.
03-069
11-25-2003 Bazaars amendment Ch. 129
Ord. No.
03-070
11-25-2003 Public billiard and pool
rooms amendment
Ch. 133
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1170
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
03-071
11-25-2003 Motor vehicle junk dealers
amendment
Ch. 287
Ord. No.
03-072
11-25-2003 Mechanical amusement
devices amendment
Ch. 117, Art. I
Ord. No.
03-073
11-25-2003 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 109
Ord. No.
03-074
11-25-2003 Fire safety amendment Ch. 215
Ord. No.
03-075
12-2-2003 Junkyards amendment Ch. 291
Ord. No.
03-076
12-2-2003 Coin-operated laundries
amendment
Ch. 301
Ord. No.
03-077
12-2-2003 Amusement parlors
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. III
Ord. No.
03-078
12-2-2003 Itinerant vendors of
photographs and
photographic services
amendment
Ch. 367, Art. III
Ord. No.
03-079
12-2-2003 Close-out sales amendment Ch. 395
Ord. No.
03-080
12-2-2003 Peddlers, hawkers, transient
merchants and itinerant
vendors amendment
Ch. 367, Art. IV
Ord. No.
03-081
12-2-2003 Auctions and auctioneers
amendment
Ch. 125
Ord. No.
03-082
12-2-2003 Secondhand dealers
amendment
Ch. 399
Ord. No.
03-083
Animals amendment Not adopted
Ord. No.
03-084
12-2-2003 Public telephones
amendment
Ch. 452
Ord. No.
03-085
12-2-2003 Sewer user charges
amendment
Ch. 407, Art. II
Ord. No.
03-086
Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
03-087
12-2-2003 Open-air parking lots
amendment
Ch. 359
Ord. No.
03-088
12-2-2003 Food and beverage vending
machines amendment
Ch. 227
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1171
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
03-089
12-2-2003 Milk and milk products
amendment
Ch. 325
Ord. No.
03-090
Zoning and land
development amendment
Failed
Ord. No.
03-091
12-16-2003 Fat, bones and meat refuse
amendment
Ch. 427, Art. III
Ord. No.
03-092
12-16-2003 Vital statistics records
amendment
Ch. 377, Art. I
Ord. No.
03-093
12-29-2003 Retail food establishments
amendment
Ch. 231
Ord. No.
03-094
12-16-2003 Slaughterhouses
amendment
Ch. 417
Ord. No.
03-095
12-16-2003 Food vending vehicles
amendment
Ch. 243
Ord. No.
03-096
12-16-2003 Health Division fees
amendment
Ch. 263
Ord. No.
03-097
12-16-2003 Food handlers certificate
amendment
Ch. 235
Ord. No.
03-098
12-16-2003 Lead-based paint
amendment
Ch. 351
Ord. No.
03-099
1-27-2004 Seizure of vehicles Ch. 466
Ord. No.
03-100
12-29-2003 Redevelopment plan: Fourth
Ward
*
Ord. No.
04-001
1-13-2004 Appropriation: garbage
truck
*
Ord. No.
04-002
Number omitted
Ord. No.
04-003
1-27-2004 Bond: sewer outflow project *
Ord. No.
04-004
1-27-2004 Bond: sewer construction *
Ord. No.
04-005
1-27-2004 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment
Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No.
04-006
1-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking
penalties
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-007
1-27-2004 General penalty amendment Ch. 1
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1172
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
04-008
2-10-2004 Acquisition of land *
Ord. No.
04-009
2-10-2004 Political signs and campaign
materials
Ch. 414, Art. II
Ord. No.
04-010
2-10-2004 Property lease *
Ord. No.
04-011
2-24-2004 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 113
Ord. No.
04-012
Salaries amendment Not adopted
Ord. No.
04-013
Salaries amendment Not adopted
Ord. No.
04-014
Salaries amendment Not adopted
Ord. No.
04-015
2-24-2004 Recycling amendment Ch. 427, Art. IV
Ord. No.
04-016
2-24-2004 Recycling amendment Ch. 427, Art. IV
Ord. No.
04-017
3-9-2004 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
04-018
3-9-2004 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
04-019
3-9-2004 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
04-020
3-23-2003 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
04-021
Appropriation Tabled
Ord. No.
04-022
4-13-2004 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
04-023
4-13-2004 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
04-024
4-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: school bus
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-025
4-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking on
River Street
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1173
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
04-026
4-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: parking on
Godwin Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-027
4-27-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zone
on East 31st Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-028
5-12-2004 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
04-029
5-12-2004 First Ward Redevelopment
Plan
*
Ord. No.
04-030
5-12-2004 Fifth Ward Redevelopment
Plan
*
Ord. No.
04-031
5-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: drop-off zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-032
6-9-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: no parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-033
5-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-034
5-25-2004 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
04-035
5-25-2004 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
04-036
5-25-2004 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
04-037
Conveyance of property Tabled
Ord. No.
04-038
5-25-2004 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
04-039
5-25-2004 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
04-040
5-25-2004 Junkyards amendment Ch. 291
Ord. No.
04-041
5-25-2004 Motor vehicle junk dealers
amendment
Ch. 287
Ord. No.
04-042
5-25-2004 Lease of property *
Ord. No.
04-043
6-9-2004 Appropriation Tabled
Ord. No.
04-044
6-9-2004 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 109
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1174
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
04-045
6-24-2004 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
04-046
6-9-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: drop-off zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-047
6-9-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: no parking
No copy
Ord. No.
04-048
6-9-2004 Conveyance of land *
Ord. No.
04-049
6-22-2004 Public Defender fee Ch. 25, Art. IV
Ord. No.
04-050
Cable television franchise Tabled
Ord. No.
04-051
6-22-2004 Immunization services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
04-052
6-22-2004 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
04-053
6-22-2004 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
04-054
6-22-2004 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
04-055
6-22-2004 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
04-056
6-22-2004 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
04-057
6-22-2004 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
04-058
6-22-2004 Fire safety amendment Ch. 215
Ord. No.
04-059
Parks and recreation
amendment: hours
Tabled
Ord. No.
04-060
6-22-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-061
6-22-2004 Bond *
Ord. No.
04-062
7-13-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: penalties
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-063
7-13-2004 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
04-064
Parks and recreation
amendment: hours
Tabled
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1175
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
04-065
7-27-2004 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
04-066
7-27-2004 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
04-067
Parks and recreation
amendment: hours
Tabled
Ord. No.
04-068
8-24-2004 Immunization services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
04-069
Street vacation: Dakota
Street
Tabled
Ord. No.
04-070
8-24-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: no parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-071
9-14-2004 Central Business District
Urban Renewal Plan
amendment
*
Ord. No.
04-072
9-14-2004 Bond *
Ord. No.
04-073
9-14-2004 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 363
Ord. No.
04-074
9-28-2004 Fire Division amendment Ch. 39
Ord. No.
04-075
9-28-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-076
10-12-2004 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
04-077
10-12-2004 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
04-078
10-12-2004 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
04-079
10-12-2004 Street vacation: Dakota
Street
*
Ord. No.
04-080
10-12-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: meter zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-081
10-26-2004 Transfer of property *
Ord. No.
04-082
6-30-2004 Cable television franchise Ch. A495
Ord. No.
04-083
11-23-2004 Bond *
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1176
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
04-084
11-23-2004 Rescind operating
agreement
*
Ord. No.
04-085
11-23-2004 Lease agreement: 38 - 46
Elm Street
Rescinded by Ord.
No. 06-059
Ord. No.
04-086
12-21-2004 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
04-087
12-21-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: meter zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
04-088
11-9-2004 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
05-001
1-25-2005 Cap bank *
Ord. No.
05-002
Political signs and campaign
materials amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
05-003
1-25-2005 Tenant Advisory Board Ch. 93
Ord. No.
05-004
1-25-2005 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
05-005
1-25-2005 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
05-006
2-8-2005 Political signs and campaign
materials amendment
Ch. 414, Art. II
Ord. No.
05-007
Vehicles obstructing snow
removal amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
05-008
2-8-2005 Lease agreement:
Christopher Hope
Community Center
*
Ord. No.
05-009
2-8-2005 Rabbits amendment Ch. 121, Art. III
Ord. No.
05-010
Agreement with City of
Newark
Tabled
Ord. No.
05-011
Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Tabled
Ord. No.
05-012
2-8-2005 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 363
Ord. No.
05-013
2-8-2005 Garbage and refuse removal
and disposal amendment
Ch. 427, Art. II
Ord. No.
05-014
2-8-2005 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment
Ch. 121, Art. I
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1177
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
05-015
2-22-2005 Vehicles obstructing snow
removal amendment
Ch. 435, Art. X
Ord. No.
05-016
Agreement with City of
Newark
Tabled
Ord. No.
05-017
Disorderly conduct
amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
05-018
Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Tabled
Ord. No.
05-019
2-22-2005 Acquisition of easements *
Ord. No.
05-020
2-22-2005 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-021
2-22-2005 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking or standing
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-022A
2-22-2005 Newsracks Ch. 334
Ord. No.
05-022B
3-8-2005 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
05-023
3-8-2005 Rental agreement: Franklin
Mill Associates, LLC
*
Ord. No.
05-024
3-8-2005 Agreement with City of
Newark
*
Ord. No.
05-025
Disorderly conduct
amendment
Failed
Ord. No.
05-026
3-8-2005 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking certain times
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-027
3-22-2005 Rental agreements: various
locations
*
Ord. No.
05-028
3-22-2005 Conveyance of property *
Ord. No.
05-029
3-22-2005 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
05-030
3-22-2005 Vehicles and traffic: dropoff
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-031
3-22-2005 Vehicles and traffic: dropoff
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-032
Number not used
Ord. No.
05-033
Number not used
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1178
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
05-034
4-26-2005 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
05-035
4-26-2005 Lease agreement: Paterson
Plaza, LLC
*
Ord. No.
05-036
4-26-2005 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
05-037
4-26-2005 Fire Division amendment Ch. 39
Ord. No.
05-038
Zoning and land
development amendment
Failed
Ord. No.
05-039
Swimming pools Tabled
Ord. No.
05-040
5-10-2005 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
05-041
5-10-2005 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-042
5-24-2005 Swimming pools Ch. 438
Ord. No.
05-043
6-14-2005 Bond *
Ord. No.
05-044
6-14-2005 Bond *
Ord. No.
05-045
6-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-046
6-14-2005 Vehicles and traffic: leftturn
only lane
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-047
6-28-2005 Redevelopment plan for
Phase I of Area 10
*
Ord. No.
05-048
6-28-2005 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
05-049
6-28-2005 Vehicles and traffic: No left
turn
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-050
7-12-2005 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
05-051
7-12-2005 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
05-052
7-12-2005 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
05-053
7-12-2005 Vehicles and traffic: dropoff
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1179
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
05-054
7-26-2005 Acquisition of easements *
Ord. No.
05-055
8-23-2005 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
05-056
8-23-2005 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
05-057
8-23-2005 Municipal Court:
organization; judges; staff
amendment
Ch. 25, Art. II
Ord. No.
05-058
8-23-2005 Public utility poles or
facilities
Ch. 435, Art. XI
Ord. No.
05-059
Street vacation Tabled
Ord. No.
05-060
9-13-2005 Lease agreement: Center
City Partners, LLC
*
Ord. No.
05-061
9-13-2005 Exchange of property *
Ord. No.
05-062
Outdoor cafes Tabled
Ord. No.
05-063
9-27-2005 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
05-064
9-27-2005 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
05-065
9-27-2005 Vehicles and traffic: dropoff
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-066
9-27-200 Outdoor cafes Ch. 349
Ord. No.
05-067
10-11-2005 Rental agreements: various
locations
*
Ord. No.
05-068
10-11-2005 Vehicles and traffic: dropoff
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-069
10-11-2005 Vehicles and traffic:
15-minute parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-070
10-25-2005 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 449, Part 1
Ord. No.
05-071
10-25-2005 Bond *
Ord. No.
05-072
10-25-2005 Bond *
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1180
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
05-073
11-9-2005 Containerization of yard
waste
Ch. 427, Art. V
Ord. No.
05-074
11-9-2005 Fowls and birds
amendment; prohibition
against wildlife feeding
Ch. 121, Arts. IV
and VIII
Ord. No.
05-075
11-9-2005 Disposal of waste into storm
sewers
Ch. 407, Art. IV
Ord. No.
05-076
11-9-2005 Illicit connections to storm
sewers
Ch. 407, Art. V
Ord. No.
05-077
11-9-2005 Recycling of leaves
amendment; yard waste
collection program
Ch. 427, Arts. IV
and VI
Ord. No.
05-078
Licensing and control of
dogs amendment; pet waste
Tabled
Ord. No.
05-079
11-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic: lane
control
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-080
11-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic: dropoff
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-081
11-9-2005 Stormwater control Ch. 433
Ord. No.
05-082
11-9-2005 Vehicles and traffic: dropoff
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
05-083
11-29-2005 Licensing and control of
dogs amendment; pet waste
Ch. 121, Arts. I and
IX
Ord. No.
05-084
11-29-2005 Department of
Administration amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
05-085
12-20-2005 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
05-086
12-20-2005 Agreement with City of
Newark
*
Ord. No.
06-001
1-24-2006 Constables amendment Ch. 21
Ord. No.
06-002
1-24-2006 Constables amendment Ch. 21
Ord. No.
06-003
1-24-2006 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
06-004
1-24-2006 Health care services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
06-005
1-24-2006 Health care services
agreement
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1181
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
06-006
1-24-2006 Vehicles and traffic: dropoff
and pickup zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-007
2-7-2006 Rental agreement *
Ord. No.
06-008
2-14-2006 Budget cap *
Ord. No.
06-009
2-14-2006 Redevelopment plan
amendment: Dale Avenue
*
Ord. No.
06-010
2-14-2006 Bond *
Ord. No.
06-011
2-14-2006 Property acquisition *
Ord. No.
06-012
2-14-2006 Lease agreement 100
Hamilton Plaza
*
Ord. No.
06-013
2-14-2006 Food vending vehicles
amendment
Ch. 243
Ord. No.
06-014
2-28-2006 Tabled
Ord. No.
06-015
2-28-2006 Redevelopment plan
amendment: Great Falls
Historic District Phase I
*
Ord. No.
06-016
2-28-2006 Fire Safety amendment Ch. 215
Ord. No.
06-017
2-28-2006 Fire Division amendment Ch. 39
Ord. No.
06-018
2-28-2006 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
06-019
2-28-2006 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
06-020
2-28-2006 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
06-021
2-28-2006 General penalty amendment Ch. 1
Ord. No.
06-022
2-28-2006 Newsracks amendment Ch. 474
Ord. No.
06-023
2-28-2006 Repeal of conveyance of
property to Housing
Authority
*
Ord. No.
06-024
2-28-2006 Property exchange *
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1182
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
06-025
2-28-2006 Property sale *
Ord. No.
06-026
2-28-2006 Sex offenders: residency
restriction
Ch. 411, Art. II
Ord. No.
06-027
3-14-2006 Failed
Ord. No.
06-028
3-14-2006 Tabled
Ord. No.
06-029
3-14-2006 Redevelopment plan
amendment: Fourth Ward
*
Ord. No.
06-030
3-14-2006 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
06-031
3-28-2006 Zoning and land
development revision
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
06-032
3-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic:
15-minute parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-033
4-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic: bus
turns prohibited
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-034
4-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic: multiway
stop controls
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-035
4-25-2006 Property lease *
Ord. No.
06-036
Tabled
Ord. No.
06-037
4-25-2006 Vehicles and traffic: no
standing
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-038
5-10-2006 Professional services
agreement
*
Ord. No.
06-039
5-10-2006 Tabled
Ord. No.
06-040
5-10-2006 Loitering: criminal gang
loitering
Ch. 315, Art. I
Ord. No.
06-041
5-10-2006 Tabled
Ord. No.
06-042
5-10-2006 Vehicles and traffic: dropoff
and pickup zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-043
5-23-2006 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
06-044
5-23-2006 Littering amendment Ch. 313
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1183
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
06-045
5-23-2006 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 435
Ord. No.
06-046
5-23-2006 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 435
Ord. No.
06-047
5-23-2006 Disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 195
Ord. No.
06-048
5-23-2006 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 113
Ord. No.
06-049
5-23-2006 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 109
Ord. No.
06-050
5-23-2006 Signs amendment Ch. 414
Ord. No.
06-051
5-23-2006 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
06-052
5-23-2006 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
06-053
5-23-2006 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-054
6-13-2006 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
06-055
6-13-2006 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-056
6-27-2006 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 367
Ord. No.
06-057
6-27-2006 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 367
Ord. No.
06-058
6-27-2006 Sewers amendment Ch. 407
Ord. No.
06-059
6-27-2006 Rescinding lease agreement
of Ord. No. 04-085
*
Ord. No.
06-060
6-27-2006 Vehicles and traffic: speed
limits
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-061
7-25-2006 Rental agreements *
Ord. No.
06-062
8-22-2006 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
06-063
8-22-2006 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
06-064
9-12-2006 Redevelopment plan
amendment: First Ward
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1184
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
06-065
9-12-2006 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-066(1)
10-10-2006 Lease agreement *
Ord. No.
06-066(2)
10-24-2006 Salaries amendment *
Ord. No.
06-067
10-24-2006 Bond *
Ord. No.
06-068
10-24-2006 Vehicles and traffic: pickup
and dropoff zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-069
Tabled
Ord. No.
06-070
11-28-2006 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
06-071
Tabled
Ord. No.
06-072
11-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-073
Failed
Ord. No.
06-074
Failed
Ord. No.
06-075
11-28-2006 Vehicles and traffic: dropoff
and pickup zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-076
12-19-2006 Budget cap appropriation *
Ord. No.
06-077
12-19-2006 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
06-078
12-19-2006 Public use of 38-46 Elm
Street
*
Ord. No.
06-079
Failed
Ord. No.
06-080
12-19-2006 Vehicles and traffic: Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
06-081
12-19-2006 Tabled
Ord. No.
07-001
1-23-2007 Retail food establishments
amendment
Ch. 231
Ord. No.
07-002
1-23-2007 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1185
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
07-003
2-13-2007 Retail food establishments
amendment
Ch. 231
Ord. No.
07-004
2-13-2007 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
07-005
2-27-2007 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
07-006
2-27-2007 Bond *
Ord. No.
07-007
Failed
Ord. No.
07-008
3-13-2007 Vehicles and traffic: parking
of heavy vehicles
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
07-009
3-13-2007 Eminent domain *
Ord. No.
07-010
3-13-2007 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
07-011
3-27-2007 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
07-012
3-27-2007 Rental agreements for
nutrition sites
*
Ord. No.
07-013
3-27-2007 Lease renewal *
Ord. No.
07-014
Failed
Ord. No.
07-015
3-27-2007 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
07-016
3-27-2007 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
07-017
3-27-2007 Vehicles and traffic: left turn Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
07-018
4-10-2007 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
07-019
4-24-2007 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
07-020
4-24-2007 Stormwater management
plan
?
Ord. No.
07-021
4-24-2007 Lease agreement renewal *
Ord. No.
07-022
5-8-2007 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1186
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
07-023
5-17-2007 Bond *
Ord. No.
07-024
5-22-2007 Acquisition of property *
Ord. No.
07-025
5-22-2007 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
07-026
5-22-2007 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
07-027
Failed
Ord. No.
07-028
Failed
Ord. No.
07-029
5-22-2007 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
07-030
5-22-2007 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
07-031
5-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
07-032
5-22-2007 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
07-033
6-26-2007 Redevelopment plan
amendment: First Ward
*
Ord. No.
07-034
6-12-2007 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
07-035
6-12-2007 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
07-036
6-12-2007 Authorization to submit
application to operate
demonstration syringe
exchange program
*
Ord. No.
07-037
6-12-2007 Vehicles and traffic: left turn Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
07-038
6-26-2007 Lease of air rights *
Ord. No.
07-039
6-26-2007 Sale of property *
Ord. No.
07-040
6-26-2007 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
07-041
6-26-2007 Health care service
agreement
*
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1187
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
07-042
6-26-2007 Health care service
agreement
*
Ord. No.
07-043
7-17-2007 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
07-044
7-31-2007 Tax exemptions and
abatements for
improvements
Ch. 445, Art. I
Ord. No.
07-045
Not adopted
Ord. No.
07-046
Not adopted
Ord. No.
07-047
Not adopted
Ord. No.
07-048
9-25-2007 Acquisition of easement *
Ord. No.
07-049
9-25-2007 Flood damage prevention Ch. 219
Ord. No.
07-050
9-25-2007 Bond *
Ord. No.
07-051
9-25-2007 Health services agreement *
Ord. No.
07-052
9-25-2007 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
07-053
9-25-2007 Acceptance of sewer
easement
*
Ord. No.
07-054
9-25-2007 Recreational and
educational use agreement
*
Ord. No.
07-055
9-25-2007 Flood Control Commission Ch. 41
Ord. No.
07-056
10-24-2007 Retail food establishments
amendment
Ch. 231
Ord. No.
07-057
10-24-2007 Failed
Ord. No.
07-058
10-24-2007 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
07-059
11-7-2007 Bond *
Ord. No.
08-001
1-22-2008 Budget cap *
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1188
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
08-002
1-22-2008 Lease agreement: 133
Ellison Street
*
Ord. No.
08-003
2-12-2008 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
08-004
2-12-2008 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
08-005
2-12-2008 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
08-006
Not adopted
Ord. No.
08-007
2-26-2008 Rental agreements for
nutrition sites
*
Ord. No.
08-008
2-26-2008 Lease agreement: 60
Temple Street
*
Ord. No.
08-009
2-26-2008 Lease agreement renewal:
60 Temple Street
*
Ord. No.
08-010
Number not used
Ord. No.
08-011
3-11-2008 Redevelopment plan:
Garrett Heights
*
Ord. No.
08-012
Not adopted
Ord. No.
08-013
4-8-2008 Lease agreement: 165 Fifth
Avenue
*
Ord. No.
08-014
4-8-2008 Vehicles and traffic:
30-minute parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
08-015
4-8-2008 Vehicles and traffic: lane
controls
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
08-016
4-22-2008 Tax abatement *
Ord. No.
08-017
5-14-2008 Granting of easement *
Ord. No.
08-018
5-14-2008 Vehicles and traffic: no
stopping or standing
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
08-019
5-27-2008 Redevelopment plan: Area
#11 neighborhood
*
Ord. No.
08-020
6-24-2008 Bond *
Ord. No.
08-021
6-24-2008 Bond *
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1189
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
08-022
6-24-2008 Bond *
Ord. No.
08-023
6-24-2008 Solid waste: garbage and
refuse removal and disposal
amendment
Ch. 427, Art. II
Ord. No.
08-024
7-29-2008 Pensions: defined
contribution retirement
program
Ch. 75, Art. I
Ord. No.
08-025
7-29-2008 Vehicles and traffic: no
stopping or standing
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
08-026
8-19-2008 Tax exemption *
Ord. No.
08-027
8-19-2008 Tax exemption *
Ord. No.
08-028
8-19-2008 Tax exemption *
Ord. No.
08-029
8-19-2008 Reappropriation *
Ord. No.
08-030
8-19-2009 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
08-031
8-19-2008 Acceptance of vehicle *
Ord. No.
08-032
8-19-2008 Vehicles and traffic:
15-minute parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
08-033
8-19-2008 Vehicles and traffic: dropoff
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
08-034
10-28-2008 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
08-035
11-12-2008 Tax exemption *
Ord. No.
08-036
11-12-2008 Bond *
Ord. No.
08-037
11-12-2008 Bond *
Ord. No.
08-038
11-25-2008 Tax exemption *
Ord. No.
09-001
1-22-2009 Budget cap *
Ord. No.
09-002
1-22-2009 Tax abatement *
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1190
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
09-003
2-10-2009 Rental agreements for
nutrition sites
*
Ord. No.
09-004
2-24-2009 Vehicles and traffic:
30-minute parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
09-005
2-24-2009 Acquisition of property *
Ord. No.
09-006
3-10-2009 Public construction
contracts amendment
Ch. 373
Ord. No.
09-007
3-10-2009 Taxicabs, autocabs, and
rented motor vehicles
amendment
Ch. 449
Ord. No.
09-008
4-14-2009 Lease agreement: 36-38
Circle Avenue
*
Ord. No.
09-009
4-14-2009 Junkyards amendment Ch. 291
Ord. No.
09-010
4-28-2009 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
09-011
4-28-2009 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
09-012
4-28-2009 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
09-013
5-26-2009 Bond *
Ord. No.
09-014
5-26-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
09-015
5-26-2009 Tax abatement *
Ord. No.
09-016
5-26-2009 Purchase and lease of
property: Railroad Avenue
*
Ord. No.
09-017
5-26-2009 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
09-018
6-23-2009 Municipal Court: Public
Defender fee amendment
Ch. 25, Art. IV
Ord. No.
09-019
6-23-2009 Amusement parlors
amendment; public
amusement parks
amendment
Ch. 117, Arts. III
and IV
Ord. No.
09-020
7-14-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1191
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
09-021
Zoning and land
development amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
09-022
8-18-2009 Vehicles and traffic:
restricted parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
09-023
Not adopted
Ord. No.
09-024
9-8-2009 Fire safety amendment Ch. 215
Ord. No.
09-025
9-8-2009 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
09-026
9-8-2009 Vehicles and traffic:
restricted parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
09-027
10-13-2009 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
09-028
10-13-2009 Vehicle acceptance *
Ord. No.
09-029
10-13-2009 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
09-030
10-27-2009 Bond *
Ord. No.
09-031
10-27-2009 Bond *
Ord. No.
09-032
10-27-2009 Bond *
Ord. No.
09-033
10-27-2009 Acceptance of property *
Ord. No.
09-034
11-10-2009 Dangerous and unfit
buildings: abandoned
properties
Ch. 157, Art. IV
Ord. No.
09-035
11-10-2009 Exchange of easements *
Ord. No.
09-036
11-24-2009 Agreement of easement *
Ord. No.
09-037
11-10-2009 Quitclaim deed *
Ord. No.
09-038
12-15-2009 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
10-001
1-26-2010 Rental agreement: senior
citizen nutrition sites
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1192
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
10-002
1-26-2010 Lease agreement: 60
Temple Street
*
Ord. No.
10-003
1-26-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank *
Ord. No.
10-004
2-9-2010 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
10-005
2-9-2010 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
10-006
2-9-2010 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
10-007
2-9-2010 Lease agreement: 60
Temple Street
*
Ord. No.
10-008
2-23-2010 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
10-009
Adopted as Ord. No.
10-012
Ord. No.
10-010
3-9-2010 Motion-picture theaters
amendment
Ch. 331
Ord. No.
10-011
3-9-2010 Approval of application for
state incentive grant by St.
Joseph's Hospital
*
Ord. No.
10-012
5-4-2010 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
10-013
3-23-2010 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
10-014
4-13-2010 Conveyance of City-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
10-015
4-13-2010 Conveyance of City-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
10-016
4-13-2010 Conveyance of City-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
10-017
4-13-2010 Conveyance of City-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
10-018
4-13-2010 Conveyance of City-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
10-019
4-13-2010 Lead-based paint
amendment
Ch. 351
Ord. No.
10-020
4-13-2010 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1193
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
10-021
4-27-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
10-022
5-4-2010 Land development and
zoning amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
10-023
Adopted as Ord. No.
10-028
Ord. No.
10-024
4-27-2010 Street vacation; street
dedication
*
Ord. No.
10-025
4-27-2010 Vehicles and traffic:
crosswalks
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
10-026
Failed
Ord. No.
10-027
4-27-2010 Conveyance of City-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
10-028
5-12-2010 Street dedication *
Ord. No.
10-029
5-12-2010 Conveyance of City-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
10-030
5-18-2010 Lease agreement: Hinchliffe
Stadium
*
Ord. No.
10-031
5-18-2010 Lease agreement: Bauerle
Field
*
Ord. No.
10-032
6-22-2010 Sale of property *
Ord. No.
10-033
6-22-2010 Sale of property *
Ord. No.
10-034
6-22-2010 Conveyance of City-owned
property
*
Ord. No.
10-035
6-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
10-036
6-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
10-037
6-22-2010 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
10-038
6-22-2010 Streets and sidewalks:
street openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 435, Art. III
Ord. No.
10-039
Adopted as Ord. No.
10-042
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1194
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
10-040
Adopted as Ord. No.
10-045
Ord. No.
10-041
Adopted as Ord. No.
10-043
Ord. No.
10-042
8-17-2010 Green Team Ch. 257
Ord. No.
10-043
8-17-2010 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
10-044
Adopted as Ord. No.
10-045
Ord. No.
10-045
9-28-2010 Bond: reconstruction of
sewers
*
Ord. No.
10-046
9-28-2010 Exceed budget; cap bank *
Ord. No.
10-047
9-28-2010 Noise amendment Ch. 337
Ord. No.
10-048
9-28-2010 Amusements and
amusement devices: public
amusement parks
amendment
Ch. 117, Art. IV
Ord. No.
10-049
10-12-2010 Environmental Commission Ch. 37
Ord. No.
10-050
10-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic: school
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
10-051
10-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic: no
stopping, standing or
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
10-052
10-12-2010 Vehicles and traffic: permit
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
10-053
11-9-2010 Municipal Court: Public
Defender fee amendment
Ch. 25, Art. IV
Ord. No.
10-054
11-9-2010 Vehicles and traffic:
penalties
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
10-055
11-9-2010 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing; regulations
amendment
Ch. 113, Art. I
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1195
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
10-056
11-9-2010 Peddling and soliciting: ice
cream peddlers amendment;
itinerant vendors of
photographs and
photographic services
amendment; peddlers,
hawkers, transient
merchants and itinerant
vendors amendment
Ch. 367, Arts. II, III
and IV
Ord. No.
10-057
11-9-2010 Entertainment and shows
amendment
Ch. 203
Ord. No.
10-058
11-9-2010 Close-out sales amendment Ch. 395
Ord. No.
10-059
11-9-2010 Motor vehicles junk dealers
amendment
Ch. 287
Ord. No.
10-060
11-9-2010 Secondhand dealers
amendment
Ch. 399
Ord. No.
10-061
11-9-2010 Dance halls amendment;
dancing academies
amendment
Ch. 191, Arts. I and
II
Ord. No.
10-062
11-9-2010 Public billiard and pool
rooms amendment
Ch. 133
Ord. No.
10-063
11-9-2010 Mechanical amusement
devices amendment;
distributors of mechanical
amusement devices
amendment; amusement
parlors amendment
Ch. 117, Arts. I, II
and III
Ord. No.
10-064
11-9-2010 Auctions and auctioneers
amendment
Ch. 125
Ord. No.
10-065
11-9-2010 Retail florists amendment Ch. 223
Ord. No.
10-066
11-9-2010 Junkyards amendment Ch. 291
Ord. No.
10-067
11-9-2010 Coin-operated laundries
amendment
Ch. 301
Ord. No.
10-068
11-9-2010 Open-air parking lots
amendment
Ch. 359
Ord. No.
10-069
11-9-2010 Animals: licensing and
control of dogs amendment
Ch. 121, Art. I
Ord. No.
10-070
11-9-2010 Fire safety amendment Ch. 215
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1196
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
10-071
11-9-2010 Availability of records: vital
statistics records
amendment
Ch. 377, Art. I
Ord. No.
10-072
11-9-2010 Food handler's amendment Ch. 235
Ord. No.
10-073
11-9-2010 Retail food establishments
amendment
Ch. 231
Ord. No.
10-074
11-9-2010 Mercantile establishments
amendment
Ch. 322
Ord. No.
10-075
11-9-2010 Rent leveling amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
10-076
11-23-2010 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
10-077
11-23-2010 Bond amendment *
Ord. No.
10-078
11-23-2010 Department of Health and
Human Services
amendment
Chs. 5, 227, 259,
322, 381 and 427,
Art. IV
Ord. No.
10-079
11-23-2010 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
10-080
11-23-2010 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-001
1-25-2011 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
11-002
1-25-2011 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
11-003
1-25-2011 Uniform construction codes
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
11-004
Adopted as Ord. No.
11-016
Ord. No.
11-005
Failed
Ord. No.
11-006
2-8-2011 Contracts: awarding of
public contracts
Ch. 23, Art. I
Ord. No.
11-007
2-8-2011 Vehicles and traffic: permit
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-008
2-8-2011 Vehicles and traffic: permit
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-009
2-22-2011 Certificate of re-rental
approval amendment
Ch. 175, Art. I
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1197
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
11-010
2-22-2011 Refunding bond *
Ord. No.
11-011
2-22-2011 Emergency appropriation *
Ord. No.
11-012
2-22-2011 Lease agreement: 60
Temple Street
*
Ord. No.
11-013
2-22-2011 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-014
3-22-2011 Refunding bond *
Ord. No.
11-015
3-22-2011 Lease agreement: 60
Temple Street
*
Ord. No.
11-016
3-30-2011 Bond: improvements to
recreational facilities
*
Ord. No.
11-017
4-12-2011 Bond: reconstruction sewers *
Ord. No.
11-018
4-12-2012 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
11-019
Failed
Ord. No.
11-020
Failed
Ord. No.
11-021
4-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic: traffic
control signal
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-022
4-26-2011 Vehicles and traffic: lane
control
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-023
5-17-2011 Salaries for City employees
not covered by collective
bargaining agreements
Vetoed
Ord. No.
11-024
6-14-2011 Vehicles and traffic: school
bus zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-025
Adopted as Ord. No.
11-026
Ord. No.
11-026
8-23-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
11-027
8-23-2011 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
11-028
9-13-2011 Housing-property
maintenance amendment
Ch. 271
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1198
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
11-029
9-13-2011 Lease of football and soccer
field
*
Ord. No.
11-030
9-13-2011 Acceptance of donated
school bus
*
Ord. No.
11-031
10-11-2011 Exceed budget; cap bank *
Ord. No.
11-032
10-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-033
10-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic:
redesignation of two-way
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-034
10-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street; lane control
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-035
Adopted as Ord. No.
11-043
Ord. No.
11-036
10-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-037
Adopted as Ord. No.
11-042
Ord. No.
11-038
Renumbered as
Ord. No. 11-041
Ord. No.
11-039
10-11-2011 Vehicles and traffic: parallel
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-040
Adopted as Ord. No.
11-044
Ord. No.
11-041
Not adopted
Ord. No.
11-042
Adopted as Ord. No.
11-047
Ord. No.
11-043
10-25-2011 Vehicles and traffic: no
standing zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-044
10-25-2011 Vehicles and traffic: no
standing zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-045
Adopted as Ord. No.
11-049
Ord. No.
11-046
10-25-2011 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-047
11-29-2011 Vehicles and traffic: no
standing zone
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1199
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
11-048
11-29-2011 Vehicles and traffic: school
dropoff and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
11-049
12-6-2011 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
12-001
1-24-2012 Sewer user charges
amendment
Ch. 407, Art. II
Ord. No.
12-002
1-24-2012 Sewer user charges
amendment
Ch. 407, Art. II
Ord. No.
12-003
1-24-2012 Bond *
Ord. No.
12-004
1-24-2012 Bond *
Ord. No.
12-005
Not adopted
Ord. No.
12-006
2-14-2012 Vehicles and traffic:
restricted parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-007
2-14-2012 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-008
2-14-2012 Vehicles and traffic: angle
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-009
2-14-2012 Vehicles and traffic: angle
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-010
2-14-2012 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
12-011
2-14-2012 Authorization for monument *
Ord. No.
12-012
2-28-2012 Emergency appropriation *
Ord. No.
12-013
Taxicabs, autocabs and
rented motor vehicles
amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
12-014
Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not adopted
Ord. No.
12-015
3-13-2012 Vehicles and traffic: angle
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-016
3-27-2012 Bond *
Ord. No.
12-017
Vehicles and traffic:
restricted parking
Adopted as Ord. No.
12-020
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1200
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
12-018
3-27-2012 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-019
3-27-2012 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-020
4-24-2012 Vehicles and traffic:
restricted parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-021
4-24-2012 Smoking Ch. 421
Ord. No.
12-022
5-9-2012 Easement agreement *
Ord. No.
12-023
5-9-2012 Lease agreement *
Ord. No.
12-024
5-22-2012 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-025
6-1-2012 Bond *
Ord. No.
12-026
6-12-2012 Appropriation *
Ord. No.
12-027
6-12-2012 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-028
6-12-2012 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-029
6-26-2012 Grass Roots Cultural Arts
Commission
Ch. 43
Ord. No.
12-030
6-26-2012 Lease agreement *
Ord. No.
12-031
7-31-2012 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
12-032
Honorary naming of streets
and public areas
Tabled
Ord. No.
12-033
8-21-2012 Uniform Construction Codes
amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
12-034
8-21-2012 Easement *
Ord. No.
12-035
Emergency appropriation Tabled
Ord. No.
12-036
8-21-2012 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
12-037
Administration of
government amendment
Tabled
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1201
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
12-038
8-21-2012 Easement *
Ord. No.
12-039
8-21-2012 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-040
Honorary naming of streets
and public areas
Not adopted
Ord. No.
12-041
Emergency appropriation Not adopted
Ord. No.
12-042
Administration of
government amendment
Not adopted
Ord. No.
12-043
9-25-2012 Lease agreement *
Ord. No.
12-044
10-9-2012 Exceed budget; cap bank *
Ord. No.
12-045
Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not adopted
Ord. No.
12-046
10-9-2012 Vehicles and traffic:
prohibited left turn
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-046A
Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not adopted
Ord. No.
12-047
Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not adopted
Ord. No.
12-048
11-7-2012 Lease of land *
Ord. No.
12-049
11-27-2012 Taxicabs, autocabs and
rented motor vehicles
amendment
Ch. 449
Ord. No.
12-050
11-27-2012 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
12-051
12-18-2012 Emergency appropriation *
Ord. No.
12-052
Bond Tabled
Ord. No.
13-001
1-22-2013 Refunding bond
($11,600,000)
*
Ord. No.
13-002
Emergency appropriation
($2,100,000)
Failed
Ord. No.
13-003
1-22-2013 Bond ($1,000,000) *
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1202
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
13-004
1-22-2013 Streets and sidewalks:
construction, repair and
maintenance amendment
Ch. 435, Art. II
Ord. No.
13-005
2-19-2013 Refunding bond
($1,400,000)
*
Ord. No.
13-006
2-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-007
2-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-008
2-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-009
2-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic:
prohibited parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-010
2-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: bus stops,
Belmont Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-011
3-26-2013 Emergency appropriation
($2,100,000)
*
Ord. No.
13-012
3-26-2013 Lease agreement: 60
Temple Street
*
Ord. No.
13-013
4-9-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
13-014
Vehicles and traffic:
prohibited parking
Tabled
Ord. No.
13-015
Vehicles and traffic
amendment: drop-off and
pickup zone
Failed
Ord. No.
13-016
3-26-2013 Vehicles and traffic:
multiway stop controls
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-017
3-26-2013 Execution of right-of-way
use agreement
*
Ord. No.
13-018
4-9-2013 Tax abatement agreement
with Riverside Lofts, LLC
*
Ord. No.
13-019
4-9-2013 Tax abatement agreement
with Straight Street, LLC
*
Ord. No.
13-020
4-9-2013 Vehicles and traffic:
prohibited parking
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1203
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
13-021
Ord. No.
13-022
5-14-2013 Pilot tax abatement
agreement
*
Ord. No.
13-023
5-14-2013 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
13-024
6-11-2013 Authorization of purchase of
properties related to
Paterson Northside Buyback
Program
Tabled
Ord. No.
13-025
6-11-2013 Vehicles and traffic:
prohibited parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-026
6-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: bus stops,
Broadway
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-027
6-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: drop-off and
pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-028
6-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: bus stops, 20th
Avenue
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-029
6-25-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: taxicab stands
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-030
6-25-2013 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
13-031
6-25-2013 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
13-032
6-25-2013 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
13-033
7-16-2013 Salary increase for
Corporation Counsel and
First Assistant Corporation
Counsel
*
Ord. No.
13-034
7-16-2013 Authorization of purchase of
properties related to
Paterson Northside Buyback
Program
*
Ord. No.
13-035
Police Division amendment Amended and
returned to first
reading; taken off
by Legal
Department
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1204
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
13-036
7-16-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: taxicab stands
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-037
8-20-2013 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
13-038
8-20-2013 Appropriation ($563,650) *
Ord. No.
13-039
9-10-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: taxicab stands
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-040
9-24-2013 Bond ($2,800,000) *
Ord. No.
13-041
9-24-2013 Bond ($696,000) *
Ord. No.
13-042
9-24-2013 Bond ($5,073,000) *
Ord. No.
13-043
9-24-2013 Appropriation ($1,485,000) *
Ord. No.
13-044
9-24-2013 Establishment of energy
aggregation program
*
Ord. No.
13-045
10-8-2013 Exceed budget; cap bank *
Ord. No.
13-046
10-8-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-047
10-22-2013 Authorization of purchase of
properties related to
Paterson Northside Buyback
Program
*
Ord. No.
13-048
10-22-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-049
10-22-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: multiway stop
controls
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
13-050
11-26-2013 Pilot tax abatement
agreement
*
Ord. No.
13-051
11-26-2013 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
13-052
12-3-2013 Taxation: exemption
pursuant to Economic
Opportunity Act of 2013
Ch. 445, Art. II
Ord. No.
13-053
12-17-2013 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 449, Part 1
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1205
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
13-054
12-17-2013 Lease agreement: 60
Temple Street
*
Ord. No.
14-001
Skipped
Ord. No.
14-002
1-24-2014 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 449, Part 1
Ord. No.
14-003
1-24-2014 Taxicabs amendment Ch. 449, Part 1
Ord. No.
14-004
1-24-2014 Housing-property
maintenance amendment
Ch. 271
Ord. No.
14-005
1-24-2014 Special improvement
districts: Sandy Hill Area
Ch. 92, Art. III
Ord. No.
14-006
1-24-2014 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
14-007
2-11-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-008
2-25-2014 Personnel policies:
payments for unused sick
and personal days
Ch. 77, Art. II
Ord. No.
14-009
3-11-2014 Appropriation ($1,650,000) *
Ord. No.
14-010
3-11-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-011
3-11-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-012
3-11-2014 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
14-013
4-8-2014 Lease agreement: 60
Temple Street
*
Ord. No.
14-014
4-8-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: establishment
of handicapped parking
spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-015
4-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way
streets
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1206
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
14-016
4-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-017
4-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-018
4-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Crosby Place
angle parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-019
4-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Wall Avenue
angle parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-020
4-22-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: Federal Plaza
angle parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-021
4-22-2014 Refunding bond *
Ord. No.
14-022
5-27-2014 Historic preservation See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
14-023
5-27-2014 Disorderly conduct
amendment
Ch. 195
Ord. No.
14-024
5-27-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: establishment
of handicapped parking
spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-025
5-27-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: establishment
of handicapped parking
spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. no.
14-026
5-27-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-027
5-27-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: establishment
of handicapped parking
spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-028
6-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: establishment
of handicapped parking
spaces
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1207
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
14-029
6-10-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: establishment
of handicapped parking
spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-030
6-24-2014 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
14-031
6-24-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: no parking
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-032
6-24-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-033
7-29-2014 Lease agreement:
Emergence Church
Missional Community–work
in progress
*
Ord. No.
14-034
7-29-2014 Dangerous and unfit
buildings: abandoned
properties amendment
Ch. 157, Art. IV
Ord. No.
14-035
8-19-2014 Appropriation ($607,860) *
Ord. No.
14-036
8-19-2014 Dissolving Patterson
Municipal Utilities Authority
and moving its operations to
Department of Public Works
Tabled; see Ord.
No. 14-059
Ord. No.
14-037
8-19-2014 Commercial hours of
operation
Vetoed by Mayor;
Council failed to
override veto; see
Ord. No. 14-045
Ord. No.
14-038
8-19-2014 Street vacation *
Ord. No.
14-039
8-19-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-040
9-9-2014 Sick leave for private
employees
Ch. 412
Ord. No.
14-041
9-16-2014 Free parking in downtown
commercial business area
for vehicles displaying legal
handicap placards
Failed
Ord. No.
14-042
9-16-2014 Bond ($36,750,000) *
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1208
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
14-043
9-16-2014 Authorizing Department of
Health and Human Services,
Division on Aging and
Disabled Services, to apply
for and accept from Federal
Transit Assistant Program
(via New Jersey Transit) two
vehicles to assist in
transporting elderly and
disabled persons
*
Ord. No.
14-044
9-16-2014 Dissolving Patterson
Municipal Utilities Authority
and moving its operations to
Department of Public Works
Tabled; see Ord.
No. 14-059
Ord. No.
14-045
9-16-2014 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing; regulations
amendment; commercial
hours of operation
Chs. 113, Art. I; 181
Ord. No.
14-046
9-23-2014 Redevelopment plan (Area
No. 11 Neighborhood
Redevelopment)
*
Ord. No.
14-047
9-30-2014 Designating Hamilton Club
Building as historic
municipal landmark
*
Ord. No.
14-048
9-30-2014 Designating Christ Church
United Methodist Building
as historic municipal
landmark
*
Ord. No.
14-049
9-30-2014 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
14-050
9-30-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: no parking
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-051
9-30-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: multiway stop
controls
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-052
9-30-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: multiway stop
controls
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-053
9-30-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: dropoff and
pickup zone
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1209
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
14-054
9-30-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: loading zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-055
9-30-2014 Administration of
government amendment;
Recreation Commissioners,
Board of
Chs. 5; 85
Ord. No.
14-056
10-14-2014 Exceed budget; cap bank *
Ord. No.
14-057
10-14-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: dropoff and
pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-058
Skipped
Ord. No.
14-059
10-28-2014 Municipal Utilities Authority
repealer
Ch. 65 (reference
only)
Ord. No.
14-060
10-28-2014 Conveyance of Visitor's
Center to National Park
Service
*
Ord. No.
14-061
10-28-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: repealing
establishment of
handicapped parking space
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
14-062
12-16-2014 Rescinding designated
parking by permit on
Washington Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-001
1-20-2015 Designation of Iglesia
Presbiteriana/First
Presbyterian Church as
historical municipal
landmark
*
Ord. No.
15-002
1-20-2015 Designation of United
Presbyterian Church/
Church of the Redeemer as
historical municipal
landmark
*
Ord. No.
15-003
1-20-2015 Expansion of Great Falls
Historical District
boundaries to include
Hinchliffe Stadium
*
Ord. No.
15-004
1-20-2015 Designation of Court House
Historic District
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1210
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-005
1-20-2015 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
15-006
1-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: one-way
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-007
1-20-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: drop-off and
pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-008
2-10-2015 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-009
2-10-2015 Handicapped parking policy
amendment
Ch. 259
Ord. No.
15-010
2-24-2015 Temporary street closure *
Ord. No.
15-011
2-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-012
2-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-013
3-10-2015 Vehicles and traffic: no left
turn
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-014
3-24-2015 Tax abatement agreement *
Ord. No.
15-015
3-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
relocation of bus stop
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-016
3-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-017
3-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-018
4-14-2015 Leasing portion of
Christopher Hope
Community Center (60
Temple Street)
*
Ord. No.
15-019
4-14-2015 Street dedication
(Alexander Hamilton
Redevelopment Project)
*
Ord. No.
15-020
Failed
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1211
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-21
4-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of school
pickup and dropoff zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-022
4-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of school
pickup and dropoff zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-023
4-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-024
4-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-025
5-12-2015 Easement for fence
construction (Community
Child Care Center, LLC)
*
Ord. No.
15-026
5-12-2015 Buildings, dangerous and
unfit: abandoned properties
amendment
Ch. 157, Art. IV
Ord. No.
15-027
5-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-028
5-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
commercial loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-29
5-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
commercial loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-30
5-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
commercial loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-031
5-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
commercial loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-032
5-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
commercial loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-033
5-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
commercial loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-034
5-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
commercial loading zone
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1212
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-035
5-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
commercial loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-036
5-12-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-036A
5-26-2015 Parades and processions
amendment
Ch. 355
Ord. No.
15-037
5-26-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-038
5-26-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-039
5-26-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of no-parking
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-040
5-26-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
commercial loading zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-041
5-26-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-042
5-26-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-042A
6-9-2015 Appropriation ($579,986) *
Ord. No.
15-043
6-9-2015 Alcoholic beverages:
possession or consumption
on private property
Ch. 113, Art. IV
Ord. No.
15-044
6-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-045
6-9-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-046
6-23-2015 Bond ($4,395,000) *
Ord. No.
15-047
6-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1213
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-048
6-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-049
6-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-050
6-23-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-051
6-30-2015 Special improvement
districts: 21st Avenue Area
Ch. 92, Art. IV
Ord. No.
15-052
Redevelopment plan
amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
15-053
7-14-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-054
7-28-2015 Redevelopment plan
amendment (Garret
Heights)
*
Ord. No.
15-055
7-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-056
7-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-057
7-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-058
7-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-059
Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street designation
Tabled
Ord. No.
15-060
7-28-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
resident-only permit
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-061
8-25-2015 Salaries for appointed and
elected officials
*
Ord. No.
15-062
8-25-2015 Street vacation (22nd
Avenue)
*
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1214
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-063
8-25-2015 Street vacation (East 20th
Street)
*
Ord. No.
15-064
8-25-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-065
8-25-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-066
Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
commercial loading zone
Removed pending
address verification
Ord. No.
15-067
9-15-2015 Bond ($3,306,000) *
Ord. No.
15-068
9-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-069
9-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-070
9-29-2015 Purchase of property *
Ord. No.
15-071
Pilot tax abatement
agreement
Tabled
Ord. No.
15-072
9-29-2015 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-073
Pilot tax abatement
agreement
Tabled
Ord. No.
15-074
10-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-075
10-13-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-076
10-13-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
street openings and
excavations amendment
Ch. 435, Art. III
Ord. No.
15-077
10-13-2015 Underground utilities:
interference with Cityowned
utilities
Ch. 460, Art. I
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1215
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-078
10-27-2015 Smoking: sale and
distribution to persons
under 21 years of age
Ch. 421, Art. II
Ord. No.
15-079
10-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-080
10-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-081
10-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-082
10-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment: no parking
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-083
10-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-084
10-27-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-085
11-24-2015 Exceed budget; cap bank *
Ord. No.
15-086
11-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-087
11-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-088
11-24-2015 Vehicles and traffic: drop-off
and pick up zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
15-089
12-15-2015 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
15-090
12-15-2015 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
15-091
Pilot tax abatement
agreement
Tabled
Ord. No.
15-092
12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1216
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
15-093
12-15-2015 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-001
1-19-2016 Bond ($1,100,000) *
Ord. No.
16-002
1-19-2016 Sewers: sewer user charges
amendment
Ch. 407, Art. II
Ord. No.
16-003
2-9-2016 Zoning and land
development amendment
See Ch. 483
Ord. No.
16-004
Reappropriation ($338,921) Tabled
Ord. No.
16-005
Refunding bond ordinance
($1,630,000)
Tabled
Ord. No.
16-006
2-9-2016 Food vending vehicles
amendment; peddling and
soliciting: ice cream
peddlers amendment
Ch. 243; Ch. 367,
Art. II
Ord. No.
16-007
Commercial hours of
operation amendment
Tabled
Ord. No.
16-008
2-9-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-009
2-9-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-010
2-9-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-011
2-9-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-012
2-9-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-013
2-9-2016 Rescinding designated
parking by permit on Colt
Street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-014
2-23-2016 Street vacation (East 29th
Street)
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1217
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
16-015
2-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-016
2-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-017
2-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-018
2-23-2016 Permanent street closure
(Barnes Street)
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-019
2-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zones
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-020
2-23-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-021
3-8-2016 Commercial hours of
operation amendment
Failed for lack of
motion
Ord. No.
16-022
3-8-2016 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-023
3-8-2016 Vehicles and traffic: drop-off
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-024
3-22-2016 Acceptance of donated
tourniquets from the
Director of Valley Hospital
Emergency Services Unit
*
Ord. No.
16-025
3-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-026
3-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-027
3-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-028
4-12-2016 Commercial hours of
operation amendment
Ch. 181
Ord. No.
16-029
4-26-2016 Conveyance of property to
Paterson Habitat for
Humanity
*
Ord. No.
16-030
4-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic: drop-off
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1218
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
16-031
4-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic: drop-off
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-032
4-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-033
4-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
streets
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-034
4-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-035
4-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic: drop-off
and pickup zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-036
4-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-037
4-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-038
4-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-039
4-26-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-040
5-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-041
5-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-042
5-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-043
5-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic: stop
intersection
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-044
5-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-045
5-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic: multiway
stop control
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-046
5-24-2016 Vehicles and traffic: multiway
stop control
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1219
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
16-047
6-14-2016 Financial agreement
between City of Paterson
and Hamilton Plaza Urban
Renewal, LLC, for 683-735
Main Street
*
Ord. No.
16-048
6-28-2016 Alcoholic beverages:
licensing; regulations
amendment
Ch. 113, Art. I
Ord. No.
16-049
6-28-2016 Retail food establishments
amendment
Ch. 231
Ord. No.
16-050
6-28-2016 Easement *
Ord. No.
16-051
6-28-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-052
6-28-2016 Vehicles and traffic: fifteenminute
parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-053
6-28-2016 Vehicles and traffic: noparking
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-054
6-28-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-055
8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-056
8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-057
8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic: fifteenminute
parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-058
8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic: multiway
stop control
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-059
8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-060
8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-061
8-16-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-062
9-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-063
9-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1220
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
16-064
9-20-2016 Bins for donated items Ch. 134
Ord. No.
16-065
10-11-2016 Administration of
government amendment
Ch. 5
Ord. No.
16-066
Police Division amendment Failed for lack of
motion
Ord. No.
16-067
Amendment to Ord. No.
04-080
Failed for lack of
motion
Ord. No.
16-068
10-11-2016 Vehicles and traffic: noparking
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-069
10-25-2016 Relocation of bus stops Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-070
10-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-071
10-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-072
10-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-073
10-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-074
10-25-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-075
Skipped
Ord. No.
16-076
11-22-2016 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
16-077
11-22-2016 Exceed budget; cap bank *
Ord. No.
16-078
11-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic: speed
limit
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-079
11-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic: no
stopping or standing zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-080
11-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-081
11-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic: fifteenminute
parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-082
11-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic: loading
zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-083
11-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic: multiway
stop controls
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1221
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
16-084
11-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic: multiway
stop controls
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-085
11-22-2016 Vehicles and traffic: multiway
stop controls
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-086
12-20-2016 Lease of 72 McBride Avenue
to Hamilton Partnership for
Paterson, Inc.
*
Ord. No.
16-087
12-20-2016 Dangerous and unfit
buildings: abandoned
properties amendment
Ch. 157, Art. IV
Ord. No.
16-088
12-20-2016 Bond amendment
($8,111,607)
Ord. No.
16-089
12-20-2016 Bond ($1,400,000)
Ord. No.
16-090
12-20-2016 Refunding bond
(($3,000,000)
Ord. No.
16-091
1-24-2017 Bond ($1,040,000) *
Ord. No.
16-092
1-24-2017 Bond ($635,000) *
Ord. No.
16-093
1-24-2017 Bond ($1,987,343) *
Ord. No.
16-094
12-20-2016 Police Division amendment Ch. 81
Ord. No.
16-095
12-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-096
12-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-097
12-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic:
repealing establishment of
handicapped parking spaces
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-098
12-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic: oneway
street
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-099
12-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic: angle
parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-100
12-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking zone
Not included in
codification
Ord. No.
16-101
12-20-2016 Vehicles and traffic: no
parking zone
Not included in
codification
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1222
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
17-001
1-17-2017 Lease of Property *
Ord. No.
17-002
1-17-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: Dropoff
and Pickup Zone
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-003
1-17-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Loading Zones
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-004
2-28-2017 Lease of Property *
Ord. No.
17-005
2-28-2017 Streets and Sidewalks:
Street Openings and
Excavations Amendment
Ch. 435, Art. III
Ord. No.
17-006
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: One-
Way Streets
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-007
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-008
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: One-
Way Streets
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-009
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: One-
Way Streets
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-010
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: One-
Way Streets
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-011
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-012
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-013
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-014
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Loading Zones
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-015
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: One-
Way Streets
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-016
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Loading Zones
Not Included in
Codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1223
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
17-017
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: All-Way
Stop Controls
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-018
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: All-Way
Stop Controls
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-019
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-020
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-021
2-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: No
Parking Zone
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-022
3-28-2017 Rent Leveling Amendment Ch. 381
Ord. No.
17-023
3-28-2017 Lease of Property *
Ord. No.
17-024
3-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-025
3-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-026
3-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing of Establishment
of Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-027
3-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Loading Zones
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-028
3-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: Speed
Limit
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-029
3-28-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing of Establishment
of Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-030
Vehicles and Traffic: Parking
of Heavy Vehicles
Tabled
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1224
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
17-031
Amendment to Subsection
(F)(3) of Ordinance No.
500.71
Failed for Lack of
Motion
Ord. No.
17-032
4-11-2017 Taxicabs Amendment;
Autocabs, Rented Motor
Vehicles and Limousines
Amendment
Ch. 449, Part 1; Ch.
229, Part 2
Ord. No.
17-033
4-11-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing of Establishment
of Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-034
4-11-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Loading Zones
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-035
4-11-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: Parking
of Heavy Vehicles
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-036
4-11-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-037
5-23-2017 Redevelopment Plan *
Ord. No.
17-038
5-23-2017 Redevelopment Plan *
Ord. No.
17-039
5-23-2017 Redevelopment Plan *
Ord. No.
17-040
5-23-2017 Redevelopment Plan *
Ord. No.
17-041
5-9-2017 Noise Amendment Ch. 337
Ord. No.
17-042
5-9-2017 Municipal Identification
Card
Ch. 332
Ord. No.
17-043
5-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing of Establishment
of Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-044
5-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1225
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
17-045
5-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing of Establishment
of Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-046
5-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-047
5-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing of Establishment
of Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-048
5-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing of Establishment
of Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-049
5-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-050
5-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing of Establishment
of Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-051
5-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
15-Minute Parking Zone
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-052
5-9-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: Dropoff
and Pickup Zone
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-053
5-23-2017 Uniform Construction Codes
Amendment
Ch. 183
Ord. No.
17-054
5-23-2017 Refunding Bond
($3,000,000)
*
Ord. No.
17-055
5-23-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-056
6-13-2017 Sale of Property *
Ord. No.
17-057
7-11-2017 Conveyance of Property Failed for Lack of
Motion
Ord. No.
17-058
6-27-2017 Bond ($1,450,000) *
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
A513:1226
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
17-059
6-27-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: Angle
Parking
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-060
Lease Agreement Tabled
Ord. No.
17-061
Vehicles and Traffic: Bus
Stop Relocations
Tabled
Ord. No.
17-062
7-25-2017 Lease Agreement *
Ord. No.
17-063
7-25-2017 Alcoholic Beverages:
Licensing; Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 113, Art. I
Ord. No.
17-064
7-25-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: Bus
Stop Relocations
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-065
8-15-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing of Establishment
of Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-066
8-15-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-067
8-15-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Repealing of Establishment
of Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-068
9-19-2017 Conveyance of Property *
Ord. No.
17-069
9-19-2017 Redevelopment Plan *
Ord. No.
17-070
Acquisition of Property Failed
Ord. No.
17-071
9-19-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: All-Way
Stop Controls
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-072
10-3-2017 Stormwater Control
Amendment
Ch. 433
Ord. No.
17-073
10-24-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: Right
Turn Prohibition At Red
Signal
Not Included in
Codification
§ DL-1 TELEPHONE FRANCHISE § DL-1
A513:1227
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
17-074
10-24-2017 Vehicles and Traffic:
Establishment of
Handicapped Parking
Spaces
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-075
10-24-2017 Vehicles and Traffic: School
Zone With Reduced Speed
Limit
Not Included in
Codification
Ord. No.
17-076
11-21-2017 Refunding Bond
($5,000,000)
*
Ord. No.
17-077
11-21-2017 Refunding Bond ($500,000) *
Ord. No.
17-078
11-21-2017 Bond ($8,000,000) *
Ord. No.
17-079
Bond ($3,850,000) Failed
Ord. No.
17-080
11-21-2017 Bond ($2,000,000) *
Ord. No.
17-081
11-21-2017 Bond *
Ord. No.
17-082
11-21-2017 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank *
Ord. No.
17-083
11-21-2017 Streets and Sidewalks:
Traffic Work Zones
Amendment
Ch. 435, Art. IX
Distribution Table
Chapter DT
DISTRIBUTION TABLE
§ DL-1 PATERSON CODE § DL-1
DT:1228

Section 500-2.3 Schedule of Bulk and Dimensional Requirements
Zoning District
Minimum Lot Area
Minimum Lot Width 
Front Yard Side Yard Rear Yard
Building Height Stories 
Dwelling Units per Acre
Floor Area Ratio
Lot Coverage (%) 
R-1 5,000 50 25 4 14 20 35 2.5  --  None 30
R-2 5,000 50 20 4 14 20 35 3  --  None 40
R-3a 1,650 50 20 4 14 25 35 3  --  1.2 40
R-3b 1,650 80 20 4 14 25 35 3  --  1.2 40
R-3c 1,550 90 20 4 14 25 35 3  --  1.2 40
R-3d 1,400 95 20 4 14 25 35 3  --  1.2 40
R-3e Townhouse: 2,500 20 20 04 124 25 35 3  --  1.2 40
R-3f Townhouse: 2,500 20 20 04 124 25 35 3  --  1.2 40
R-3a Garden Apartment 10,000 100 20 15 30 25 35 3 38 0.75 25
R-3b Low-Rise Apartment 15,000 150 255 155 305 205 80 7 50 1.4 20
R-4 High Density Residential District 20,000 200 25 20 40 20 250 21 100 3.0 20
B-1 Neighborhood Business District 2,500 25 None 10 10 20 30 2.5 None 1.0 50
B-2 Community Business District 5,000 50 None 10 10 25 40 3 None 2.0 60
B-3 General Business District 10,000 100 None 10 10 30 40 3 None 1.5 60
B-4 Central Business District None None None 10 10 None None None None 5.0 100
MU Mixed Use District11
Commercial Development See B-3
Industrial Development See I-1
I-1 Light Industrial District 10,000 100 10 10 10 10 40  --  None 2.0 60
I-2 Heavy Industrial District 10,000 100 10 10 10 10 40  --  None 2.0 60
GFHD Great Falls Historic District 10,000 100 None 109 109 1015 5015 4 None10 3.0 75
PUID Planned Unit Industrial Development District See 500-9.1
H-1 Hospital Zone 112 5,000 50 10 4 10 25 40 3 None 1.0 60
R/C-3 High Medium Density Mixed Use District
Townhouse: Two Family4 10,000 100 10 9 18 20 35 3 22 1.2 45
Multi-Family Dwellings (3 to 7 Families) 12,500 125 10 9 18 20 35 3 22 1.2 45
Garden Apartment 15,000 150 10 9 18 20 35 3 22 1.2 45
I-T Industrial Transition District13, 14 20,000 200 None 013 013 15 80 710 None 5.0 70
1. For non-conforming lots, see Section 500-6. For lots of record pursuant to Section 500-6.2, each side yard shall not be less than four (4) feet in width.
Section 500-2.3 Schedule of Bulk and Dimensional Requirements
2. Pursuant to Section 500-3.2B, in all zoning districts, where the average of the front yards existing on all lots within 200 feet of either side of the lot is less than the minimum required front yard, the required setback line shall be
reduced to this lesser average depth. In residential districts and in the GFH District, no building shall be set back more than 10 feet further from the front lot line than the average front yard setback on the street. In business districts,
no buildings shall be set back more than 20 feet further from the front lot line than the average front yard setback on the street.
3. Minimum lot area per dwelling unit. Side yard requirement shall apply for construction of a new principal structure. Existing structures located on a non-conforming lot may be altered and/or enlarged in conformance with other
district regulations.
4. There shall be no more than eight (8) townhouses in a single structure. There shall be at least a 2-foot offset between each two structures containing townhouses. Side yards shall apply to structures (not individual units).
5. Front yards shall not be less than one-half the building height minus twenty-five (25) feet, or not less than 25 feet, whichever is greater. Side and rear yards shall not be less than one-half the building height, except that this may be
reduced by fifty percent (50%) at building ends no over fifty (50) feet in width. Side and rear yards shall not be less than twenty (20) feet in any case.
6. Requirements in this row apply to high-rise apartment buildings. Other residential uses permitted in the R-4 District shall be subject to the applicable requirement of the R-3 District.
7. Ten (10) feet for each residential floor area/penthouse level plus standard heights for garage levels below residential floors. Maximum building height shall be 250 feet.
8. The following density requirements in relation to stories shall be met: Up to two stories – 30 units per acre; 3 to 5 stories- 40 units per acre; 6 to 10 stories – 70 units per acre; 11 to 21 stories – 100 units per acre.
9. Setback is either ten (10) feet or zero (0) feet on both sides, or a combination thereof. However, such setback(s) shall be wide enough to allow access to parking facilities on the site.
10. Subject to the requirements of Section 500-3.9.
11. Any proposed development for commercial purposes shall comply with the bulk regulations of the B-3 District. Any proposed development for industrial purposes shall comply with the bulk regulations for the I-1 District.
12. The requirements specified in this table relate to hospital-related uses permitted in the district. The bulk standards for hospitals are specified in Section 500-5.26. Uses permitted in the R-2 District (e.g., one and two family dwellings)
shall be subject to the bulk to the applicable requirements of the R-2 District. Uses permitted in the R-3 District (e.g., multi-family dwellings) shall be subject to the bulk to the applicable requirements of the R-3 District.
13. These provisions do not apply to a “Mixed Use Community Development”. A “Mixed Use Community Development shall be governed by the requirements specified in Subsection 500-4.17 of this ordinance.
14. See Section 500-2.5 for design standards.
15. Structured parking garage facilities which serve the general public, and are located on Block 4609 in the GFHD are permitted to have a maximum height of 7 levels.