Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE.
The book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Borough of Pine Hill, 1973", and is herein referred to as
the "revision".
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this revision, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Pine Hill in the County of Camden
and State of New Jersey.
BOROUGH COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — Shall mean the Mayor and
councilmen of the borough.
CLERK OR BOROUGH CLERK — Shall mean the municipal Clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the government
established or designated by ordinance or this revision as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to
such organizational unit by the council.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this revision.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this revision, so long as it is adopted by
the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it
remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
AO:1
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every
class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION.
For the purpose of this revision and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day is a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the borough are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, type-writing and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
Whenever a specific time is used in this revision, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this revision shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the revision identified by
Arabic numbers and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY.
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this revision shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part,
§ 1-2 PINE HILL CODE § 1-4
AO:2
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this revision.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
§ 2-1. CHAPTER TITLE.1
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Administrative Code of
the Borough of Pine Hill and is herein referred to as the code.
§ 2-2. BOROUGH COUNCIL.
§ 2-2.1. Organization.
The council shall consist of the Mayor and six councilmen, all of whom shall
be elected at large in the borough and take office in the manner provided
by law. Their term of office shall commence January 1, next following their
election.
§ 2-2.2. Vacancies.
Pursuant to the borough law, a vacancy occurring in the office of the Mayor,
whether by resignation or otherwise, shall be filled by the council until the
next general election and until the election and qualification of a successor.
At such next general election the person elected to fill such vacancy shall
be elected for the unexpired term only. All vacancies in other elected offices
shall be filled by nomination of the Mayor and appointment by him, with
the advice and consent of the Council members present at the meeting,
provided that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for such
purpose, the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in the case of a tie.
All appointments to fill vacancies on the council shall be until January 1st
following the next general election.
If such vacancies shall occur at so short a period of time before the next
general election that the office cannot be filled at the election, the vacancy
shall be filled in the same manner as though it had occurred immediately
after the election at the next subsequent general election for such portion of
the term, if any, as may still remain unexpired. At such next general election
1. Pine Hill is governed under the borough form of government outlined in Chapter 86-94 of
Title 40 of the Revised Statutes. The administrative code has been drafted in conformity
with borough law and in many instances provisions have been restated. Other enabling
laws relevant to this chapter are R.S. 2A:9-7, et seq., Municipal Court; Board of Health;
R.S. 26:3-1, et seq.; Planning Board, R.S. 40:55-1.1. et seq. Zoning Board of Adjustment,
R.S. 40:44-36. General authority to regulate the internal affairs of the borough, R.S.
40:48-2.
§ 1-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.2
AO:3
the person elected to fill the vacancy shall elected for the unexpired term
only.
§ 2-2.3. Rules of Council.
The council shall by resolution adopt rules of procedure not inconsistent
with this code. The rules shall provide for standing committees of the
council.
§ 2-2.4. Ordinances And Resolutions.
Council shall take appropriate action to insure that ordiances and
resolutions of the preceding year are compiled or codified.
§ 2-2.5. Books And Records.
All books, records, data, accounts, maps and papers of and relating to
the borough or to the conduct of borough business and matters shall be
kept at the borough hall. The governing body shall designate the place or
places within the borough hall at which such books, records, documents and
papers shall be located.
§ 2-3. MEETINGS.
The council shall meet for organization on the 1st day of January, or during
the first seven days in January in any year at the call of the incoming Mayor.
Thereafter, the council shall meet regularly within the borough at such
times and places as provided by the rules of the council. The Mayor shall,
when necessary, call special meetings of the council. In case of his neglect
or refusal, any four members of the council may call such meetings at such
time and place in the borough as they may designate. In all cases of special
meetings, 24 hours' written notice (or actual voice contact) shall be given to
all members of the council. Written notice may be by leaving such notice at
their places of residence.
§ 2-4. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
The Mayor shall preside over all meetings of the council but shall not vote
except to give the deciding vote in the case of a tie. Except as otherwise
provided by statute, the Mayor shall nominate and, with the advice and
consent of the council, appoint all officers in the borough. No appointments
requiring council approval and confirmation shall be made except by a
majority vote of the Council members present at the meeting, provided
that at least three affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose,
the Mayor to have no vote thereon except in case of a tie. Vacancies in
appointive offices shall be filled by appointment in the same manner for the
unexpired term only. The Mayor shall make such nomination to fill a vacancy
within 30 days after the appointive office becomes vacant. If the Mayor fails
to nominate within 30 days or the council fails to confirm any nomination
made by the Mayor, then, after the expiration of 30 days, the council shall
appoint the officer.
§ 2-2.2 PINE HILL CODE § 2-4
AO:4
The Mayor shall see that the laws of the state and the ordinances of the
borough are faithfully executed, and shall recommend to the council such
measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the
borough. He shall maintain peace and good order and have the power to
suppress all riots and tumultuous assemblies in the borough.
The Mayor shall supervise the conduct and acts of all officers in the borough
and shall execute all contracts made on behalf of the council.
§ 2-5. PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL.
At an organizational meeting the council by a majority vote shall elect from
their number a President of the council, who shall preside at all of its
meetings when the Mayor does not preside. The President of the council
shall hold office for one year and until the next annual meeting. He shall
have the right to debate and vote on all questions before the council. If
the council at its annual meeting fails to elect a President, the Mayor shall
appoint the President from the council and in that case no confirmation
shall be necessary. If the Mayor is absent from the borough for a period of
three consecutive days or for any reason is unable to act, the President of
the council shall perform all the duties of the Mayor during his absence or
disability. The Mayor, in case of his intended absence from the borough for
more than three days at any one time, shall notify the President in writing
of such intended absence, whereupon the President shall be and become
acting Mayor from the receipt of such notice and continue to act until the
Mayor's return. In case of the temporary inability of the President to so act,
the Council member having the longest term of service as such may act
temporarily for the President.
§ 2-6. BOROUGH PROSECUTOR.
§ 2-6.1. Findings.
It is the desire of the borough council to protect its law abiding citizens
and to insure that its residents have the best municipal court system for the
protection of its citizens; and the present borough court system is operating
without a prosecutor to prepare and present cases before the court; and
the council feels that the best interests of the citizens of the borough would
be served by having a borough prosecutor present cases before the local
borough court.
§ 2-6.2. Creation.
The borough council hereby creates the position of borough prosecutor.
§ 2-6.3. Term; Salary.
The term of any borough prosecutor shall be provided by law and at a salary
established pursuant to R.S. Local Public Contracts see 40A:4-1 et seq.;
and it shall be the duty of the borough prosecutor to prosecute all matters
before the local borough court.
§ 2-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7
AO:5
§ 2-7. PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES.
§ 2-7A. (RESERVED)2
§ 2-7B. DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS,
EMPLOYEES, APPOINTEES AND PROFESSIONALS SERVING THE
BOROUGH.
The Borough of Pine Hill shall provide for the defense of any action brought
against a public official of the Borough of Pine Hill, an employee or former
employee of the Borough of Pine Hill, an appointee or former appointee of
the Borough of Pine Hill, and/or a professional or former professional of the
a. Manual Adopted. The Pine Hill Personnel Policies and Procedure
Manual is adopted as the official policy of the Borough of Pine Hill.
b. Copy on File. A copy of said manual shall be available at the office of the
borough Clerk during regular office hours for inspection by any
interested party.
c. Effective Date. This section shall become effective upon publication as
provided by law.
d. Any adjustments, amendments, changes, alterations and/or deletions to
the Personnel Policies and Procedures of the Borough of Pine Hill shall
be accomplished by resolution of the governing body.
e. The Borough of Pine Hill shall by ordinance establish titles for public
employment by the Borough of Pine Hill and salary ranges for Borough
of Pine Hill employees.
f. The Borough of Pine Hill shall by resolution adopt and amend from time
to time personnel policies and procedures including rules concerning
the hiring and termination of employees, terms and conditions of
employment, and regulations required to comply with applicable
federal and state employment related law. The personnel policies and
procedures adopted pursuant to said resolution(s) shall be applicable to
all officials, appointees, employees, prospective employees, volunteers
and independent contractors of the Borough of Pine Hill.
g. The municipal Clerk shall be responsible to implement and enforce the
personnel practices adopted by ordinance or resolution authorized
pursuant to this section. If there is a conflict between said personnel
practices and any duly adopted and lawful collective bargaining
agreement, personnel services contract or federal or state law, the
terms and conditions of that contract or law shall prevail. In all other
cases, the practices adopted pursuant to this ordinance shall prevail.
2. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-7A, Payroll, was removed at the direction of the Borough
Attorney. Payroll is now included in the Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual (See
Section 2-7).
§ 2-7 PINE HILL CODE § 2-7B
AO:6
Borough of Pine Hill on account and any act or omission in the scope of said
office, appointment or employment.
The borough may refuse to provide for the defense of an action upon
determination that the:
§ 2-8. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
§ 2-8.1. through § 2-8.5 (Reserved)3
§ 2-8.6. Authorization Of Checks.
With the exception of the procedures established by resolutions of the
governing body of the Borough of Pine Hill addressing "emergent/exigent"
circumstances, the Mayor and treasurer are, hereby, authorized as the
"signatories" of all checks drawn on the legal depositories of the
municipality on the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 2-8.7. Signatories On Municipal Legal Depositories.
a. Act or omission was not within the scope of employment or appointment
of office; or
b. Act or failure to act was because of actual fraud, willful misconduct or
actual malice; or
c. The action has been brought by the municipality itself against the
official, employee, appointee or professional;
d. The office, employee or appointee is found to have acted in violation of
any municipal code of ethics.
The municipality's provision of the necessary defense shall be by
prospective payment of counsel for the defendant to be provided by the
municipality pursuant to resolution under the Local Public Contracts
Law of the State of New Jersey.
Said Section is enacted with complete recognition for the standards set
forth by New Jersey Statutes requiring defense and reimbursement of
police officers.
In those instances where the municipality provides defense of an
official, employee, appointee or professional, the municipality also
provides indemnification.
a. Checks drawn on the municipality shall be signed by the Mayor or other
chief executive officer and countersigned by the municipal Clerk or
deputy municipal Clerk or the treasurer/CFO.
3. Editor's Note: Former subsections 2-8.1 through 2-8.5 pertaining to Payment of Claims
were removed at the direction of the Borough Attorney.
§ 2-7B ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-8.7
AO:7
§ 2-8A. (RESERVED)4
§ 2-9. DEPARTMENT OF POLICE.
Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 120, 152,
85-399, 90-486, 95-591, 98-648, 99-669, 2006-785, 2008-809, 2009-837,
2010-864.
§ 2-9.1. Created - Department Of Police. [Ord. No. 2013-902]
The department of police has been created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.
It shall consist of the following positions: (1) Chief of Police; (1) lieutenant;
(5) sergeants; (13 - 15) patrol officers, special officers and civilian personnel
as the borough council may determine by ordinance. The department shall
be under the day to day supervision and control of the Chief of Police,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, who shall be appointed by the Pine Hill
borough council.
§ 2-9.2. Appropriate Authority. [Ord. No. 2013-902]
The public safety director, a member of Pine Hill Borough Council appointed
by the Mayor, shall be the appropriate authority over the Pine Hill Police
Department pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, and shall promulgate rules
and regulations to be adopted by the borough council for the government
of the force and for the discipline of its members. The appropriate authority
shall be responsible directly to the Mayor and borough council.
The appropriate authority shall supervise the Chief of Police with respect
to the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations of the department, and
shall establish policies with the Chief of Police to ensure the proper and
effective delivery of police services to the borough.
The appropriate authority with the approval of borough council may also
appoint committees or commissions to conduct investigations of the
operation of the police force, and may delegate to such committee or
commission such powers of inquiry as it deems necessary or may itself
conduct any hearing or investigation authorized by law with the approval of
borough council. The appropriate authority may direct the examination at
b. Checks drawn on the municipality shall require two signatures. One
signature shall be the Mayor or other chief executive officer and one the
municipal Clerk or deputy municipal Clerk or the treasurer/CFO.
c. The court administrator, deputy court administrator or the municipal
judge are authorized to sign checks for the Pine Hill Municipal Court.
d. The Tax Collector, chief administrative officer, CFO or the municipal
Clerk or deputy municipal Clerk are authorized to sign checks for the
Pine Hill Tax Office.
4. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-8A, Purchasing and Claims Approval, was removed at the
direction of the Borough Attorney.
§ 2-8.7 PINE HILL CODE § 2-9.2
AO:8
any time of the operations of the force or the performance of any officer or
member thereof on notice to borough council.
§ 2-9.2A. Line Of Authority. [Ord. No. 2013-902]
The following shall constitute the line of authority relating to the police
function as required by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118:
a. Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall possess those powers and
duties set forth at N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, and shall be the head of the
police force and directly responsible to the appropriate authority for the
efficiency and routine day to day operations thereof. The Chief of Police
shall, pursuant to policies established by the appropriate authority.
1. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the force
and its officers and personnel with the appropriate authority
establishing policies for the efficient operation of the police
department.
2. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the force.
3. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
4. Delegate such of his or her authority as he or she may deem
necessary for the efficient operation of the force to be exercised
under his or her direction and supervision.
5. Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed by the appropriate authority on the operation of
the force during the preceding month, and make such other reports
as may be requested by the appropriate authority.
It is the duty of the Chief of Police to cause public peace to be
preserved and to see that all laws and ordinances, written orders,
resolutions and policies of the Borough of Pine Hill pertaining to
the police department and properly complied with. He or she shall
faithfully and properly obey and cause all the personnel under
him or her to obey all rules, regulations, resolutions, orders and
policy directives which may from time to time be prescribed by the
appropriate authority.
b. Lieutenant of Police. Immediately subordinate to the Chief of Police in
the line of authority is the lieutenant of police, who shall perform such
duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by the Chief of Police or
as may be set forth in departmental rules and regulations or otherwise
imposed by law.
c. Sergeant of Police. Immediately subordinate to the lieutenant of police
in the line of authority is the sergeant of police who shall perform such
§ 2-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.2A
AO:9
§ 2-9.3. Discipline. [Ord. No. 2013-902]
The appropriate authority shall establish policies and procedures to be
approved by borough council for the discipline of the employees of the
police department which shall be administered and enforced by the chief in
accordance with federal and state statutes, rules and regulations.
§ 2-9.4. Disciplinary Procedures. [Ord. No. 2013-902; Ord. No.
2013-908]
duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by the Chief of Police or
lieutenant of police or as may be set forth in departmental rules and
regulations or otherwise imposed by law.
d. Patrol Officer. Immediately subordinate to the sergeant of police in the
line of authority is the position of patrolman, who shall perform such
duties and responsibilities as may be assigned by the Chief of Police or
lieutenant of police or sergeant of police or as may be set forth in
departmental rules and regulations or otherwise imposed by law.
Nothing contained herein shall prevent the Chief of Police from
directing that a particular sworn officer or position bypass the aforesaid
line of authority and/or chain of command and report directly to the
Chief of Police or such other officer as the chief may direct.
a. Hearing Authority.
1. In the event of any disciplinary proceedings against any member of
the Police Department of the Borough of Pine Hill, the Appropriate
Authority or his/her designee shall be the sole hearing officer and
person in charge of all such proceedings. The decision of the
Appropriate Authority shall be final. The right of appeal shall be to
the New Jersey Superior Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14-150, as
applicable, or pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14-210, as applicable.
2. In the event the appropriate authority designates a hearing
authority other than himself/herself, and the designated hearing
authority is to be an officer within the Borough of Pine Hill Police
Department, the Chief of Police shall be the person charged and
designated for that purpose. Whenever special counsel is
designated to be the hearing authority, prior approval must be
obtained by resolution of the Mayor and borough council. The
decision of said hearing authority shall be provided within 10 days
to the appropriate authority, who shall render the final and binding
decision, both as to violation and penalty, within 10 days from when
he/she receives the decision and supporting documentation such as
a hearing transcript. The time lines established herein are to be
construed flexibly in the interest of justice so that fair and reasoned
decisions will follow. Should the appropriate authority fail to act
within 10 days or give notice of necessary extension, the decision of
the hearing authority shall become final.
§ 2-9.2A PINE HILL CODE § 2-9.4
AO:10
b. Charging Authority.
1. In the event a Borough of Pine Hill Police Department officer is to
be charged in a disciplinary action and said employee is
subordinate to the rank of the Chief of Police, only the Chief of
Police or his/her designee may initiate such charges (N.J.S.A.
40A:14:-118). In the event the office of the Chief of Police has been
abolished through intentional vacancy, then the appropriate
authority or his/her designee shall function as the charging
authority. Failure to initiate charges when same are indicated may
constitute a neglect or dereliction of duty [Gauntt v. Bridgeton, 194
N.J. Super. 468, 477 A.2d 381 (App. Div. 1984)], but the function of
the charging authority may not be circumvented.
2. In the event the Chief of Police for the Borough of Pine Hill is to be
charged in a disciplinary action, the appropriate authority or
special counsel named by the appropriate authority to act on his/
her behalf shall be the charging authority. The appropriate
authority is hereby empowered to name a designated special
council to function as an alternative charging authority without
prior borough council approval in an emergency. This is
necessitated by the statutory time lines involved in the charging
process. Notwithstanding this authority, at the earliest opportunity
the appropriate authority shall inform borough council of the action
that he/she has taken and obtain its confirming approval.
3. Whenever any person, whether police officer, special counsel, or
the appropriate authority, serves in an investigative capacity and/or
as the charging authority relevant to a Borough of Pine Hill Police
Department disciplinary action; he/she may not thereafter be
designated as or serve as the hearing authority in that same
disciplinary action.
c. Appeals. Disciplinary action against any member of the police
department shall be taken in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147. Any
department employee seeking to appeal disciplinary charges shall do so
in writing submitted to the office of the appropriate authority. Said
appeal shall be filed within five days, not including Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, of the date said charges were served upon said employee.
In either event, the appropriate authority shall schedule a hearing in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and state statute.
Administrative disciplinary charges served on any department
employee shall contain the date, time and location for a prospective
hearing as required by statute. Any failure to submit the required
written request for an appeal would constitute an act of insubordination
and may effect the employee's rights pertaining to said statutory time
lines, the discovery proceedings, as well as other legal rights and
remedies appurtenant thereto.
d. Administrative Investigations. The Mayor and borough council, or the
appropriate authority with governing body approval, may appoint a
§ 2-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.4
AO:11
§ 2-9.5. Rules And Regulations. [Ord. No. 2013-902]
Subject to approval of the borough council, the appropriate authority shall
have the authority to issue, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
governing the operation of the police department and its divisions, provided
that such rules and regulations are not in abrogation or repeal of, or are
inconsistent with statutory law or local ordinance or resolution. Such rules
and regulations, and any departmental orders, verbal or written, shall be
applicable to all personnel of the department, including when engaged in
outside employment.
At such time as the person filling the role of appropriate authority changes
at the designation of the Mayor, any rules and regulations adopted and
promulgated by the person action as the appropriate authority previously
shall remain the same full force and effect as if adopted and promulgated
by the new appropriate authority, except with the respect to such rules and
regulations which may have been explicitly repealed.
§ 2-9.6. Qualification Of Members. [Ord. No. 2013-902; Ord. No.
2013-908]
No person shall be appointed as a member of the department of police in
the Borough of Pine Hill, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122, unless he/
she;
committee and/or designate special counsel to conduct investigations
of the operation of the police force and may delegate to such committee
or special counsel any and all lawful powers of inquiry. The appropriate
authority or his designee for this purpose, or special counsel appointed
by the governing body, may examine the operations of the force or the
performance of any officer or member thereof. Any resolution of the
governing body appointing special counsel for the purpose of examining
or investigating the operation of the police force or the performance of
any officer or member thereof shall be considered to vest the examining
or investigating official or body with the authority to perform a
municipal investigation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-25 and the County
and Municipal. Investigations Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 to 4. Any such
subpoenas as authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:48-25 shall be in the name of
the appropriate authority. In conducting any such external investigation
or examination, the investigating or examining authority shall not be
bound by those internal affairs investigation guidelines or regulations
governing the police department in conducting its own internal
investigations, although all applicable statutory restrictions and
particularly N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147 shall not thereby be circumvented.
a. Is a citizen of the United States
b. Is a resident of the State of New Jersey [N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.8]
§ 2-9.4 PINE HILL CODE § 2-9.6
AO:12
§ 2-9.7. Powers And Duties. [Ord. No. 2013-902]
The rights, privileges, powers and duties of the members of the department
of police, shall be those prescribed by the laws of the State of New Jersey,
the provisions of this section and other ordinances and resolutions of the
Borough of Pine Hill, and such rules and regulations which may be
established.
§ 2-9.8. Training Of Police Officers. [Ord. No. 2013-902]
c. Is sound in body and of good health to satisfy the Board of trustees of
the Police and Firemen's Retirement System of New Jersey as to his/her
eligibility for membership in the retirement system;
1. Regular police officers shall be at least 21 years of age, but no more
than 35 years of age. [N.J.S.A. 40A:14-127]
2. All other law enforcement personnel shall be at least 18 years of
age.
d. Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently;
e. Is of good moral character, and
f. Has not been convicted of any criminal offense involving moral
turpitude.
a. No person shall hereafter be given or accept a permanent appointment
as a police officer in the Borough of Pine Hill unless such person has
successfully completed a police training course at a school approved
and authorized by the Police Training Commission in the Department of
Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey, in accordance with
applicable statutes and regulations.
b. This subsection shall not prohibit the giving or accepting of a
probationary or temporary appointment as a police officer for a period
not to exceed one year, to enable a person seeking a permanent
appointment to complete a police training course as prescribed by the
Police Training Commission. The probationary period may be extended
for up to six months upon the recommendation of the director of public
safety to borough council.
c. No person shall be permitted to take a police training course unless he
holds a probationary or temporary appointment as a police officer in the
Borough of Pine Hill, and such appointee shall be entitled to a leave of
absence with pay during the period of the police training course
pursuant to law.
d. Upon successful completion of police training required by the Police
Training Act (N.J.S.A. 52:17B-68), Officers are subject to a one year
working test period to permit the appointing authority to determine
§ 2-9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.8
AO:13
§ 2-9.9. Working Probationary Period For Promoted Employees.
[Ord. No. 2013-902]
§ 2-9.10. Special Law Enforcement Officers; Appointment;
Categories; Number; Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2013-902]
whether the employee satisfactorily performs the duties of the title.
Upon successful completion of the working test period, the appointing
authority may make such appointment permanent.
e. As early as possible during the probationary and subsequent working
test period, any officer who is performing unsatisfactorily shall be
alerted about their need for improvement and shall be advised as to
what specific areas of their performance require improvement.
f. During the probationary and working test periods, employees may be
terminated without cause and without being preferred with charges
and specifications and without any right to a hearing, in accordance
with Azarra v. Waterford Township, 392 N.J. Super 322 (App. Div. 2007).
a. There shall be a one year working probationary period for all employees
who are promoted other than the Chief of Police. The purpose for the
working test period is to permit the appointing authority the ability to
determine the employee satisfactorily performs the duties of the title.
During the one-year period, the promoted employee shall be observed
and rated by the Chief of Police and the appointing authority based on
criteria related to the job description for the promotional position. Such
criteria shall include, but shall not be limited to, a promoted employee's
ability to supervise those employees under his/her direction, the
employee's administrative capabilities and the employee's commitment
to the promotional position.
b. As early as possible during the probationary period, any promoted
employees who are performing unsatisfactorily shall be alerted about
their need for improvement, shall be advised as to what specific areas
of their performance require improvement and advised if their lack of
improvement is of such a degree as to potentially cause their return to
their former rank or status.
c. An officer who has been promoted may be restored to his previous
position or rank during this probationary period by the appropriate
authority in consultation with the Chief of Police, after notices as
required in paragraph b, without cause and without being preferred
with charges and specifications and without any right to a hearing, in
accordance with Azarra v. Waterford Township, 392 N.J. Super 322
(App. Div. 2007).
a. Special law enforcement officers may be appointed in the Borough of
Pine Hill in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8, et
seq.
§ 2-9.8 PINE HILL CODE § 2-9.10
AO:14
b. The appropriate authority shall, with the advice and consent of the
borough council, appoint special law enforcement officers within the
parameters of this section and the laws of the State of New Jersey.
c. Classification:
1. Class I: Officers of this class are authorized to perform routine
traffic detail, spectator control and similar duties. They shall have
the power to issue summonses for disorderly persons and petty
disorderly persons offenses, violations of municipal ordinances and
violations of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes. The use of a firearm
by an officer of this category shall be strictly prohibited and no
Class I officer shall be assigned any duties which may require the
carrying or use of a firearm. There may be appointed such number
of Class I special law enforcement officers as may be required.
2. Class II: Officers of this class shall be authorized to exercise full
powers and duties similar to those of a permanent, regularly
appointed full-time police officer. The use of a firearm by an officer
of this class may be authorized only after the officer has been fully
certified as successfully completing training as prescribed by the
New Jersey Police Training Commission. The number of Class II
special law enforcement officers shall not exceed 25% of the total
number of regular police officers.
d. No person may be appointed as a special law enforcement officer unless
said person:
1. Is a resident of the state during the term of appointment;
2. Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent;
3. Is sound in body and of good health;
4. Is of good moral character;
5. Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
which would make him unfit to perform the duties of his office;
6. Has successfully undergone the same medical and psychological
testing that is required of all full-time police officers in the
Township;
7. Shall have had fingerprints taken, which fingerprints shall be filed
with the Division of State Police and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation; and
8. Is not serving as a special law enforcement officer or regularly
appointed full-time police officer of any municipalities. Is not a
public official with responsibility for setting law enforcement police
or exercising authority over the budget or supervision of the police
department of any municipality.
§ 2-9.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.10
AO:15
§ 2-9.11. Civilian Agent. [Ord. No. 2013-902]
There shall be the position known as a civilian agent, assigned to the Pine
Hill Police Department, under the command of the Chief of Police, with
specific duties and assignments to be set by the Chief of Police, for the
Borough of Pine Hill. Said position shall be appointed by the appropriate
authority with the advice and consent of the borough council.
§ 2-9.12. Off-Duty Employment Of Police Officers For Police-Related
Activities. [Ord. No. 2013-902; Ord. No. 2013-908]
(Secondary Employment And Off-Duty Employment.)
e. Special law enforcement officers may be appointed for terms not to
exceed one year. Nothing shall be construed in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.14
to require reappointment of the special law enforcement officers upon
expiration of the term for which appointed. The term of office shall
expire on December 31 of the current year.
f. Special Law Enforcement Hours of Duty.
1. No special law enforcement officer may be scheduled for more than
20 hours per week, except without limitations during periods of
emergency.
2. The appropriate authority, with consent of borough council may
designate one special law enforcement officer to whom the
limitations on hours employed set forth herein do not apply.
3. In addition to not more than 20 hours per week assisting the local
law enforcement unit, special law enforcement officers may be
assigned for not more than 20 hours to provide law enforcement
services to a public entity.
a. Secondary Employment. Pine Hill Borough police officers are expected
to give their whole time and attention to their duties in serving the
public interest and public safety of/for the residents of the borough.
They are required by police rules and regulations to be armed at all
practical times and are subject to duty recall when determined to
be necessary by the Chief of Police or other appropriate authority.
Additionally, there are certain private employment activities that are in
direct conflict with police power vested in the officer by the Borough
of Pine Hill. Accordingly, effective upon passage of this chapter, no
Pine Hill Borough police officer will be allowed to engage in secondary
employment apart from their borough-held position except as follows:
1. Any officer wishing to moonlight must first submit a written request
through the Chief of Police, with his endorsement recommending
approval or not, to the appropriate authority for a permit to do so.
The request will contain all necessary information, to include at a
minimum: the type of employment; the hours to be worked; the
§ 2-9.10 PINE HILL CODE § 2-9.12
AO:16
name, address and phone number of the prospective employer
and company; a certification from the employer that the duties
will not involve police powers, that there will not be any conflict
with the officer's police career, and that the company will provide
the officer with full insurance benefits to indemnify the borough
and cover the officer for his actions or inactions or if injured
in the course of or during actions arising out of or related to
the prospective moonlighting job. That is, the outside employer
must have sufficient insurance coverage to protect the borough
against liability for tort actions or other actions of the officer
outside the officer's official police department duties, and to defend
and indemnify and hold the borough and the officer harmless in
any legal proceedings not arising out of and not directly related
to the lawful exercise of police powers in furtherance of official
police duties and related to the moonlighting employment. Said
permit will only be issued by the appropriate authority, with the
approval of the Mayor and borough council, for officers who have
been productive employees for the borough as documented and
certified by the Chief of Police. All such permits will be revoked
for employees whose performance deteriorates after the secondary
employment is started.
2. Entrepreneurial endeavors (e.g., self employment) are strictly
prohibited subject to the same permit requirements listed in
paragraph a1 above. Additionally, no permits for those endeavors
will be issued for any business conducted within the boundaries of
Borough of Pine Hill. The appearance of impropriety (even in the
absence of actual wrongful behavior) necessarily stemming from
paying attention to such business practices on borough time and/or
using police powers in regard to such business enterprises has
arisen in the past and may be particularly troublesome.
3. Permit criteria. The following standards shall be used to guide the
appropriate authority in deciding requests from officers to engage
in off-duty employment as well as operation of a business
enterprise (i.e., self employment) off duty:
(a) Whether the business/employment has the potential to be
aided or furthered by an officer's use of confidential
information that the officer is privy to solely by virtue of his
police position, whether or not the officer may actually so use
such information, based on the appearance and potential
conflict created;
(b) Whether the business/employment might tend to result in a
loss of departmental control or authority over the officer while
engaged in the business/employment beyond any loss of
control over other off-duty officers not so employed or
engaging in their own private business;
§ 2-9.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.12
AO:17
(c) Potential for loss of the officer's police services as a result of
injury sustained in the alternate employment/business;
(d) Whether the employment/business has the potential to create
the appearance that those who patronize the business or place
of employment might curry favorable treatment by the officer
in his police capacity or by the department, or the appearance
that those who patronize a competitor of the business/
employer might be subject to unfavorable treatment by the
officer or department;
(e) Whether the business/employment has the potential to cause
diminished physical and mental capacity of the officer while on
duty;
(f) Whether the employment/business is in a publicly regulated
industry which might create actual or appearance of conflicts
of interest, even if with other branches or levels (e.g., state,
county, municipal) of government;
(g) Whether the employment/business has the potential for the
creation of an appearance of favoritism among officers from
the operation of a joint enterprise among multiple police
officers holding different ranks on the police force when the
same officers exercise their supervisory authority over each
other in the course of their police duties;
(h) The potential for possible pursuit of police time or resources to
pursue private employment/business functions;
(i) The potential civil liability of the borough for acts committed
by the officer in the private employment/business;
(j) Potential for the employment/business to affect the reputation
and effectiveness of the police force;
(k) The potential for the officer to be involved in the collection/
accounts receivable aspects of the business/employment such
that those dealing with the officer in the employment/business
capacity might feel pressure/coercion in paying debts beyond
that which would be present if such activities were not
performed by an off-duty police officer;
(l) Any other factor unique to the employment/business request
with the potential to create a conflict or appearance of conflict
with police employment.
4. Divestiture. All employees currently moonlighting, conducting a
side business, or involved in any form of secondary employment
without the required permit will immediately submit written
application for same or terminate such employment within two
weeks and/or divest themselves of all side businesses prohibited in
§ 2-9.12 PINE HILL CODE § 2-9.12
AO:18
paragraph a2 above within 30 days. A violation of this chapter
constitutes grounds for immediate removal from service as a
borough police officer.
b. Police Related Off-Duty Employment.
1. Police officers employed by the Borough of Pine Hill shall be
permitted off-duty police-related employment pursuant to the
provisions set forth herein. Off-duty employment shall not be
permitted if the police officer and/or outside contractor fail to
comply with the provisions set forth herein either prior to the
commencement of the employment or at any time during the period
of employment.
2. All off-duty police-related services performed by a borough police
officer shall be in his/her official capacity as an employee of the
borough police department and shall be subject to the control and
supervision of the police department.
3. Borough of Pine Hill police officers are prohibited from engaging in
any employment for police-related services with any private
person, corporation or other entity except in the manner set forth
in this chapter.
c. Definitions.
As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONTRACTOR — Shall mean the person, corporation, or other legal
entity employing a Borough of Pine Hill police officer to provide off-duty
police-related services.
OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMENT — Shall mean any employment by a Borough
of Pine Hill police officer for police-related services where the source of
compensation to the police officer does not originate from the municipal
budget line item for police wages and salary.
d. Request For Off-Duty Employee; Special Assignments By Chief Of
Police.
1. Contractors seeking to employ off-duty Borough of Pine Hill police
officers shall make said request through the Borough of Pine Hill
Police Department, to the attention of the Chief of Police. The
request shall be in writing, except in case of emergency, and shall
include the specific nature of the services desired.
2. The Chief of Police or his designee may assign Borough of Pine Hill
police officers for police-related services based upon a
determination that the police-related services are required for the
public safety. The cost for said police-related services shall be the
responsibility of the person or entity on whose behalf the services
are provided or the property owner whose property or activities on
§ 2-9.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.12
AO:19
said property cause the need for police-related services. All costs
shall be paid as set forth herein.
(a) Assignment of police officers. When an off-duty employment
request is made to the Borough Police Department, a sign up
sheet shall be posted as soon as practical for police officers
wishing to work the off-duty employment opportunity. The
Chief of Police shall assign police officers based on need. In
those situations where time does not permit all police officers
to have an opportunity to sign the sheet, emails and text
messages will be sent to all officers for a response to
participate in the off-duty employment opportunity.
(b) Remitted hours; emergency duty. Under no circumstances
shall a police officer be permitted to work more than 20 hours
per week during a regularly scheduled work week in off-duty
employment, and off-duty employment can be immediately
terminated if the police officer performing said work is
required for emergency police duty for the Borough of Pine Hill
as shall be determined by the Chief of Police.
(c) Police uniforms, equipment and vehicles. Borough of Pine Hill
police officers performing off-duty police-related services for
private contractors shall be in full police uniform while said
services are being provided. However, borough police vehicles
shall not be used by police officers during the performance of
off-duty police-related services unless specifically authorized
by the Chief of Police.
(d) Authorizing contract. The Mayor and borough Clerk are hereby
authorized to execute a contract with the contractor for the
services required, which contract shall set forth, inter alia, the
specific nature of the services to be performed, the location
that said services will be performed, the dates and hours of
service, payment arrangements, arrangements for the use of
police vehicles, arrangements for insurance coverage, and any
other provisions mandated by this section or any law or
regulation of the State of New Jersey.
(e) Payment requirement; escrow accounts.
(1) Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty
law enforcement officer in the Borough of Pine Hill Police
Department shall estimate the number of hours such law
enforcement services are required, which estimate shall
be approved in writing by the Chief of Police, and shall
establish an escrow account with the Chief Financial
Officer of the borough by depositing an amount sufficient
to cover the rates of compensation and administrative fees
for the total estimated hours of service. A separate
dedicated by rider trust fund shall be established by the
§ 2-9.12 PINE HILL CODE § 2-9.12
AO:20
Borough of Pine Hill, and all funds collected and disbursed
relating to off-duty employment shall be made through
said account. In cases where there is insufficient time to
post the escrow due to an emergent situation, the Chief of
Police shall as soon as possible invoice the contractor for
the services rendered or being rendered.
(2) Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law
enforcement officers, the Chief of Police or his designee
shall verify that the balance in the escrow account of the
person or entity requesting services is sufficient to cover
the compensation and fees for the number of hours
specified in the request for services. The Chief of Police
shall not post a request for services from any person or
entity unless all fees and compensation required in the
manner described above have been deposited with the
Chief Financial Officer. No officer shall provide any such
services for more hours than are specified in the request
for services.
(3) In the event the funds in such an escrow account should
become depleted, services of off-duty law enforcement
officers shall cease and requests for further or future
services shall not be performed or posted until additional
funds have been deposited in the escrow account in the
manner prescribed above.
(4) The person or entity requesting such services shall be
responsible for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the
escrow account in order to avoid any interruption of
services.
(5) Contractors hiring borough police officers for off-duty
employment shall be charged pursuant to the following
schedule which includes an hourly rate of pay for the
police officer, the cost for the use of a police vehicle, plus a
fair and reasonable sum representing the administrative
costs, overhead and out-of-pocket expenses to the Borough
of Pine Hill for providing this service.
[a] The hourly compensation is the rate that any off-duty
police officer shall be paid for performing policerelated
activities.
[b] A nonrefundable administrative fee of $5 per hour per
off-duty borough police officer is established to cover
the borough's costs, overhead, benefits for off-duty
officers and out-of-pocket expenses.
[c] If a patrol car is requested by the person in connection
with a police-related activity the person shall pay $10
per hour as an administrative fee.
§ 2-9.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.12
AO:21
[d] Traffic Control Rate: $65 Per Hour Plus $5
Administrative Fee and $10 Vehicle Fee Per Hour.
[e] Pine Hill Board of Education: $40 per hours, plus $5
administrative fee per hour.
[f] Houses of worship and other nonprofit organizations
(nontraffic control), $40 per hour, plus $5
administrative fee per hour.
[g] Houses of worship and other nonprofit organizations
(traffic control) $40 per hour, plus $5 administrative
fee and $10 vehicle fee per hour.
(6) Contractor shall submit payment to Borough of Pine Hill
within five business days of receipt of said invoice. Failure
of the contractor to make payment within said five days
shall result in the immediate cessation of the police
services being provided, and this agreement shall be
deemed terminated. In the event this contract is
terminated, the contractor shall forfeit all sums paid in
advance and Borough of Pine Hill shall have the right to
pursue any remedy at law for the collection of any amounts
that may be due and owing for the services provided prior
to termination.
(f) Payment to officers.
(1) Police officers performing off-duty police-related services
for private contractors shall be paid for said services by
the Borough of Pine Hill at the rate set forth at subsection
2-9.12;
(2) All sums due a police officer performing off-duty
employment shall be paid subsequent to the submission of
a voucher which is approved by the Chief of Police or his
designee.
(g) Insurance. The contractor shall be responsible for providing all
necessary insurance coverages as required by law, including
but not limited to workers' compensation and general liability
insurance. Coincidental with the execution of the contract, the
contractor shall provide the borough with appropriate
insurance binders insuring that the police officer and Borough
of Pine Hill are provided general liability coverage with respect
to the services to be provided and that the police officer is
covered by appropriate workers' compensation insurance.
(h) Indemnification.
(1) To the fullest extent permitted by law, contractor shall
indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the Borough of Pine
§ 2-9.12 PINE HILL CODE § 2-9.12
AO:22
Hill, its agents and employees, from and against all claims,
damages, losses, liabilities and expenses, including but not
limited to attorney's fees and court costs, arising out of,
resulting from or in any way relating either directly or
indirectly to:
[a] The performance of the work;
[b] Any and all claims made by said police personnel for
injuries and/or illnesses while performing the off-duty
employment;
[c] The breach by contractor of any of the terms and
conditions of the agreement;
[d] The negligent or intentional acts or omissions of the
police and/or the contractor, its employees, agents,
and/or subcontractors;
[e] Bodily injury, sickness and/or disease, including death
at any time resulting from such bodily injury, sickness
or disease, sustained by any person while in, on or
about the site and surrounding areas where such
injury, sickness, disease and/or death arose out of or
was in any way connected with the work of, the
performance of, or failure to properly perform the
work;
[f] Any liability based upon contractor's negligence
imputed to the Borough of Pine Hill;
[g] Damage to property of contractor, the Borough of Pine
Hill or any other person or entity arising out of,
incident to, or in connection with the performance of
the work;
[h] Laborer's, mechanics and materialmen's liens, and all
other liens and charges of every character
whatsoever, arising out of work to be performed by
this agreement; and/or
[i] Any other cause of action which may be brought
against the Borough of Pine Hill arising out of or in
any way relating to the work and contractor's
obligations hereunder.
(2) This indemnification and hold harmless agreement shall
apply in all instances whether the Borough of Pine Hill is a
plaintiff or is made a direct party to the initial action or
claim or is subsequently made a party to the action by
third-party in-pleading or is made a party to a collateral
§ 2-9.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.12
AO:23
§ 2-9.13. Emergency Directives. [Ord. No. 2013-902]
Nothing herein contained shall infringe upon or limit the power or duty of
the appropriate authority to act to provide for the health, safety or welfare
of the municipality in an emergency situation through special emergency
directives. (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118; 40A:14-146.9)
§ 2-9.14. Police Department Rules And Regulations And Police
Manual. [Ord. No. 2013-902; Ord. No. 2013-904; Ord. No. 2013-908]
action arising, in whole or in part, from any of the issues
from the original cause of action or claim.
a. Adoption and promulgation. Subject to approval of borough council, the
appropriate authority, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, is hereby
authorized to update, adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for
the governing of the police department and for the discipline of its
members with a view to making the police department and all members
thereof efficient, vigilant and effective in the service of the Borough of
Pine Hill. Said rules and regulations will be in manual form and shall be
called the "Rules and Regulations of the Police Department for the
Borough of Pine Hill" and shall govern the conduct of and be binding
upon the entire membership of said police department. Said rules and
regulations shall provide for discipline of the members of the police
force. In the event of any mutually inconsistent provisions between the
police ordinance and the rules and regulations, the ordinance shall
govern; however, both shall be interpreted so as to give full affect to
both this chapter and the rules and regulations wherever possible.
1. Ordinance No. 2013-904 adopted Police Department Rules and
Regulations by reference on March 18, 2013. The Rules and
Regulations may be found in the Borough Offices.
b. Distribution. The rules and regulations shall be distributed in electronic
form as follows: A computer data storage device will be issued to and
signed for by each employee of the Police Department for the Borough
of Pine Hill. An electronic format copy will be maintained by the
Borough Clerk for the personnel designated as "special officers and
Civilian Agent" and to provide public access to same. An electronic
format copy will be stored on the Police Department database server for
access by all personnel in the Department. A manual form of the Rules
and Regulations of the Police Department for the Borough of Pine Hill
will be maintained by the Chief of Police, Internal Affairs Commander
and Patrol Bureau.
c. Members' Responsibility for Computer Data Storage Device. All
members and employees who are assigned a computer data storage
device shall be responsible for its maintenance and care. Said computer
data storage devices shall remain the property of the Borough of Pine
Hill, County of Camden, State of New Jersey, and, upon separation from
police service, each person is bound to return same. Each person will be
§ 2-9.12 PINE HILL CODE § 2-9.14
AO:24
§ 2-10. FIRE DEPARTMENT. [Ord. No. 317; Ord. No. 86-431; Ord.
No. 93-533 §§ 2, 3]
The responsibility for maintenance personnel and the day to day handling
of the fire department of the Borough of Pine Hill rest with the Board of
Fire Commissioners of the Borough of Pine Hill and the responsibility for
maintenance thereof shall rest with that board and not with the Mayor and
Borough Council of the Borough of Pine Hill.5
§ 2-11. MUNICIPAL COURT.
§ 2-11.1. Established.
There is hereby established in the borough a municipal court to be known
as "Municipal Court of the Borough of Pine Hill."
§ 2-11.2. Judge.
The court shall be presided over by a judge appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of borough council and the judge shall be appointed for a term
of three years from the date of his appointment, and until his successor is
appointed and qualified.
§ 2-11.3. Qualifications Of Judge.
The qualifications of the judge shall be those required by law.
§ 2-11.4. Jurisdiction.
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction as follows:
responsible for the security of his/her computer data storage devices,
and loss of the same will constitute neglect of duty and will result in
disciplinary action. All computer data storage devices shall be kept
current, and supplementary pages concerning additions, revisions or
amendments shall be promptly and properly inserted. No Police
Department operating policies will be inserted as part of this manual
unless and until properly assimilated by the Appropriate Authority.
Each police officer and each civilian employee is duty-bound to
thoroughly familiarize himself/herself with the provisions of the police
manual. Failure to comply shall be considered neglect of duty. In the
event neglect of duty is charged against a member for failure to observe
the rules and regulations or Department procedures or orders,
ignorance of any provision of this manual will not be accepted as an
excuse.
a. Violation of motor vehicle and traffic laws.
b. Violation of the fish and game laws.
5. Editor’s Note: Section 2-10, formerly containing subsections 2-10.1 - 2-10.27 and
Ordinance Nos. 317 and 86-431, was amended in its entirety by Ordinance No. 93-533.
§ 2-9.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-11.4
AO:25
§ 2-11.5. Practice And Procedure.
The practice and procedure shall be governed by law and shall be subject
to such rules as may be promulgated by the supreme court of New Jersey.
§ 2-11.6. Disposition Of Fees.
All costs and fees shall belong to the borough and shall be delivered on the
first day of every month to the proper custodian of borough funds. All fines
and penalties shall be disposed of according to law.
§ 2-11.7. (Reserved)6
§ 2-11.8. Municipal Court Discovery.
c. Violation of the state disorderly persons act.
d. Violation of the borough ordinances.
e. Violation of the state poor laws.
f. Violation of the state child laws.
g. Violation of the state institution and agencies laws.
h. Such other functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction in civil and
criminal cases as have been heretofore exercised by justices of the
peace, police justices, police magistrates or recorders.
i. Concurrent civil jurisdiction with the small claims division of the county
district court provided the defendant resides within the jurisdiction of
the municipal court.
j. All the powers of a committing magistrate or judge.
k. Such other jurisdiction as may be conferred upon the court of law.
a. All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Borough of Pine Hill
Municipal Court shall be submitted through the municipal prosecutor.
b. The following fees shall be payable by the requester to the Borough of
Pine Hill for the discovery provided:
1. $0.75 per page for each of the first 10 pages photocopied.
2. $0.50 per page for each of the next 10 pages photocopied.
3. $0.25 per page for each of the pages photocopied thereafter.
4. Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
5. $0.25 for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail.
6. Editor's Note: Former subsection 2-11.7, Fee for Application for Representation by Public
Defender has been relocated to section 2-29 by Ordinance No. 98-641.
§ 2-11.4 PINE HILL CODE § 2-11.8
AO:26
§ 2-12. MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENT SEARCH CLERK AND TAX
SEARCH CLERK.
§ 2-12.1. Positions Created.
The positions of the tax search Clerk and municipal improvement search
Clerk are hereby created. The positions shall be filled by appointment by the
borough council and the salaries shall be as provided in the annual salary
ordinance.
§ 2-12.2. Duties.
The duties of the search Clerk shall be to certify the existence or nonexistence
of municipal assessments, liens, or arrears.
§ 2-12.3. Fees For Services.
Fees for tax searches and for municipal improvement searches shall be
established by resolution of the borough council.
§ 2-13. (RESERVED)7
§ 2-14. MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AUTHORITY.8
§ 2-14.1. Creation.
Pursuant to the provisions of the County and Municipal Water Sewerage
Disposal Authorities Law (P.L. 1957, c. 183 p 634, Section 1, N.J.S.A. Title
40, Chapter 14B) of the State of New Jersey, there is hereby created a
public body corporate and politic under the name and style of "The Pine Hill
Borough Municipal Utilities Authority."
6. Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of
making the photographs shall be charged.
7. Duplication of videotapes constitutes an extraordinary duplication
process and will be charged at the rate of $5 per videotape.
8. On any item that cannot be photocopied on the Borough of Pine Hill
copy machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the
actual cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
c. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than the
Borough of Pine Hill, e.g. another police department, the actual costs
paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
7. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-13, Municipal Tax Assessor, previously codified herein was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2004-740.
8. Editor's Note: For provisions regarding the execution of a service agreement with the
Camden County Municipal Utilities Authority (CCMUA) see Chapter 12, Water and Sewers,
Section 12-5.
§ 2-11.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-14.2
AO:27
§ 2-14.2. Powers And Duties. [Ord. #83, S2]
The Pine Hill Borough Municipal Utilities Authority hereby created is a
utilities authority as contemplated and provided for by the County and
Municipal Water and Sewerage Disposal Authorities Law and shall have and
exercise all of the powers and perform all of the duties provided for by the
County and Municipal Water and Sewerage Disposal Authorities Law and
any other statutes heretofore enacted and applicable thereto.
§ 2-14.3. Salary Limitation. [Ord. #83, S4; Ord. #235; Ord.
#0-85-405; Ord. #94-571, S1; Ord. #95-585, SS1,2; Ord. #2000-680,
S1; Ord. #2003-723, S1; Ord. #20-03-723, S1; Ord. #2006-788, S1;
Ord. #2008-815, S1]
§ 2-14.4. Filing.
A copy of this section duly certified by the borough Clerk shall forthwith be
filed by the Clerk in the office of the Secretary of State of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 2-14.5. Alternate Members. [Ord. #388; Ord. #2006-781, S1]
The "Pine Hill Borough Municipal Utilities Authority" shall consist of the
regular membership established under the initial legislative enactment of
the borough's governing body and shall also consist of "two alternate
members" to be designated by the governing body as "Alternate Number
One" and "Alternate Number Two" who shall serve during the absence or
disqualification of any regular member or members. Alternate Number One
shall serve first with highest priority and Alternate Number Two shall serve
second upon the second vacancy.
The term of each alternate member shall be five years commencing on
February 1 of the year of appointment; provided, however, that in the
event two alternate members are appointed their initial terms shall be
four and five years respectively. The terms of the first alternate members
appointed pursuant to this amendatory act shall commence on the day of
their appointment and shall expire on the fourth or fifth January 31 next
ensuing after the date of their appointments, as the case may be. Alternate
members may participate in discussion of the proceedings but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote shall
a. The salaries of the following chairperson and Commissioners of the
Pine Hill Borough Municipal Utilities Authority shall not exceed the
following and are annual salaries.
Chairperson $2,380.50
Commissioner $2,173.50
Alternate Commissioner $1,966.50
b. Said salaries shall be paid monthly.
§ 2-14.2 PINE HILL CODE § 2-14.5
AO:28
not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an
alternate member.
§ 2-15. (RESERVED)
§ 2-16. MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE POSITIONS.
§ 2-16.1. Deputy Clerks And Tax Collector. [Ord. #222, S1 & 2]
The positions of deputy borough Clerk, deputy Tax Collector and deputy
court Clerk are hereby created. The terms for the positions shall be as
provided by law and at salaries established pursuant to the Local Budget
Law R.S. 40A:4-1 et seq.
§ 2-16.2. Zoning Officer. [Ord. #226, S1, 2, & 3]
The position of Zoning Officer is hereby created. The duties of the Zoning
Officer shall be to administer and enforce the zoning laws of the borough as
set forth in the zoning ordinance. The appointment of Zoning Officer shall
be by the Mayor and confirmation of council as set forth in R.S. 40:87-16.
§ 2-16.3. Board Of Health Violations Officer.
The position of board of health violations officer is hereby created. The
duties of the Board of health violations officer shall be to enforce the health
laws applicable to the borough together with such other duties prescribed
by the governing body as well as the Board of health. The appointment of
the officer shall be in the manner provided by R.S. 40:87-16.
§ 2-17. BOARD OF HEALTH.9
§ 2-17.1. Board Created. [Ord. No. 2015-932]
The Board of Health of the Borough of Pine Hill shall be known as the
Health Services Advisory Board of the Borough of Pine Hill created
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3-1.
§ 2-17.2. Composition; Terms of Office. [Ord. No. 2015-932]
Said Board of Health shall consist of three members who shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Borough Council of the
Borough of Pine Hill. The persons so appointed shall be citizens of this State
and residents of the Borough of Pine Hill. The terms of office of the three
members shall be staggered of not less than one year and not more than
three years. Thereafter, all appoints shall be for three-year terms. Vacancies
in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Appointment to a
vacancy to the Health Services Advisory Board shall be made in the same
manner as the original appointment.
9. Editor's Note: Ordinance history: Ord. #2, §§ 1 - 3.
§ 2-14.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-17.3
AO:29
§ 2-17.3. Oath of Office. [Ord. No. 2015-932]
Each member before taking office shall sign and file with the Borough Clerk
an Oath of Office.
§ 2-17.4. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2015-932]
The Health Services Advisory Board of the Borough of Pine Hill shall
cooperate with the County of Camden Health Department to provide a
program of health services in compliance with the Health Services Act.
Further, the Health Services Advisory Board may, from time to time, serve
as liaison between the Camden County Health Department and the Mayor
and Borough Council of the Borough of Pine Hill in an effort to promote the
enforcement of any and all County Health Ordinances. The Health Services
Advisory Board shall perform any and all related functions necessary to
meet the standards of performances under the Health Services Act.
§ 2-17.5. Designation of County Health Department as Local
Provider. [Ord. No. 2015-932]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:3 A2-10, the Camden County
Department of Health is hereby designated as the entity responsible for
compliance with the Local Health Services Act for any and all functions
which would be performed by local health services provider, including
meeting standards of performance.
§ 2-17.6. Cooperation with Health Services Advisory Board. [Ord.
No. 2015-932]
The Health Services Advisory Board of the Borough of Pine Hill, County
of Camden shall cooperate with the Camden County Health Department to
provide a program of health services in compliance with the Health Services
Act. Further, the Borough Health Services Advisory Board may serve as
liaison between the Camden County Health Department and the Mayor and
Borough Council of the Borough of Pine Hill in an effort to promote the
enactment and enforcement of any and all County Health Ordinances.
§ 2-18. REGISTRAR OF VITAL STATISTICS; CLERK; SANITARY
INSPECTOR.
§ 2-18.1. Appointment. [Ord. #2, S4]
The Board of health shall appoint a local registrar of vital statistics, Clerk
and sanitary inspector, and may appoint such other officers or assistants as
it may deem necessary.
§ 2-18.2. Term Of Office Of Registrar. [Ord. #2, S4]
The term of office of the registrar shall be three years and until his
successor has been appointed and qualified and any vacancy occurring in
such office shall be filled for the unexpired term only.
§ 2-17.3 PINE HILL CODE § 2-18.3
AO:30
§ 2-18.3. Regulated By Board Of Health. [Ord. #2, S4]
All appointees of the Board shall be governed by the rules of the Board
of health and be subject to all laws, rules and regulations governing such
officers, and they may be removed for cause by the Board. The sanitary
inspector shall promptly report to the Board of health every violation of
the health ordinances and rules of the borough coming to his view of
knowledge, and the marshals of the borough when on police duty shall serve
as special sanitary inspectors.
§ 2-19. HOUSING AUTHORITY.
§ 2-19.1. Preamble.
There exists in the borough unsanitary or unsafe dwelling accommodations,
and persons of limited income, such as senior citizens, are forced to reside
in such unsanitary or unsafe accommodations. In the borough there is a
shortage of safe or sanitary dwelling accommodations available at rents
which persons of limited income can afford, and these persons are forced
to occupy overcrowded and congested dwelling accommodations; and the
aforesaid conditions cause an increase in and spread of disease and
constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the
residents of the borough and impair economic values; and those conditions
necessitate excessive and disproportionate expenditures of public funds
for public health and safety, fire and accident protection, and other public
Services and facilities.
These areas in the borough cannot be cleared, nor can the shortage of safe
and sanitary dwellings for persons of limited income be relieved through the
operation of private enterprise, and the construction of housing projects for
persons of limited income (as defined in the Local Housing Authorities Law)
would therefore not be competitive with private enterprise.
The clearance, replanning and reconstruction of the areas in which
unsanitary and unsafe housing conditions exist and the providing of safe
and sanitary dwellings accommodations by any public body for persons of
limited income are public uses and purposes for which public money may be
spent and private property acquired and are governmental functions. It is in
the public interest that work on projects for such purposes be commenced
as soon as possible in order to relieve unemployment.
§ 2-19.2. Authority Created.
Pursuant to the provisions of the "Local Housing Authorities Law" of the
State of New Jersey, a body corporate and politic to be known as the
"Housing Authority of the Borough of Pine Hill" is hereby created and
established.
§ 2-18.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-19.3
AO:31
§ 2-19.3. Membership.
The membership of the housing authority shall consist of the Mayor, three
councilmen appointed annually by the borough council and three members
of the Pine Hill senior citizens organization appointed annually by the
borough council.
§ 2-19.4. Copy Filed.
The Clerk is authorized and directed to file a copy of this section with the
executive officer of the State housing authority.
§ 2-19.5. Scope Of Authority.
The housing authority of the borough is hereby authorized to adopt, initiate
and carry out work or undertakings including but not limited to:
§ 2-20A. COMMUNITY AFFAIRS COORDINATOR.
§ 2-20A.1. Establishment.
The office of community affairs coordinator is hereby established. The
community affairs coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by council.
§ 2-20A.2. Duties.
The community affairs coordinator shall report to the Mayor or director of
community affairs as established at the borough's annual reorganization.
The community affairs coordinator shall assist the Board of recreation
Commissioners with the planning, programming and budgeting of
community activities and programs. As directed by the Mayor and/or
director of community affairs, the community affairs coordinator shall
implement plans and policies approved by the governing body. The
coordinator will ensure good cooperation among the various community
organizations by implementing management procedures for ensuring
a. To make surveys and prepare redevelopment plans; and acquire
blighted areas, as herein defined.
b. To acquire other real property for the purposes of removing, preventing
or reducing blight, blighting factors or the causes of blight.
c. To acquire real property where the acquisition of the area by the
authority is necessary to carry out a redevelopment plan.
d. To clear any areas acquired and install, construct or reconstruct
streets, utilities and site improvements essential to the preparation of
site for uses in accordance with the redevelopment plan.
e. To sell or lease land so acquired for uses in accordance with the
redevelopment plan.
§ 2-19.3 PINE HILL CODE § 2-20A.2
AO:32
effective communications among the community, the Board of recreation
Commissioners and the governing body. Additionally, the community affairs
coordinator will be responsible administratively for the use of borough
funds and facilities; reporting; and grant finding.
§ 2-20A.3. Term.
The term of the community affairs coordinator shall be for a period of one
year.
§ 2-20.0. BOARD OF RECREATION COMMISSIONERS.
§ 2-20.1. Established.
A board of recreation Commissioners is hereby established in the Borough
of Pine Hill, Camden County, New Jersey.
§ 2-20.2. Members.
The Board of recreation Commissioners shall consist of seven members
appointed by the Mayor.
§ 2-20.3. Term.
The Commissioners first appointed shall be appointed for terms of one, two,
and three years respectively, the term of at least one Commissioner expiring
in each year according to the number appointed as fixed by the Mayor.
§ 2-21. SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
§ 2-21.1. Created; Members.
There is hereby created in the borough a board to be known as the Pine
Hill Shade Tree Commission, which shall consist of five members, who are
residents of this municipality, to be appointed by the Mayor and to serve
without compensation.
§ 2-21.2. Term.
The terms of office of the members of the commission shall in the first
appointment be for one, two, three, four and five years from next
succeeding appointment on January 1. All subsequent appointments, except
to fill vacancies, shall be for the full term of five years.
§ 2-21.3. Powers And Duties.
The commission shall have the power to:
a. Exercise full and exclusive control over the planting and care of shade
and ornamental trees and shrubbery now located, or which may
hereafter be planted in any public highway, park or parkway, except
§ 2-20A.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-21.3
AO:33
§ 2-21.4. Permit Required.
No person firm or corporation shall do, or cause to be done, any of the
following acts upon a public highway, public park or other public place
within the borough without the written permit of the shade tree
commission:
§ 2-21.5. Preventive Measures.
county parks or parkways, of the municipality for which it was created,
including the planting, trimming, spraying, care and protection thereof.
b. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same so far
as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection.
c. Move or require the removal of any tree or part thereof dangerous to
public safety, at the expense of the owner of such tree.
d. Care for and control such parks and parkways, encourage
arboriculture, recommend passage, alteration, amendment and repeal
of ordinances by the governing body of the municipality for carrying out
the provisions hereof.
a. Cut, trim, break, climb with spike, disturb the roots of or otherwise
injure, or spray with any injurious chemical, or remove any living tree
or shrub, or injure, misuse or remove any structure or device placed to
support or protect such tree or shrubs.
b. Plant any tree or shrub.
c. Fasten any rope, wire, electric attachment, sign or other device to a
tree or shrub or to any guard about such tree or shrub.
d. Close or obstruct any open space provided about the base of a tree or
shrub to permit the access of air, water or fertilizer to the roots of such
tree or shrub.
e. Pile any building material or mix any mortar or cement within six feet of
a tree or shrub.
a. Throughout the period of erection or repairs of any building or
structure, or in the improvement or repairs of a highway, the owner
thereof or the contractor shall place such guards around all nearby
trees on the public highways as shall effectively prevent injury to such
trees.
b. Every person, firm or corporation having control over any wire for the
transmission of an electric current along a public highway shall at all
times guard all trees through which or near which such wires pass,
against any injury from the wires or from the electric current carried by
it. The device or means used shall in every case be subject to approval
of the shade tree commission.
§ 2-21.3 PINE HILL CODE § 2-21.6
AO:34
§ 2-21.6. Prohibitions.
§ 2-21.7. Violations.
Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provisions of this
section shall be liable to a fine of not less than $5 or more than $100 to
be determined by the municipal magistrate. Each 24 hours of continued
violation of this section after a complaint has been made shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 2-22. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION.
§ 2-22.1. Economic Development Commission Establishment.10
There is hereby established in the Borough of Pine Hill an economic
development commission having the powers and duties hereinafter
enumerated.
§ 2-22.2. Members.
The economic development commission shall consist of up to seven
members appointed by the governing body. The appointees shall serve for
terms of one year commencing January 1st and ending December 31st. All
appointments to fill vacancies shall be promptly filled by appointment of the
governing body for the unexpired term thereof.
§ 2-22.3. Officers.
The members of the economic development commission shall choose
annually from among their members a Chairman or President and such
other officers as they may deem necessary. The Mayor shall be ex officio
member of the commission.
a. No person, firm or corporation shall hitch or fasten any animal to any
tree or shrub upon a public highway or to any guard or support
provided for the same, or shall permit any animal to bite or otherwise
injure any such tree or shrub.
b. No person, firm or corporation shall permit any brine, gas or injurious
liquid or solid matter to come in contact with the stem or roots of any
tree or shrub upon a public highway.
c. No person, firm or corporation shall prevent, delay or interfere with any
lawful work undertaken hereunder by the shade tree commission, its
agents or employees.
10.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 348, 92-520,
94-561, 96-615, 2004-732, 2005-778, and 2011-866.
§ 2-21.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-22.4
AO:35
§ 2-22.4. Powers and Duties.
The economic development commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
§ 2-22.5. Expenditure of Funds.
The governing body may annually appropriate funds for the use of the
economic development commission and such funds may be expended on
the authority and approval of the commission upon submission of proper
vouchers.
§ 2-23. UNIFORM CODE FOR DETERMINING VACANCIES IN
MUNICIPAL BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS,
AUTHORITIES OR OTHER AGENCIES OF THE BOROUGH.
§ 2-23.1. Criteria For Determination Of Vacant Office.
The office of any person appointed to a specified term, with or without
compensation, by the governing body or Mayor, including persons
appointed to any board, committee, commission, authority or other agency
of the borough, shall be deemed vacant:
a. To inquire into, survey and publicize the extent advantages and utility of
vacant land within the borough.
b. To classify such vacant land according to its adaptability for the
settlement thereon of various types of business, professional, and
industrial enterprises.
c. To study and analyze various businesses, industries and professions
with a view to ascertaining the opportunities for expansion of such
businesses, industries and professions within the borough.
d. Recommend to the governing body advertising the economic
advantages and opportunities and availability of real estate in the
borough and encourage and accomplish business, industrial and
professional settlement within the borough.
a. Upon its being so declared by judicial determination;
b. Upon the filing by such officer of his written resignation and written
acceptance by the appointing authority;
c. Upon the refusal of a person designated for appointment to such office
to qualify or serve;
d. Upon the determination of the appointing authority that such officer
shall have become physically or mentally incapable of serving;
e. Upon the death of such officer;
§ 2-22.4 PINE HILL CODE § 2-23.1
AO:36
§ 2-23.2. Appointments To Unexpired Term Of Office.
Whenever any of the aforementioned criteria shall occur, resulting in a
vacancy in any board, committee, commission, authority or other agency of
the borough, the appointing authority shall forthwith fill the office for the
unexpired term in the manner prescribed by law.
§ 2-23.3. Effective Date.
This section shall take effect immediately upon its enactment and
publication.
§ 2-23.4. Notification To Members Of Ordinance Provisions.
The office of Clerk of the borough shall notify, through mail to the residence,
all members of all boards, committees, commissions, authorities or agencies
of the borough a certified copy of this section.
§ 2-24. RESPONSIBILITY OF MANAGEMENT OF PERSONNEL.
§ 2-24.1. Director Of Public Safety.
The director of public safety is, exclusively, responsible for the
management, administration and oversight of the Pine Hill Police
Department, Pine Hill Fire Department, and Pine Hill Municipal Court.
§ 2-24.2. Personnel Director.
The personnel director is, exclusively, responsible for the management,
administration, and oversight of all employees that are not subject to the
management, administration and oversight of the directors of standing
f. Upon the determination of the appointing authority that, in violation of
a lawful residency requirement, such officer no longer resides within
the corporate limits of the Borough of Pine Hill;
g. In the case of a member of a board, committee, commission, authority
or other agency of the borough, whenever the member, without being
excused by majority of the authorized members of such body, fails to
attend and participate at meetings of such body, for a period of eight
consecutive weeks, or for four consecutive regular meetings, whichever
shall be of longer duration, at the conclusion of such period, provided
that such body shall notify the appointing authority in writing of such
determination; provided, further, that such board, committee,
commission, authority or other agency of the borough may only excuse
with respect to those failures to attend and participate which are due to
legitimate illness;
h. Upon the removal of such officer for cause in accordance with New
Jersey statutes, or for any other reason prescribed by New Jersey
statutes.
§ 2-23.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-24.2
AO:37
committees of the Borough of Pine Hill. The personnel director is
responsible for the management, administration, and oversight of all
employees to the extent of inclusion of his responsibility for their
compliance with all legislative mandates enacted either through Ordinance,
statute of the State of New Jersey, or law of the United States of America.
§ 2-24.3. Applicability of Existing Ordinances.
All other ordinances of the Borough of Pine Hill regarding the management,
administration and oversight of the personnel of the Borough of Pine Hill
that are not inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this section shall
remain applicable.
§ 2-24.4. Finance Director.
The finance director is exclusively responsible for the management,
administration and oversight of the financial affairs of the governing body,
including but not exclusively, the compliance with the Local Public
Contracts Law, the Local Budget Law, the Local Fiscal Affairs Law and the
Local Bond Law. In addition to said responsibilities the finance director is
responsible for the recommendation of the auditor and treasurer.
§ 2-24.5. Director Of Streets And Roads.
The director of streets and roads is exclusively responsible for the
management, administration and oversight of the resources and employees
of the Highway Department of the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 2-25. EMERGENCY POLICE ASSISTANCE.
a. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, the governing body of
the Borough of Pine Hill hereby agrees to the provisions of reciprocal
police assistance, as hereinafter proscribed, with those of municipal
corporations in Camden County and in those counties contiguous to
Camden County which demonstrate their reciprocity by their
enactment of this section.
b. It is hereby expressly provided that upon committing such reciprocal
police assistance, as hereinafter proscribed, no payment shall be
required to be made by the assisted municipality to the municipality
providing such assistance. This exclusion will include (but is not
necessarily limited to) police salaries, cost of automobiles, motorcycles,
use of police dogs and/or the cost of other equipment or expenses
incurred by providing such assistance. This provision of non-payment is
in lieu of those rates of pay and rentals set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156
and as required by law.
c. Any of the concurring parties may withdraw from and terminate their
part in this agreement at the end of any calendar year, providing notice
of such intention to terminate shall be given no later than November 1st
§ 2-24.2 PINE HILL CODE § 2-25
AO:38
§ 2-26. ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE DISTRICT NO. 1.
§ 2-27. BOROUGH ADMINISTRATOR.11
§ 2-27.1. Position Created.
The position of borough administrator is hereby created.
§ 2-27.2. Appointment.
The administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by
majority of the members of the governing body and shall be discharged
subject to the approval of the majority of the members of the governing
body.
§ 2-27.3. Qualifications.
The administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications, with a background so as to prepare the
appointee to assume the responsibility for administering borough
operations. Appointee shall be responsible to the governing body for the
proper and efficient administration of the business affairs of the borough.
of each year to each participant herein. Otherwise, the Agreement shall
remain in force on a yearly basis.
d. The "Mutual Aid Operations Plan" promulgated by the Camden County
Chiefs of Police Association proscribing the specifics of emergency
reciprocal police assistance is hereby incorporated by reference
without inclusion herein. Such "Mutual Aid Operations Plan" will be
periodically updated; but such updated version will not be enacted until
distributed to each and every party hereto for their edification and
whatever action they may deem appropriate.
e. The Chief of Police shall annually, and as soon after the end of the year
as practicable, furnish the respective governing body with a summary
report of services rendered and received with his comments and
recommendations.
a. The Mayor and council of the Borough of Pine Hill, County of Camden,
and State of New Jersey that the territorial boundaries of the Borough
of Pine Hill shall be the territorial location for the fire district to be
known as "Fire District No. 1" of the Borough of Pine Hill.
b. Upon enactment of this section and its effectiveness, the governing
body shall "by resolution, provide for the election of a board of fire
Commissioners for the district to consist of five persons, residents
therein, and shall specify the date, time, and place for the election of
the first board."
11.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes Ordinance Nos. 88-471 and 93-524.
§ 2-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-27.4
AO:39
§ 2-27.4. Powers And Duties.
The powers and duties of the administrator shall include but are not limited
to the following:
a. The administrator shall have the responsibility of coordinating the
affairs of the borough and shall in conjunction with the various
department heads, the Mayor and members of the council, be
responsible for supervising the daily business activities of the borough.
b. The administrator may also serve as the treasurer and Chief Financial
Officer of the borough. He shall be responsible for the management of a
sound investment program and shall report such results to the director
of finance and administration.
c. The administrator, under the direction of the Mayor and council, shall
be responsible for the administration of the various departments in the
borough and, in general, will be responsible for the efficient operation
of each department. Each department head will, except where specific
functions may be described by statute, act under the direct supervision
of the administrator and will be directly responsible to him.
d. The administrator shall serve as the borough personnel officer and in
that capacity shall recommend in writing to the Mayor and council the
appointment, suspension or discharge of the head of a department,
office or agency of the borough.
e. The administrator shall recommend the appointment, suspension or
discharge of subordinate borough employees to the governing body
after consultation with the head of the department, office or agency.
f. The administrator shall maintain personnel files on all borough
employees and maintain a description of all positions. He shall receive
copies of all general and official correspondence addressed to the
Borough of Pine Hill and see that they are referred to the appropriate
official or department for disposition and reply. He shall set up master
files and ensure that there is an up-to-date and coordinated filing
system for all borough departments, offices and boards.
g. The administrator shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and council
before the close of the fiscal year, or on such alternate date as shall be
determined, a budget for the succeeding fiscal year and an explanatory
budget message. In preparing the budget, the administrator or an
officer designated by him, shall obtain from the head of each
department, agency, board or officer estimates of revenues and
expenditures and other supporting data as he may deem appropriate.
The administrator shall review such estimates and may revise them
before submitting the budget to the Mayor and council. In addition, the
administrator shall prepare the temporary budget for the first January
meeting of the governing body.
§ 2-27.4 PINE HILL CODE § 2-27.4
AO:40
h. The administrator shall be responsible for the administration of the
budget after its adoption by the governing body and he shall assure that
all expenditures are in accordance with the budget.
i. The administrator shall submit to the Mayor and council, as soon as
possible after the close of the fiscal year, (beginning with the close of
the first fiscal year of his/her term) a complete report on the financial
and administrative activities of the borough for the preceding year.
j. The administrator shall keep the governing body informed as to the
federal and state aid projects, grants and any other aid programs for
which the borough may qualify and actively pursue said projects, grants
and programs upon instruction by the governing body.
k. The administrator shall supervise, manage and continually review the
borough's insurance program.
l. The administrator shall attend all meetings of the governing body with
the right to take part in the discussion and he/she shall receive notice of
all special meetings of the governing body. The administrator shall
oversee the preparation of agenda for all meetings of the governing
body, ensuring that agenda packets with appropriate supporting
documentation, are distributed to Mayor and council in a timely
manner.
m. The administrator shall keep the Mayor and council informed, at least
on a monthly basis, as to the conduct of borough affairs, submit periodic
reports on the condition of the borough finances, and make
recommendations to the Mayor and council as may be appropriate.
n. The administrator shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases,
permits and privileges granted by the borough are observed.
o. The administrator shall have the responsibility of supervising the
overall purchasing policies of the borough, and shall be responsible for
establishing and maintaining a complete manual of purchasing
procedures. He shall supervise, require and implement an adequate
inventory of all municipally owned equipment, material and supplies in
stock, and further, recommend the sale of any surplus, obsolete or
unused equipment, material and supplies to the governing body.
p. The administrator shall assign, clerical personnel, office space,
furniture, equipment and facilities among and within departments.
q. The administrator shall maintain liaison with the Pine Hill Board of
Education.
r. The administrator shall act as a representative of the borough at
meetings, seminars and/or conventions as may be directed by the
Mayor or members of council.
s. The administrator shall be responsible for the administration and
coordination of municipal capital programs. This will include
§ 2-27.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-27.4
AO:41
§ 2-27.5. Term: Compensation: Residency Requirement.
The term of the borough administrator shall be determined by contract.
Said contract shall describe all compensation, minimum work schedule,
benefits and leave. Salary for the position of borough administrator may
also be included in the annual salary ordinance. The administrator need not
be a resident of the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 2-27.6. Limitation Of Duties.
Nothing in this section shall authorize the borough administrator to assume
the statutory duties of any other official.
§ 2-28. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
§ 2-28.1. Preamble.
Under chapter 110, of the public laws of 1988, all municipal governments in
New Jersey must have a Chief Financial Officer; and each municipality must
by ordinance create the position of Chief Financial Officer.
The governing body of the Borough of Pine Hill desires compliance with
the above statutory mandates; and the governing body shall make separate
budgetary allocations therefore and designation of salary by subsequent
salary ordinance.
§ 2-28.2. Established.
The office of Chief Financial Officer of the Borough of Pine Hill is hereby
established.
§ 2-28.3. Budgetary Allocation.
Appropriate budgetary allocation shall be incorporated into the annual
budget of the Borough of Pine Hill.
engineering studies and analysis, feasibility studies and cost benefit
analysis.
t. The administrator shall have all the powers necessary to delegate any
of the aforementioned responsibilities and will be responsible only to
the Mayor and council.
u. All complaints regarding services provided by the borough or personnel
employed by the borough shall be referred to the administrator. He
shall investigate and dispose of such complaints, maintain the
appropriate records relative to same and apprise the governing body of
action taken.
v. Administrator shall also perform such other reasonable duties as may
be assigned from time to time.
§ 2-27.4 PINE HILL CODE § 2-28.4
AO:42
§ 2-28.4. Salary.
The salary of the above officer shall be established by the annual salary
ordinance.
§ 2-28.5. Certified Municipal Officer.
The Chief Financial Officer shall be a person who is a "certified municipal
officer appointed by the municipality as defined by New Jersey Statutes."
§ 2-28.6. Responsibilities.
The Chief Financial Officer shall carry out the responsibilities established
by the mandates of the New Jersey Statutes.
§ 2-28.7. Certification by January 1, 1991.
The appointed Chief Financial Officer shall be certified by January 1, 1991.
§ 2-28.8. Restrictions on Appointment.
No member of the governing body shall be appointed as Chief Financial
Officer.
§ 2-28.9. Municipal Financial Officer Defined.
Under N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.7, the municipal financial officer means a
comptroller or municipal treasurer who is not a member of the governing
body of the municipality.
§ 2-29. PUBLIC DEFENDER.
§ 2-29.1. Preamble.
Under the United States Constitution and New Jersey Constitution, the
constitutional "right to legal counsel" has been established.
Under New Jersey Statutes, due to the legislative establishment of severity
of sentences, our State Courts have recognized the "right to legal counsel"
applies to certain offenses, under the New Jersey Criminal Code and Motor
Vehicle Code within the jurisdiction Municipal Courts.
In such cases, the municipal court judge is obligated to advise an individual
regarding his right to counsel and the entitlement to a "public defender"
upon satisfaction to the Court of one's candidacy as "indigent"; and under
the above circumstances, the Pine Hill Municipal Court must address and
legal mandate of a provision of a "public defender"; and said position has
not been recognized by the necessary legal enactment by the governing
body.
§ 2-28.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.2
AO:43
§ 2-29.2. Established.
The office of public defender is, hereby, established.
§ 2-29.3. Salary.
The salary of the above part-time official shall be established by salary
ordinance.
§ 2-29.4. Entitlement of Respective Defendant.
The above public defender shall serve only upon a determination by the
court of the entitlement of the respective defendant.
§ 2-29.5. Application; Fee; Inability to Pay.
In order to obtain the services of the municipal public defender or a court
approved counsel; an application must be filed with the municipal court on
a form provided by the borough. The application form shall be constant with
the requirements of N.J.S.A. 2A:158A-1 et seq.
a. The municipal court judge shall make the decision as to which
defendants are indigent after reviewing the defendant's application.
This determination shall be based upon whether the applicant fits
within the definition of "indigent defendant" found within N.J.S.A.
2A:158A-2.
b. The municipal court administrator shall assess a nonwaivable
application fee of $200 upon each person from whom an application for
services under this chapter is made. This fee shall be chargeable
regardless of whether the applicant is found to require the services of
the municipal public defender or court approved counsel. The
municipal court judge may waive any application fee, in whole or in
part, only if the court determines, in its discretion upon a clear and
convincing showing by the applicant that the application fee represents
an unreasonable burden upon the applicant.
c. The defendant's inability to pay the application fee shall in no way affect
or reduce the rendering of services under this chapter. In the case of a
defendant who is unable or unwilling to pay the application fee, the fee
shall become a lien and the borough may collect the fee consistent with
N.J.S.A. 40:6A-1 and N.J.S.A. 2A:158A-19.
d. In all cases where it appears that the defendant has, or reasonably
expects to have, means to meet some part, though not all, of the cost of
the services rendered to him, he shall be required to reimburse the
borough, either by single payment or in installments in such amounts as
the applicant can reasonably be expected to pay over a time period not
to exceed four months. No default or failure in the making of such
payment shall affect or reduce the rendering of services under this
chapter.
§ 2-29.2 PINE HILL CODE § 2-29.6
AO:44
§ 2-29.6. Use of Fees.
All monies collected for the use of this application fee shall be used
exclusively to meet the costs incurred in providing the services of the
municipal public defender or court approved counsel including, when
required, expert and lay investigation and testimony.
§ 2-30. BOROUGH TREASURER.
§ 2-30.1. Preamble.
New Jersey Statutes established financial responsibility of respective
officials of the Borough of Pine Hill; and no such legislative enactment has
formally recognized the necessity of the office of treasurer in the Borough
of Pine Hill.
The governing body desires such formal recognition of said office at this
time in order to establish conformity with New Jersey Statutes.
§ 2-30.2. Established.
The office of treasurer is, hereby, established.
§ 2-30.3. Appointment of Nonresident.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-1.2, the governing body is, hereby, enabled to
appoint to the office of municipal treasurer a nonresident of said
municipality.
§ 2-30.4. Salary.
The salary of the above officer shall be established by salary ordinance.
§ 2-30.5. Tenure Provisions.
The tenure provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-152 and 40A:9-152.1 are, hereby,
recognized.
§ 2-31. CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
§ 2-31.1. Office Created.
There is hereby created in the Borough of Pine Hill the office of Code
Enforcement Officer, and the title of said office shall be "Code Enforcement
Officer of the Borough of Pine Hill."
§ 2-31.2. Appointment.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the borough council.
§ 2-29.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-31.3
AO:45
§ 2-31.3. Salary.
The salary of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be fixed in the annual
salary ordinance.
§ 2-31.4. Duties.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall enforce the following ordinances:
General Licensing, Mercantile Licenses, Litter and Rubbish, and the
licensing or permit requirements of all borough ordinances. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall also notify those persons or agencies responsible
for the enforcement of all other borough ordinances in the event that any
said ordinance appears to be violated.
§ 2-31.5. Violations Of Codes.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall take steps to cause the correction
of any violation of any code under the officer's jurisdiction. These steps
may include warnings, a written direction to correct the matter, filing
of charges for ordinance violations, or filing, with the assistance of the
Borough Solicitor, other court actions to enforce the code. Should there
exist a code violation which is not under the officer's jurisdiction, that
violation will immediately be brought to the attention of the appropriate
enforcing agency or person by the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 2-32. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-32.1. Established.
There is hereby established within the time frames for adoption of this
section provided by state statute an autonomous body known as the
environmental commission.
§ 2-32.2. Members.
The environmental commission shall consist of seven members appointed
by the Mayor and council of the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 2-32.3. Term.
The Commissioners first appointed shall be terms for one, two and three
years respectively, the term of at least one Commissioner expiring each year
according to the number affixed by the Mayor and council, thereafter, after
the initial staggering of the terms, the term of each Commissioner shall be
for three years.
§ 2-32.4. Powers And Duties.
The environmental commission shall have the power to:
§ 2-31.3 PINE HILL CODE § 2-32.4
AO:46
§ 2-33. SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
There is created the position of municipal superintendent of public works,
an officer of the Borough of Pine Hill whose duties include supervising the
care and maintenance of streets, roads, avenues, public buildings, public
places, motor vehicles of the borough and other such duties as may from
time to time be assigned by council.
§ 2-34. PUBLIC RECORDS.
§ 2-34.1. Request for Public Records Form.
The attached government records request form and the contents therein is
adopted as the borough's system for the request of public records.12
§ 2-35. RECREATION TRUST FUND.
a. Meet on an "as needed basis" to review the status of the environment in
the Borough of Pine Hill with the approval of the governing body of the
Borough of Pine Hill. The environmental commission shall have the
opportunity to utilize a secretary who shall keep minutes of the
meetings. The commission shall meet in public and shall be subject to
the open public meetings act.
b. The environmental commission shall have the authority of all public
documents within the Borough of Pine Hill and shall have the authority
to request the cooperation of all of the various departments and
agencies of the Borough of Pine Hill.
c. The environmental commission shall serve in an advisory capacity only
after reviewing the environmental status of the Borough of Pine Hill, it
shall have the opportunity to investigate any potential violators of any
environmental laws of the Borough of Pine Hill, County of Camden and
State of New Jersey or United States of America. It shall not have any
subpoena powers and shall make recommendations only to the Mayor
and governing body of the Borough of Pine Hill.
d. The environmental commission shall meet periodically to make
recommendations and plans for the future conditions of the
environment within the Borough of Pine Hill.
a. There is established a recreational trust fund, to be funded as below.
b. Any funds in the recreational trust fund shall be used as determined by
Mayor and Council to meet the recreational needs of Borough
residents:
c. In the event that any applicant for land development in the borough is
required by ordinance to provide recreational facilities, and if, in the
sole discretion of the Planning Board, it is impossible or unwise to
12.Editor's Note: The form referred to herein may be found in the office of the borough Clerk.
§ 2-32.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-35
AO:47
§ 2-36. NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS).
§ 2-36.1. Findings.
The President in Homeland Security Directive (HSPD)-5, directed the
Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security to develop and
administer a National Incident Management System (NIMS), which would
provide a consistent nationwide approach for federal, state, local, and tribal
governments to work together more effectively and efficiently to prevent,
prepare for, respond to and recover from domestic incidents, regardless of
cause, size or complexity.
The collective input and guidance from all federal, state, local, and tribal
homeland security partners has been, and will continue to be, vital to the
development, effective implementation and utilization of a comprehensive
NIMS.
It is necessary and desirable that all federal, state, local and tribal
emergency agencies and personnel coordinate their efforts to effectively
and efficiently provide the highest levels of incident management.
To facilitate the most efficient and effective incident management it is
critical that federal, state, local, and tribal organizations utilize
standardized terminology, standardized organizational structures,
interoperable communications, consolidated action plans, unified command
structures, uniform personnel qualification standards, uniform standards
for planning, training, and exercising, comprehensive resource
management, and designated incident facilities during emergencies or
disasters.
The NIMS standardized procedures for managing personnel,
communications, facilities and resources will improve the state's ability
to utilize federal funding to enhance local and state agency readiness,
maintain first responder safety, and streamline incident management
processes.
The Incident Command System components of NIMS are already an integral
part of various incident management activities throughout the state,
including current emergency management training programs; and
The National Commission on Terrorist Attacks (9-11 Commission)
recommended adoption of a standardized Incident Command System.
require the installation of recreational facilities, the developer may
meet this need by making payment to the recreational trust fund in an
amount equal to the costs of the recreation facilities it would otherwise
be required to install plus the market value of the land not being used
for recreational facilities or a cash contribution of $2,500 per dwelling
unit, the method of calculation to be decided by the developer.
d. Payments shall be paid as follows: 1/2 at the time of final approval and
the balance per unit at the time each building permit is issued.
§ 2-35 PINE HILL CODE § 2-36.2
AO:48
§ 2-36.2. Established.
The National Incident Management System (NIMS) is established as the
borough standard for incident management.
§ 2-37. DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
§ 2-37.1. Eligible Positions. [Ord. No. 2008-822]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 2-37.2. Exempt Positions. [Ord. No. 2008-822]
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2:
§ 2-37.3. Implementation of Program. [Ord. No. 2008-822]
This section shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance from the Local Finance Board
or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
a. Any newly appointed person covered under the Salary Ordinance of the
Borough of Pine Hill, County of Camden, State of New Jersey, as of July
1, 2007.
a. Certified health officer;
b. Tax Collector;
c. Chief Financial Officer;
d. Construction code official;
e. Qualified purchasing agent;
f. Tax Assessor;
g. Municipal planner;
h. Registered municipal Clerk;
i. Licensed uniform subcode inspector;
j. Principal public works manager.
§ 2-36.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-38
AO:49
§ 2-38. RETURNED CHECK FEE. [Ord. No. 2012-897; N.J.S.A.
49:5-18]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:5-18, the fee for checks returned for insufficient
funds shall be $20.
§ 2-39. CONTRACTS, PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
§ 2-39.1. Adoption of Standards; Applicability. [Ord. No. 2012-895]
The following standards and criteria are hereby adopted and shall be made
applicable to all contracts awarded and/or confirmed by the borough council
and any and all borough boards, commissions and authorities which are in
excess of $17,500.
§ 2-39.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2012-895]
BUSINESS ENTITY — Shall mean (i) an individual, including the individual's
spouse, and any child/children; (ii) a firm, corporation, professional
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, organization,
association, and any other manner and kind of business entity; (iii) any
person who owns 10% or more of the equity or ownership or income
interests in a person or entity as defined in paragraph (i) and (ii) above
and their spouses and child/children; (iv) all partners or officers of such
an entity, in the aggregate, and their spouses and child/children; (v) any
person, subcontractor, subsidiary, corporation, firm, partnership, limited
liability company, organization or association who has received or
indefeasibly acquired the right to receive, from a person described in
paragraph (i) above more than $100,000 in compensation or income of any
kind (including, by way of illustration, and not limitation; wages; salaries,
sums paid to independent contractors, benefits, dividends, profit-sharing,
pension contributions, deferred contributions, stock, stock options or gifts),
in any twelve-month period prior to the award of, or during the term of, a
contract subject to this section.
§ 2-39.3. Award Of Public Professional Services And Other No-Bid
Contracts. [Ord. No. 2012-895]
a. Purpose and Intent. Although professional services contracts and
certain other contracts for goods and services are exempt from the
competitive bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law,
N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., the Mayor and borough council deem it
appropriate, and consistent with the provisions of enacted New Jersey
Legislation, now codified at N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1.1 et seq., to henceforth
award such contracts through a competitive, quality-based, fair and
open process, unless a specific determination to the contrary is made by
the borough council.
b. Process For Award Of Professional Services And Other No-Bid
Contracts. The Borough of Pine Hill, or any agency or instrumentality
thereof, shall not enter into a contract, including a professional services
§ 2-38 PINE HILL CODE § 2-39.3
AO:50
contract, or such other contract which is exempt from public bidding
requirements, having an anticipated value in excess of $17,500 as
determined by the Borough of Pine Hill or any agency or
instrumentality, thereof, with a business entity, except through a
contract that is awarded pursuant to a fair and open process if, during
the preceding one-year period, that business entity has made a
contribution that is reportable by the recipient under N.J.S.A. 19:44A-1
et seq., to any municipal committee of a political party if a member of
that political party is in office as the Mayor or a member of the borough
council when the contract is awarded, or to any candidate committee
of any person serving in an elected public office of the Borough of Pine
Hill, when the contract is awarded. The fair and open process shall be
quality-based, and shall be as follows:
1. Professional services may be awarded by virtue of a publicly
advertised request for proposals (RFP) which will be issued as one
document for those appointments which are made on an annual
basis, such as, but not limited to, the positions of: Borough
Attorney, borough labor counsel, Borough Engineer, borough
planner, borough auditor, Planning Board attorney, Planning Board
engineer, zoning board attorney, zoning board engineer, municipal
utilities authority attorney, engineer and auditor and fire district
attorney and auditor.
2. For said positions, no contract shall be awarded unless and until
the positions are:
(a) Publicly advertised in newspapers or on the internet website
maintained by the borough in sufficient time to give notice in
advance of the solicitation for the contracts;
(b) Awarded under a process that provides for public solicitation of
proposals and qualifications including the following:
(1) Experience and reputation in the field;
(2) Knowledge of the subject matter of the services to be
provided to the borough;
(3) General knowledge of the borough, its affairs and
operations;
(4) Availability to accommodate any required meetings of the
borough;
(5) Compensation proposal;
(6) Compliance with the minimum qualifications established
by the borough for the position;
(7) Other factors determined to be in the best interest of the
borough.
§ 2-39.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-39.3
AO:51
(c) Awarded and disclosed under criteria established in writing by
the Borough of Pine Hill prior to the solicitation or proposals or
qualifications as set forth herein;
(d) Publicly announced when awarded; and as to those RFPs which
prove to be unsuccessful, the borough administrator shall
retain a copy of same on file for a period of not less than 60
days.
3. For contracts which arise on an occasional basis, such as appraisals
needed for the acquisition of land and/or open space, as well as title
searches, surveying, and similar work associated with same; and
comparable assignments, such as planning services needed for
master plan updates, appraisals, special counsel, special project
engineer contracts, etc., professional services contracts may be
awarded without following the foregoing provisions, so long as:
(a) The anticipated value does not exceed the $17,500 threshold
set forth above; and work.
(b) The borough administrator solicits at least two proposals for
said work.
c. The proposals shall be evaluated taking into consideration the
designated qualifications and/or performance criteria, experience,
reputation of vendor, quality of services, quoted fee and other relevant
factors in making a recommendation to the borough council; and the
borough administrator may, in his/her sole discretion, conduct
negotiations with qualified vendors after receipt of proposals, in order
to achieve the best possible contract terms and conditions for the
borough and its taxpayers. No contract shall be awarded, however,
unless same is authorized by resolution duly adopted in public session
by the borough council.
d. Contribution Statement By Professional Business Entity.
1. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure services,
including banking or insurance coverage services, with any
professional business entity, the borough or any of its purchasing
agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall receive a sworn
statement from the professional business entity made under
penalty of perjury that the business entity has not made a
contribution in violation of this section;
2. The business entity shall have a continuing duty to report any
violations of this section that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this
subsection shall be made prior to entry into the contract or
agreement with the borough and shall be in addition to any other
certifications that may be required by any other provision of law.
e. Contracts Issued Without Use Of The RFP Process.
§ 2-39.3 PINE HILL CODE § 2-39.3
AO:52
§ 2-40. GOVERNMENT-PRIVATE ENERGY AGGREGATION
PROGRAM.
§ 2-40.1. Preamble. [Ord. No. 2016-942 Preamble]
The State of New Jersey is one of three states that has been engaged in a
process to establish a competitive market place through deregulation and
restructuring of the electric utility industry.
The Government Energy Aggregation Act of 2003 permits the Township of
Pine Hill to become a Government Aggregator in order to provide electric
generation service for use by residential and nonresidential customers
within the Municipality's geographic boundaries.
1. In circumstances where the borough council determines that the
use of the RFP process is not appropriate, such as, but not limited
to, contracts with other government agencies, and agreements
with public utilities, the borough administrator shall use his/her
best efforts to obtain at least two quotations for the work and shall
require the contractor to fully comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
et seq., N.J.S.A. 19:44A-22, and related statutes.
2. No business entity which enters into negotiations for, or agrees to,
any contract or agreement with the Borough of Pine Hill or any
department or agency thereof, or of its independent authorities for
the rendition of professional, banking or insurance coverage
services, or any other consulting services, shall solicit or make any
contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including in-kind
contributions, to any Borough of Pine Hill, municipal candidate or
holder of the public office having ultimate responsibility for the
award of the contract, or campaign committee supporting such
candidate of officeholder, or to any Borough of Pine Hill party
committee between the time of first communications between that
business entity and the borough regarding a specific professional
services agreement and the later of the termination of negotiations
or the completion of the contract or agreement.
f. Emergency Exceptions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the borough
recognizes that the New Jersey Legislature has provided for certain
emergencies, and further recognizes that the procedure outlined above,
might not be capable of being achieved in the event of an emergency or
other time constraints. Thus, should a situation arise, and time does not
permit resort to this procedure, and the immediate performance of
services is necessary, then an award for same may be made in
accordance with the provisions of the Local Public Contracts Law
relating to emergency contracts, and such rules and regulations as may
be promulgated, from time to time, by the borough council with regard
to same. No such emergency contracts, however, may be awarded
without a resolution establishing a basis for the deviation from the
procedures outlined herein.
§ 2-39.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-40.1
AO:53
Residential and nonresidential citizens of the Borough of Pine Hill have a
substantial economic and social interest at stake in the purchase and supply
of energy.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pine Hill finds it is in the best
interest of the municipality's rate payers, both residential and
nonresidential, to create a Governmental-Private Energy Aggregation
Program.
§ 2-40.2. Authorization. [Ord. No. 2016-942 § 1]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pine Hill is authorized to become a
Government Aggregator of electric generation service and electric service
for residential and nonresidential customers' electric power on behalf of its
residential and nonresidential citizens.
§ 2-40.3. Government-Private Aggregator Option Two. [Ord. No.
2016-942 § 2]
The Borough will follow the Government-Private Aggregator Option Two of
the BPU Government-Private Aggregator Program pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the New Jersey State Board of Public Utilities.
§ 2-40.4. Notices and Required Documentation. [Ord. No. 2016-942
§ 3]
The Mayor and Borough Administrator are hereby authorized to take any
and all steps to submit the necessary documentation to the New Jersey
Board of Public Utilities and to provide any and all notices to residential
customers to opt-out of the Program and to nonresidential customers to optin
to the Program.
§ 2-40.5. Selection of Energy Consultant. [Ord. No. 2016-942 § 4]
The Borough is a member of the Middlesex Regional Educational Services
Commission and they have followed the Fair and Open process to select
an energy consultant, Good Energy L.P. to perform the New Jersey BPU
aggregation program adopted by N.J.A.C. 14:4-6 et seq.
§ 2-40.6. Term of Agreement. [Ord. No. 2016-942 § 5]
The term of the agreement shall require the Borough Council to approve by
Resolution the extension of the service agreement annually up to no more
than five renewals.
§ 2-40.7. Fees. [Ord. No. 2016-942 § 6]
All fees and services costs shall be posted annually for the cost of electricity
on the Borough's website to permit residential disclosure according to the
following:
§ 2-40.1 PINE HILL CODE § 2-40.7
AO:54
June 1, 2016 Rate information (Projected)
ACE Auction Rate per kWh: $0.1070
Aggregating Rate offer per kWh: $0.1009(estimated)
Fees to service provider per kWh: $0.00125
§ 2-41. CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECKS.
§ 2-41.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-947; Ord. No. 2017-954]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH-SPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAMS — Shall mean any programs
sponsored by the Borough of Pine Hill, including any and all leagues, boards
and commissions falling within the purview of, or acting for or on behalf of,
the Borough of Pine Hill and having contact with persons under the age of
18 years.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — Shall mean a
determination of whether a person has a criminal record by crossreferencing
that person's name and fingerprints with those on file with
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division and/or the New
Jersey State Bureau of Identification in the Division of State Police.
NON-SPONSORED YOUTH PROGRAMS — Shall mean any youth programs
not sponsored by the Borough of Pine Hill, but that utilize municipal
facilities or have affiliation with a Borough-sponsored youth program and
having contact with persons under the age of 18 years.
YOUTH PROGRAMS — Shall mean any programs that allow for
participation in activities by those persons under 18 years of age. Activities
may include, but are not limited to, sporting activities, passive recreation
groups, clubs or camps and trips or other activities whereby some control
and responsibility for children are assigned to some person acting for or on
behalf of the Borough other than a parent or caregiver.
§ 2-41.2. Non-sponsored Youth Programs; Use of Borough of Pine
Hill Borough Facilities. [Ord. No. 2016-947; Ord. No. 2017-954]
a. Prior to any club or organization, not defined as a Borough-sponsored
youth program, being authorized to use Borough-owned facilities for
functions participated in by children, all adults, those persons 18 years
of age or older, in any way assisting in the function, including but not
limited to coaches, assistant coaches, or similar positions, must provide
the Pine Hill Borough Police Chief with findings of a criminal
background check obtained from the State Bureau of Identification in
the New Jersey State Police.
b. The submission of background check findings must be based upon a
check performed within three years of the start of use of the Boroughowned
facility. In the case of coaches performing duties as employees of
§ 2-40.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-41.2
AO:55
§ 2-41.3. Borough-sponsored Youth Programs. [Ord. No. 2016-947;
Ord. No. 2017-954]
§ 2-41.4. Issuance and Display of Identification Card. [Ord. No.
2016-947; Ord. No. 2017-954]
Individuals engaged in providing recreation activities, whether for Borough-
Sponsored Youth Programs or Non-Sponsored Youth Programs, shall be
a school district, the policy of background checks adopted by the
individual school district shall be used to establish eligibility for use
of Borough-owned facilities. In all cases, the background check must
comply with the provisions of any applicable laws regarding same, but
not less detailed than those performed by the Borough for individuals
involved in administering Borough-sponsored youth programs. The cost
of background checks for individuals not administering a Boroughsponsored
program shall be borne by the individual or program with
which they are participating.
a. All adults, those persons 18 years of age or older, including but not
limited to coaches, assistant coaches, or similar positions involved in
educating, directing or supervising youth, and in any way assisting in a
Pine Hill Borough-sponsored function participated in by children, shall
submit sufficient information on forms supplied by the Borough Police
Department from the New Jersey State Police, for the purpose of
obtaining a criminal history background check with the State Bureau of
Identification in the New Jersey State Police. Applications for
background checks shall be processed by the Pine Hill Borough Police
Chief.
b. Based upon the Memorandum of Understanding executed between the
Borough of Pine Hill and the New Jersey State Police, the individual
applying for the background check shall authorize the Borough Police
Chief to be the recipient of the affirmative or negative response from
the State Police based upon the findings of the background check.
Individuals involved in a Borough-sponsored youth function, and who
are required to undergo background checks based upon this section,
shall not be responsible for the costs involved with obtaining the
criminal background check.
c. All league officers and/or those individuals in charge of each recreation
program are required to ensure compliance with this section for that
league or program. The President or leader of each recreation program
shall file an annual roster of individuals that are required to participate
in the background check procedures of this section. The roster shall be
on forms supplied by the Borough of Pine Hill and shall contain a
certification as to the accuracy and completeness of the roster and
individual names. Any person who knowingly certifies a background
check roster that excludes an individual required to be checked shall be
in violation of this section and laws regarding false swearing.
§ 2-41.2 PINE HILL CODE § 2-41.4
AO:56
issued identification cards with appropriate expirations based upon the
date of their individual background check. Individuals issued identification
cards are required to display their card while in performance of their duty
involving youth programs.
§ 2-41.5. Disqualification. [Ord. No. 2016-947; Ord. No. 2017-954]
a. Upon receipt of a completed background check conducted by the State
Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State Police and/or the
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, the Borough
Police Chief shall notify the applicant directly if the search result is
negative. (Search identifies a basis to disqualify the applicant.) The
determination of the Police Chief is based upon the procedure set forth
in this section. Details in the background check that result in a negative
determination by the State Police are not afforded to any other party
and are only available to the applicant upon making a formal request to
the State Bureau of Investigation.
b. In the event the criminal background check reveals any prior
convictions for crimes or offenses which negatively impact the health,
safety and welfare of children, said person shall not be qualified to
participate in any official capacity in any function for persons under the
age of 18 years held at any Borough-owned facilities. Such offenses
shall include, but not be limited to:
1. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.,
such as criminal homicide; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., such as
assault, reckless endangerment, threats, stalking; N.J.S.A.
2C:13-1 et seq., such as kidnapping; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq.,
such as sexual assault; or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq., such as
robbery;
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:24-1 et seq., such as endangering the welfare of a child;
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes;
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analogue as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes except paragraph (4) of subsection a, of
N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
2. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in subsection 2-41.5b1 of this section.
§ 2-41.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-41.5
AO:57
§ 2-41.6. Frequency of Background Checks. [Ord. No. 2016-947;
Ord. No. 2017-954]
§ 2-41.7. Appeals of Disqualification. [Ord. No. 2016-947; Ord. No.
2017-954]
Any person whose criminal background check disqualifies that person from
employment or from volunteering may appeal his disqualification.
c. The list of crimes and violations contained in this section is for
illustrative purposes only and shall not be construed as a limitation on
those criminal activities or violations that would be grounds to
disqualify a person from assisting with youth-related activities as
indicated herein.
d. Refusal by individuals required to submit to background checks will
result in an immediate dismissal of the individual from any Boroughsponsored
activities requiring background checks. In addition, refusal
to comply with this section by any individual falling within the scope of
requirements for non-sponsored youth programs will forfeit that
individual's ability to participate with the respective program. Refusal
of a non-Borough-sponsored youth program to subscribe to the
requirements of this section shall forfeit that program's ability to use
municipal facilities.
a. All non-sponsored youth programs that have individuals subject to this
section shall supply background checks for all of its participants prior
to the individual being able to participate at any function at a Boroughowned
facility to the extent covered by this section. Thereafter, every
three years, a new background check shall be submitted to the Borough
Police Chief.
b. Borough-sponsored youth programs.
1. All Borough-sponsored youth programs that have individuals
subject to this section shall direct those individuals to the Police
Chief for background checks prior to the individual being able to
participate at any function sponsored by the Borough of Pine Hill.
Thereafter, every three years a new background check shall be
submitted to the Police Chief.
2. Individuals involved in Borough-sponsored youth programs who
are required to undergo background checks shall be given an
interim approval for participation only after submission to the
Division of State Police for a background check. Interim approvals
shall only be valid for the period of time that it takes to receive
background checks results. Such interim approval shall not be valid
for a period of time exceeding 45 days. Only one interim approval
may be granted per individual.
§ 2-41.5 PINE HILL CODE § 2-41.7
AO:58
a. Appeal re: accuracy of record. A person may challenge the accuracy of
the criminal history record. A challenge to the accuracy of the report
shall be filed with the New Jersey State Police, Volunteer Review
Operations. Forms to initiate a challenge shall be available from the
Borough Police Chief.
b. Appeal alleging rehabilitation. A person may claim to be rehabilitated.
1. No person may appeal a disqualification on the grounds of
rehabilitation, if the person has been disqualified because that
person has been convicted, adjudicated delinquent or acquitted by
reason of insanity of aggravated sexual assault; aggravated
criminal sexual conduct kidnapping pursuant to paragraph (2) of
subsection c. of N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1; endangering the welfare of a child
by engaging in sexual conduct which would impair or debauch the
morals of the child pursuant to subsection a. of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4;
endangering the welfare of a child pursuant to paragraph (4) of
subsection b. of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; luring or enticing pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2C:13-6; criminal sexual conduct pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:14-3b; if the victim is a minor; kidnapping pursuant to N.J.S.A.
2C:13-2, or false imprisonment pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-3 if the
victim is a minor and the offender is not the parent of the victim;
knowingly promoting prostitution of a child pursuant to paragraph
(3) or paragraph (4) of subsection b. of N.J.S.A. 2C::34-1; or an
attempt to commit any of these enumerated offenses.
2. Appeals Committee. An appeal based on rehabilitation shall be
made to an Appeals Committee, which shall consist of the Borough
Chief of Police, the Borough Administrator and Borough Council
Recreation Director. Any such appeal must be made within 30 days
of receipt of the notice of disqualification. The appealing party must
provide all information necessary for the Appeals Committee to
complete its review. All proceedings before the Appeals Committee
shall be closed to the general public.
3. Rehabilitation criteria. In determining whether a person has
affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation, the Appeals Committee
shall consider the following factors:
(a) The nature and responsibility of the position which the
convicted person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
(b) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(c) The circumstances under which the offense occurred;
(d) The date of the offense;
(e) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(f) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
§ 2-41.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-41.7
AO:59
§ 2-41.8. Privacy. [Ord. No. 2016-947; Ord. No. 2017-954]
§ 2-41.9. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-947; Ord. No. 2017-954]
(g) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the
offense; and
(h) Any other evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in
prison or the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment
received; acquisition of additional academic or vocational
schooling; successful participation in correctional workrelease
programs, or the recommendation of those who have
had the person under their supervision.
4. If the Appeals Committee determines that the disqualified person
has been successfully rehabilitated, it shall enter the person's name
on the list of qualified employees and volunteers maintained by the
Borough Police Chief or his designee.
a. Any and all criminal background checks obtained from the State Bureau
of Identification in the New Jersey State Police or the Federal Bureau of
Investigation shall be filed and maintained in a secured cabinet in the
office of the Chief of Police for the Borough of Pine Hill who shall take
custody and maintain such records which shall not be available to the
public. The Pine Hill Borough Chief of Police shall take appropriate
steps to safeguard such records. The records shall be exempt from
public disclosure under the common law, the Open Public Records Act
and the New Jersey Right to Know Law. In addition, the Pine Hill
Borough Chief of Police shall not reveal the affirmative or negative
response from the State Police based upon the findings of the
background check except as provided in this section. Other than
members of the Appeals Committee, no Pine Hill Borough official or
employee shall have access to the criminal background checks other
than individuals in the Pine Hill Borough Police Department Records
Bureau, whose only access shall be to take custody and maintain the
files as provided for in this subsection. The records shall only be
retained for such period of time as is necessary to serve their intended
and authorized purpose and thereafter destroyed. The Pine Hill
Borough Chief of Police shall be the contact person for Pine Hill
Borough for the VRO Program of the State Police.
b. Access to criminal history record information for noncriminal-justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
members of the Appeals Committee, as authorized by Federal or State
law regarding obtaining and disseminating of criminal history record
information obtained under this section.
c. The Appeals Committee shall limit its use of the criminal history record
information solely to the individual for which it was obtained and the
criminal history record information furnished shall not be disseminated
to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the records.
§ 2-41.7 PINE HILL CODE § 2-41.9
AO:60
§ 2-42. DIRECT DEPOSIT OF COMPENSATION FOR EMPLOYEES.
§ 2-42.1. Direct Deposit Mandated. [Ord. No. 2017-959]
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. CURFEW.
§ 3-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-922]
As used in this section:
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person other than a Parent, to whom legal
custody of the Juvenile has been given by Court Order or who is acting in
the place of the Parent, or is responsible for the care and welfare of the
Juvenile.
JUVENILE — Shall mean an individual who is under the age of 18 years.
PARENT — Shall mean the mother, father or stepmother or stepfather of the
juvenile.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any place to which the public has access
including but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk,
bridge, alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation
facility, vehicle use for public transportation, parking lot or any other public
building, structure or area.
a. Failure to comply with this section may result in the Borough
withholding funding for the youth service organization, prohibiting the
use of facilities or withholding funding for facility maintenance.
b. Any person violating or failing to comply with the provisions of this
section, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250
and not more than $2,500. Each continuing violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
a. All employees and elected public officials of the Borough of Pine Hill
who receive compensation from the Borough are hereby mandated to
have Direct Deposit of their compensation as of November 1, 2017 in
accordance with Chapter 28 P.L. 2013 as defined under C.52:14-15f(b).
b. All employees required to have direct deposit will also be required to
receive paperless statements, via email.
c. Seasonal and temporary employees who are employed by the Borough
of Pine Hill are exempt from the direct deposit mandate.
§ 2-41.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-1.2
AO:61
§ 3-1.2. Curfew Established. [Ord. No. 2014-922]
It shall be a violation of this section for any juvenile to be in a public place
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless accompanied by the
juvenile's parent or guardian or unless engaged in, or traveling to or from a
business or occupation which the laws of this State authorizes a juvenile to
perform.
§ 3-1.3. Other Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2014-922]
The foregoing curfew shall not apply to any juvenile who shall be a bonified
student attending a school activity or a juvenile who shall be in attendance
at a function or any other cultural, educational and social event sponsored
by religious or community based organizations, or at a properly supervised
recreational program after 10:00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m. during the
time necessarily required to travel between the juvenile's residence and
the place of assembly. In addition, the foregoing curfew shall not apply
to emergency situations necessitating the Juvenile to be in a public place
during the prohibited hours.
§ 3-1.4. Parents/Guardians Responsibility. [Ord. No. 2014-922]
It shall be a violation of this section for a parent or guardian of a juvenile to
allow that juvenile to be in a public place between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.,
subject to the exemptions of subsection 3-1.2 and 3-1.3.
§ 3-1.5. Violations. [Ord. No. 2014-922]
Any violation of this section shall be prosecuted in the Pine Hill Municipal
Court. Upon a finding of guilt, the Municipal Court shall impose a sentence
of community service and may be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000. If
both a juvenile and a juvenile's parent or guardian violate this section, they
shall be required to perform community service together.
§ 3-2. REMOVAL OF GRASS, WEEDS AND BRUSH.
§ 3-2.1. Findings. [Ord. #21]
Grass, weeds, brush and other wild vegetation are permitted to grow on
certain lands in the borough to such an extent that they form a breeding
place for mosquitoes in the summer and constitute a fire hazard in the fall
and winter, thus menacing persons and property in the vicinity, and the
borough council is of the opinion that such conditions are contrary to the
general welfare of the borough and should not be permitted to exist.
§ 3-2.2. Prohibition. [Ord. #21, S1]
It is unlawful for any person, owning or occupying any land in the borough
to allow or permit weeds, grass, brush or other wild vegetation to grow and
remain on the land to such an extent that such vegetation shall provide a
§ 3-1.2 PINE HILL CODE § 3-2.2
AO:62
cover or breeding place for mosquitoes or that, when dry, it shall constitute
a fire hazard to surrounding property.
§ 3-2.3. Notification Of Clerk.
It is the duty of the borough Chief of Police to notify the borough Clerk
in writing of any violation of subsection 3-2.2, which may come to his
attention, by giving the Clerk the name of the occupant; or owner of the
property and the exact location of the same.
§ 3-2.4. Duties Of Fire Department.
It is the duty of the chief of the fire department to make, or cause to be
made, at least twice a year a list of all properties, setting forth the name
of the occupant or owner of the same and their precise location, whereon
there are alleged violations of this section and to report the same in writing
to the borough.
§ 3-2.5. Notice To Remove Vegetation.
Upon receipt of any such notice the borough Clerk shall send by registered
mail to each of such persons at his last known post office address, a notice
to cut down or otherwise remove such grass, weeds, brush and other
wild vegetation within 10 days from the date of the mailing of the notice,
specifying therein the location of the land in question.
§ 3-2.6. Removal By Borough; Cost To Be Lien On Premises.
In case of noncompliance with the notice, borough council may cause such
grass, weeds, brush and other wild vegetation to be removed and in such
case, the cost thereof shall be certified by the officer in charge of such
removal, to borough council which shall examine the certificate and if found
correct, cause this amount so certified to be charged against the lands,
which amount shall be added to and form a part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such lands and shall bear interest at the same rate
and be enforced in the same manner as other taxes on real property.
§ 3-3. KEEPING OF ANIMALS.
§ 3-3.1. Conformity With Section.
No animals or fowl shall be kept, harbored, grazed or otherwise used or
maintained within the borough, except as hereinafter set forth.
§ 3-3.2. Definitions.
a. ANIMALS - Shall be defined as any horses, cattle, ponies, or any
domesticated farm animals or undomesticated animals, excluding cats
and dogs.
§ 3-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-3.2
AO:63
§ 3-3.3. Area Of Land Required To Maintain Animal.
b. FOWL - Shall be defined as any feathered vertebrate animal, including
but not limited to chickens, hens, ducks, turkeys, cocks, pheasants or
barnyard type birds raised for meat or otherwise.
c. ANIMALS - Shall also include reptiles, of every kind and description,
including, but not being confined to snakes, lizards, alligators,
crocodiles, turtles, and any other air breathing vertebrates.
a. All horses, ponies, and cattle as defined herein may be maintained
within the borough subject to and within the limitations imposed and
defined in any other ordinance of the borough providing the owner of
the animal shall maintain such animal as shall be defined under this
section, on a plot of ground not less than 100 by 150 feet in dimension,
per animal.
b. The keeping, boarding and maintaining of any horses, cows or other
domesticated animals, shall not be permitted unless there is sufficient
ground so that there shall be a maximum of three animals per acre and
an additional minimum of one acre for each additional animal so
maintained.
c. In the keeping, harboring, boarding or maintaining of animals as
hereinbefore defined, the following rules and regulations regarding the
same shall be followed at all times:
1. All stables, buildings or accessory buildings shall be cleaned of all
manure, garbage and any and all filth, which shall be disposed of
properly.
2. All manure or other waste materials shall be kept at least 25 feet
from any property line. Any manure and other waste materials from
such animals is to be removed.
All grounds and fences shall be maintained and kept in an orderly
and clean fashion at all times for the proper control of all animals.
To maintain an odor level of urine, once a week lime shall be spread
over the ground where the animals are kept.
3. All buildings, stables and necessary buildings for the keeping,
maintaining or housing of such animals, shall be fogged or sprayed
or disinfected by other means at such times as shall be required for
the control of flies, insects and rodents.
4. No person shall maintain any animals or fowl as defined herein
which such animals or fowl shall, between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. emit any noise which interferes with the sleep and
rest of the neighbors in the vicinity in which the animals or fowl are
located.
§ 3-3.2 PINE HILL CODE § 3-3.3
AO:64
§ 3-3.4. Running At Large.
It is unlawful for the owner of land, tenant, or other person to permit any
animal owned by a person or under the control or in the custody of such
person, to permit the animal to run at large other than on the land owned
or leased by the person having the ownership or custody or control of the
animal; or on which the owner of the animal has the right of access thereto;
or to permit the animal to trespass and encroach on the property of another
or others.
§ 3-3.5. Impounding.
In the event that the owner or person in whose custody or possession the
animal is, shall fail or neglect to keep the animal within the bounds of the
premises owned or leased by the aforesaid person, or to which the person
has the right of access, the animal may be impounded and held until all
normal expenses have been paid in full for the care while the animal is in
the custody of the borough. If these expenses are not paid in full, the animal
may be sold for the expenses incurred in the impounding and providing for
same up to the time of sale.
§ 3-3.6. Pet Waste Disposal.
5. The provisions of this subsection shall not be interpreted to enlarge
the number of animals or fowl or enlarge any building or accessory
buildings now used for the keeping or housing of the animals or
fowl within the borough, nor to permit the maintenance of same in
violation of any other ordinance now in force in the borough.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the
proper disposal of pet solid waste in the Borough of Pine Hill, so as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for
failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Shall mean any person who shall possess,
maintain, house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet,
whether or not the owner of such pet.
§ 3-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-3.6
AO:65
§ 3-4. STORAGE OF WASTE MATERIALS.
§ 3-4.1. Storage Of Unsightly Materials.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or allow to gather, maintain or
collect on any premises within the borough, any junk, debris, trash, waste
materials or other articles deemed to be unsightly, objectionable, or which
tends to detract from the aesthetic appearance of the surrounding area.
§ 3-4.2. Storage Of Health Hazards.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or allow to gather, maintain or
collect on any premises within the borough, any junk, debris, trash, waste
materials of any description deemed to be a safety or health hazard, or
which constitutes an attractive nuisance to children, as defined by case law.
§ 3-4.3. Exception.
This section does not effect any junkyards licensed within the law governing
junkyards and dumps.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PET — Shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability
assistance animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Shall mean waste matter expelled from the
bowels of the pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Shall mean placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse
container which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other
refuse collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic
sewage for proper treatment and disposal.
c. Requirement for Disposal. All pet owners and keepers are required to
immediately and properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited
on any property, public or private, not owned or possessed by that
person.
d. Exemptions. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability
assistance animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section
while such animal is being used for that purpose.
e. Enforcement. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the
police department and the local board of health or Code enforcement of
the Borough of Pine Hill.
f. Violations and Penalty. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$100 for each occurrence.
§ 3-3.6 PINE HILL CODE § 3-4.4
AO:66
§ 3-4.4. Enforcement.
Any member of the borough police department, board of health, or its
officially designated agents, or the director of public safety shall be required
to enforce this section.
§ 3-4.5. Abatement Of Nuisance.
If in the discretion of the enforcing public officer the violator genuinely
intends to abate the condition existing on his premises that violates the
intent of this section, such officer may grant the violator an extension of 10
days in which to clean the premises so involved. This notice shall be given
in writing, setting forth the termination date.
§ 3-5. SUNDAY LEGALIZED GAMES OF CHANCE.
Organizations and associations duly licensed to hold and operate legalized
games of chance under the provisions of R.S. 5:8-24 et seq. and R.S. 5:8-50
et seq. are hereby authorized pursuant to R.S. 5:8-58 to hold, conduct and
operate legalized games of chance in the borough on Sundays between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.
§ 3-6. DESTRUCTION OF BOROUGH PROPERTY.
No person shall damage, mutilate or destroy any real or personal property
owned by the borough.
§ 3-7. PARKING OF TRAILERS OR CAMP CARS.
§ 3-7.1. Definition.
TRAILER OR CAMP CAR — Shall mean any vehicle, whether self propelled
or otherwise to be used as a conveyance upon public streets or highways,
and so designed, constructed or reconstructed or added to by means of
accessories in such a manner to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling
or sleeping place for one or more persons and having no foundation other
than wheels, jacks, or skirting so arranged to be integral with or portable
by the trailer or camp car.
§ 3-7.2. Parking. [Ord. #30, S2]
It is unlawful for any person to park any trailer or camp car on any street,
road or highway in the borough in violation of any ordinance of the borough
regulating the parking of vehicles for any period longer than two hours.
§ 3-7.3. Trailer Parks. [Ord. #30, S3]
Trailer parks, tourist camps, camp parks and trailer camps are hereby
prohibited within the limits of the borough.
§ 3-8. PENALTY.
§ 3-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-8.1
AO:67
§ 3-8.1. Maximum Penalty. [New]
For violation of any provision of this chapter, any other chapter of this
revision, or any other ordinance of the borough where no specific penalty
is provided regarding the section violated, the maximum penalty, upon
conviction, shall be a fine not exceeding $1,000, or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 90 days, or both. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 3-8.2. Separate Violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided every day in which a violation of any provision
of this chapter or any other ordinance of the borough exists shall constitute
a separate violation.
§ 3-8.3. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for every violation. Any lesser penalty, including a
nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular
case or violation.
§ 3-8.4. Minimum Penalty. [New]
The borough council may prescribe that, for the violation of any particular
Code provision or ordinance, at least a minimum penalty shall be imposed
which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not exceeding
$100. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 3-9. TOWING AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES.
Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance Nos. 86-423 and
2012-883.
§ 3-9.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2012-886]
The towing and storage of motor vehicles, damaged, stolen, or impounded,
within the Borough of Pine Hill shall be performed by towing operators
qualified and licensed pursuant to the provisions set forth below on a
rotating basis without competitive bid.
§ 3-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2012-886; Ord. #892; Ord. No.
2015-926]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMOBILE — Shall mean a private-passenger automobile of a private
passenger or station wagon type that is owned or hired and is neither used
as a public or livery conveyance for passengers nor rented to others with a
driver; and a motor vehicle with a pickup body, or delivery sedan, a van; or a
panel truck or a camper-type vehicle used for recreational purposes owned
by an individual or by husband and wife who are residents of the same
§ 3-8.1 PINE HILL CODE § 3-9.2
AO:68
household, not customarily used in the occupation, profession or business
of the owner other than farming or ranching. An automobile owned by a
farm family copartnership or corporation, which is principally garaged on a
farm or ranch and otherwise meets the definitions contained in this section,
shall be considered a private-passenger automobile owned by two or more
relatives resident in the same household.
BASE OF SERVICE — Shall mean the towing operator's principal place of
business where the tow vehicle is stationed when not in use.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — Shall mean the removal and transportation of
an automobile from a highway, street, or other public or private road, or a
parking area, or from a storage facility, and other services normally incident
thereto, but does not include recovery of an automobile from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon any other
object within the right-of-way or berm.
GEOGRAPHIC CENTER OF PINE HILL — For the purpose of this section,
the geographic center of Pine Hill shall be __________. All measurements
taken from that location shall be by radius and without regard to the actual
roadways.13
INSIDE SECURED — Shall mean a vehicle storage facility that is completely
indoors, having one or more openings in the walls for storage and removal
of vehicles and that is secured by a locking device on each opening.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks
and motorized bicycles.
MOTOR VEHICLE ACCIDENT — Shall mean an occurrence in which a
motor vehicle or automobile, as defined herein, is damaged or comes in
contact with any other object, as a result of which the motor vehicle or
automobile must be towed or removed for placement in a storage facility.
This includes damage caused by vandalism, fire, or drunken drivers, but
does not include mechanical breakdowns or impounded vehicles.
OUTSIDE SECURED — Shall mean an area not indoors secured by a fence,
wall or barrier at least six feet high and continuously lighted at night,
with all gates, doors or entryways secured by locks and all of which shall
be within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Borough of Pine Hill Police
Department or a contiguous adjoining municipality.
OUTSIDE UNSECURED — Shall mean an area not indoors that is not
secured by a fence, wall or other barrier and to include all other areas not
defined as an inside building and outside secured facility and all of which
shall be within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Borough of Pine Hill
Police Department or a contiguous adjoining municipality.
STORAGE CHARGES PER TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR PERIOD — Shall mean
starts at 12:01 a.m. for a twenty-four-hour period or fraction thereof.
13.Editor's Note: The geographic center shall be determined by the Borough Council.
§ 3-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-9.2
AO:69
TOW VEHICLE — Shall mean those vehicles equipped with a boom or
booms, winches, slings, tilt beds, wheel lifts, or under-reach equipment
specifically designed by its manufacturer for the removal or transport of
private-passenger automobiles.
§ 3-9.3. Rotating Call List. [Ord. #2012-886; Ord. #892]
Towing operators performing towing services for the Borough of Pine Hill
shall perform on a rotating basis. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized
and directed to establish a tow truck call list of towing operators licensed
pursuant to this section and to establish a system of rotation in the
assignment of tow trucks. Towing operators shall be assigned duties from
the tow truck call list only. No licensed towing operator or other party shall
respond to the scene of an accident except upon notification by the officer
in charge or upon request of the driver or owner of the disabled vehicle. The
towing operator shall respond to each call with the equipment requested by
the police or dispatcher. All towing operators must be available for service
on a twenty-four-hour, seven-day per week basis when on the rotation list.
§ 3-9.4. License Required for Towing Operators; Duration; License
Fee. [Ord. #2012-886; Ord. #892; Ord. No. 2015-926]
a. In order for a towing operator to be listed on the tow truck call list, a
license is required pursuant to the provisions set forth below. Each
license issued hereunder shall terminate on December 31 of the year in
which it is issued, and each renewal license shall be for the one-year
period of January 1 through December 31.
b. Specifically exempted from the licensing requirement is the towing,
transporting, conveying or removing motor vehicles from private
property by towing operators who have been privately engaged or
designated by the owner of the vehicle to be so removed.
c. All applicants for licenses shall pay the sum of $300 at the time the
application is filed to cover the cost of the investigation and review of
the applications for compliance with the section requirements. All
applications shall be filed between October 1 and November 1, unless
November 1 falls on a Saturday or Sunday, then the applications will be
accepted on the following Monday. No application will be accepted
before or after these dates. All applications will be date and time
stamped when received and processed in the order received.
d. No more than three towing/storage licenses shall be issued at any time
or for any interval of time by the Borough of Pine Hill.
e. Any application filed after the first three date and time stamped
applications will not be processed unless any of the initial three
applications is denied. In such an event, the next date and time stamped
application(s) will be reviewed. Any applicant whose application is not
investigated and reviewed for approval will have the $300 application
fee refunded.
§ 3-9.2 PINE HILL CODE § 3-9.5
AO:70
§ 3-9.5. Application for License. [Ord. #2012-886; Ord. No.
2015-926]
Licenses hereunder shall be approved by the governing body of the Borough
of Pine Hill and issued by the borough Clerk. The application therefor shall
contain the following information:.
a. The full name and address of the applicant and, if such applicant is a
corporation, the names and addresses of the officers and directors
thereof, and the registered office and registered agent thereof; or, if
such applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all
partners. In addition, provide proof that the applicant's business is
within five miles of the geographic center of the Borough of Pine Hill.
(See definitions for Geographic Center).
b. The year, make, model and serial number, registration number, and
owner of each tow vehicle which is to be used by the applicant in
responding to calls from the borough police department requesting the
towing and storage of disabled motor vehicles.
c. The tow vehicle's base of service for each tow vehicle to be used by the
licensed operator.
d. The location to which the applicant will tow, transport, convey or
remove, and thereafter store, any motor vehicle towed, transported,
conveyed or removed by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
e. The specific area at the location referred to above that the applicant has
available for properly storing and protecting disabled motor vehicles.
The applicant shall attach to his application a diagram of its property
showing the secured area (inside or outside secured) intended for the
storage and protection of vehicles removed from the roadway.
f. The place and location where the applicant will maintain an office at
which any person whose vehicle has been towed, transported, conveyed
or removed may obtain information relative thereto, attend to the
payment of any money to be paid in connection therewith and arrange
for any further removal or possession of such vehicle.
g. A statement that the applicant has sufficient personnel and equipment
to provide twenty-four-hour towing and storage services and is able to
respond to police calls in accordance with the requirements of this
section.
h. A certification that the fees charged will not exceed those set forth in
this chapter.
i. The name of the insurance company and its address and policy number
showing the limits of coverage required by this chapter, along with a
certification that the Borough of Pine Hill will be added as an additional
insured under the liability provisions of said policy.
§ 3-9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-9.5
AO:71
§ 3-9.6. Investigation and Licensing Authority.
§ 3-9.7. Licensing Standards.
No license shall be issued unless all of the following standards are met:
j. A representation that the applicant will execute an indemnification and
hold harmless agreement with the Borough of Pine Hill.
k. A listing of the applicant's prior towing experience, including the years
in business and other municipalities served.
l. Such other information as deemed appropriate by the governing body
of the Borough of Pine Hill.
a. Application forms may be obtained from the borough Clerk and all
completed applications together with the licensing fee shall be
submitted to the borough Clerk.
b. All applications shall be investigated and evaluated by the borough
Police Chief or his designee regarding the applicant's background and
qualifications and a report of the Police Chief's findings and
recommendations shall be submitted to the governing body within 30
days of the receipt of said application. All applicants shall execute a
release for information to be obtained by the Police Chief to complete
the investigation and evaluation.
c. All applications are subject to review and approval by the governing
body of the Borough of Pine Hill. Only those applicants which are
responsible and qualified pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
be approved. All approved applicants shall be required to execute a
contract with the Borough of Pine Hill to provide the towing and
storage services referred to herein.
d. Storage areas for vehicles towed under the direction of Borough of Pine
Hill Police Department, being in the jurisdiction of the Borough of Pine
Hill Police boundaries or a contiguous and adjoining municipality, shall
be made continuously accessible to police officers of the Borough of
Pine Hill Police Department for the purpose of investigation, which may
include but not be limited to, searches, photographs, fingerprint
dusting, and/or collection of other evidence. During impoundment of
vehicles, no towing/storage licensee shall allow access to said vehicle
without the express permission of the Borough of Pine Hill Police
Department in which jurisdiction said vehicle is impounded and
remains so until properly released.
e. Any holder of a towing/storage permit from the Borough of Pine Hill
which is dated on or before January 1, 2012 shall be exempt from the
immediate effect of this amending ordinance until July 1, 2012, after
which time all permit holders shall be subject to all requirements,
including this section amendment and all subsequent amendments.
§ 3-9.5 PINE HILL CODE § 3-9.7
AO:72
a. Equipment Requirement. No license shall be issued to a towing
operator who does not possess, for utilization in this business, the
following tow vehicles and equipment, which tow vehicles and
equipment shall be inspected by the Chief of Police or his authorized
representative prior to a license being issued:
1. At least one four-ton tow vehicle with a boom and drum rating of
four tons; a 100-foot long 3/8 inch diameter cable with a
recommended working limit of at least 3,500 pounds;
recommended gross vehicle weight of truck or chassis of 10,000
pounds; and dual rear wheels maintained and equipped in
accordance with manufacturer's specifications.
2. At least one 16 ton tow vehicle with two booms and two drums, with
each boom having an eight ton capacity, and each drum having an
eight ton capacity, and each drum having a 200-foot long 1/2 inch
cable; recommended gross vehicle weight of truck or chassis of
16,000 pounds; dual rear wheels; heavy-duty truck tow bar air
brakes; connecting air lines for connection with air compressor and
air brake lines of the towed vehicle; two speed rear axle and
differential or dual transmission or five speed transmission; two
heavy-duty high-test pickup chains; and heavy-duty truck sling and
tow bar. In lieu of having this piece of equipment in its possession,
the licensee shall supply the borough Clerk with an agreement in
writing between the licensee and any other entity, or corporation or
person who possesses this specific equipment that he or it will
provide services to the licensee pursuant to the provisions of this
section for the term of the license. This agreement shall provide
that the response time shall be in accordance with the provisions of
this section and that the licensee shall assume all responsibility for
compliance with the provisions of this section. The licensee shall
make provision for the equipment to be available for inspection at
his place of business at the time and place requested by the Chief of
Police or his authorized representative prior to the issuance of the
license. If said agreement shall be canceled for any reason, the
licensee must notify the Borough of Pine Hill within 24 hours.
3. At least one flatbed or car carrier with at least a one car capacity;
wheel chokes; and four tie-down chains or grab hooks.
4. At least one vehicle equipped with tie-down equipment for carrying
motorcycles.
5. Safety equipment to be carried on all trucks shall include universal
towing sling; tow hooks and chains; one snatch block for 3/8 to 1/2
inch cable; two high-test safety chains; four lamp or three lamp
revolving amber emergency light with New Jersey State Permit; a
tool box with assortment of hand tools; rear working lights and rear
marker lights; cab lights; body clearing lights located to clear the
towed vehicle; a block choke for the tow vehicle while working;
§ 3-9.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-9.7
AO:73
safety cones; a shovel and broom; and a steering wheel lock or tiedown.
6. In lieu of having the required equipment in the applicant's
possession, the licensee shall supply the borough Clerk with an
agreement in writing between the licensee and any other entity, or
corporation or person who possesses this specific equipment that
he or it will provide services to the licensee pursuant to the
provisions of this section for the term of the license. This
agreement shall provide that the response time shall be in
accordance with the provisions of this section and that the licensee
shall assume all responsibility for compliance with the provisions of
this section. The licensee shall make provisions for the equipment
to be available for inspection at his place of business at the time
and place requested by the Chief of Police or his authorized
representative prior to the issuance of the license. If said
agreement shall be canceled for any reason, the licensee must
notify the Borough of Pine Hill within 24 hours.
b. The tow vehicle's base of service, the towing operator's place of
business, the proposed storage areas, and any other premises to be
utilized by the towing operator as set forth in the license application
shall comply with all provisions of the zoning ordinance, property
maintenance code, and all other applicable laws of the Borough of Pine
Hill, or the municipality wherein the property is located, pertaining to
the use or condition of said premises.
c. Each towing operator shall have the ability to store all motor vehicles
within an inside secured or outside secured area. The enclosure shall be
in good repair and well-maintained, and must be continuously lighted
from dusk to dawn. No vehicles shall be stored in an outside unsecured
area. Each storage area shall be subject to inspection and approval by
the Chief of Police or his designee prior to a license being issued.
d. The secured storage area must be available 24 hours a day, 365 days
per year and open to the public on weekdays during normal business
hours and limited hours to be approved by the governing body of the
Borough of Pine Hill on Saturdays and Sundays. This storage area must
be located within the Borough of Pine Hill or a contiguous adjoining
municipality and the towing operator's place of business shall be
located within the Borough of Pine Hill or a contiguous adjoining
municipality.
e. All towing operators shall maintain and produce proof of the following
insurance coverage, with the Borough of Pine Hill named as an
additional insured, with the application when submitted to the borough
Clerk:
1. Automobile liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit.
§ 3-9.7 PINE HILL CODE § 3-9.7
AO:74
§ 3-9.8. Rules and Regulations.
2. Comprehensive liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit.
3. Garage keepers' liability in an amount not less than $75,000, both
on hook and for each storage location.
4. Garage liability in an amount not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit.
5. The policies shall be endorsed to provide collision coverage for
vehicles in tow.
f. In order to provide the public with prompt and adequate tow truck
service, the licensee must respond within 30 minutes after being
summoned.
g. Operators and their employees shall be fully trained and knowledgeable
in the operation of all required equipment and shall be subject to
background investigations by the Borough of Pine Hill Police
Department.
h. All billings for towing and storage services shall be itemized for the
services actually rendered pursuant to the fee schedules set forth
herein. A copy of the fee schedule set forth in this section shall be
available to the public at the towing operator's place of business during
normal business hours.
i. Agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the Borough of Pine Hill
for any and all suits, judgments, costs, expenses, including attorney's
fees and claims on account of breach of contract, damaged property, or
personal injuries, including death, arising out of or in any way
connected with the towing and storage services to be provided.
j. Repealed.
a. The governing body hereby designates the police department generally
and the Chief of Police in particular as the supervising authority to
enforce the provisions of this section as well as the rules and
regulations adopted hereunder.
b. Each licensed towing operator shall at all times maintain the necessary
equipment to remove disabled vehicles as required by this section.
Each towing operator, prior to departure from the scene of towing
services, shall clean and clear the streets of any customary debris
resulting from any motor vehicle accident at such scene and shall at all
times carry the necessary equipment to perform said cleaning services.
c. Refusal to tow an abandoned or stolen motor vehicle or at the scene of a
motor vehicle accident may result in the disqualification of any towing
operator, and a report of said refusal shall be furnished to the Chief of
§ 3-9.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-9.8
AO:75
Police and the borough Clerk by the investigating officer at the scene of
the accident, as soon as possible.
d. If the licensee summoned is unable to respond within the time
constraints specified in this section, he shall so notify the individual
requesting the service, and the next-named towing operator on the tow
truck call list shall be called to respond.
e. No towing operator operating pursuant to the license issued hereunder
shall employ, either directly or indirectly, any personnel or employees of
the Borough of Pine Hill.
f. The Borough of Pine Hill Police Department shall maintain a log record
of calls to licensed towing operators and said record shall be available
for inspection by any licensed tow operator upon reasonable notice.
g. An individual whose motor vehicle has been towed and/or stored has
the right to retrieve any of his or her personal possessions therefrom,
even when said motor vehicle is within the possession of the towing
operator. Personal property shall be defined to mean anything that is
not permanently attached to the motor vehicle so as to be an integral
part thereof. An individual seeking the retrieval of any personal items
shall arrange with the towing operator to obtain said items and shall be
required to execute a receipt therefor. The towing operator shall
maintain copies of all said receipts.
h. The Borough of Pine Hill reserves the right to review the qualifications
of any personnel employed by the towing operator at any time.
i. The towing operator and any of its employees are independent
contractors and they do not represent nor are they employed by the
Borough of Pine Hill.
j. The towing operator shall at all times be responsible for the conduct of
its employees and shall be liable to the Borough of Pine Hill and the
owners of any motor vehicles towed or stored by the towing operator
for any injuries, damages or costs incurred as a result of the conduct of
said employees.
k. All towing operators shall comply with all state and federal laws and
regulations concerning the hiring of employees, their wages, hours and
terms of employment.
l. The Borough of Pine Hill is not liable for any of the services performed
by the contractor unless those services are performed for municipal
vehicles. The contractor shall proceed directly against the individual
owner of the motor vehicle for all fees and charges incurred.
m. No licensed towing operator shall pile or store vehicles on public
streets or sidewalks.
n. Each towing operator shall maintain a record of all vehicles towed,
including the date towed, where the vehicle was stored, when the
§ 3-9.8 PINE HILL CODE § 3-9.8
AO:76
§ 3-9.9. Towing and Storage Fees.
vehicle was released, and the fees charged, together with any and
all other services rendered. Said records shall be maintained at the
principal place of business of the towing operator as set forth on the
application and said records shall be maintained for a minimum three
years.
a. The fees for basic towing services, road service and/or storage shall not
exceed the following fee schedule:
Basic Towing Service:
Monday thru Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. $90
Monday thru Friday 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 108
Saturday, Sunday and Holidays Mileage $3 per
mile (from portal to portal)
$108
Winching minimum charge $50
Motorcycles $115
Road service, plus supplies: Day $65
Night $90
Clean-up fees, plus supplies and with
documentation
$30
Lot removal fee $35
Storage fee: Per day $25
Inside storage $40
Waiting time when other than non-basic towing charges are provided
1 man and truck
First half-hour is free, the second half-hour and each hour thereafter
will be $75
Additional costs for extra truck and manpower to
help with towing service minimum charge, with
documentation
$75
Gate fee after hours $35
Administrative fee $20
Yard hours:
Monday thru Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Saturday 8:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m.
Sunday and Holidays Closed
§ 3-9.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-9.9
AO:77
Each tow company will sign a letter that will designate a heavy-duty
tow company that they will work with for heavy-duty tow.
b. Notwithstanding any fee set forth in subsection 3-9.9 above, when a
vehicle is abandoned due to the death or incapacitation of the driver or
any passenger, a storage fee of no more than $100 shall be charged for
the first 72 hours after the vehicle is placed on the premises.
c. A licensed towing operator may petition the governing body of the
Borough of Pine Hill for permission to charge fees other than as set
forth herein for the towing and storing of motor vehicles other than
automobiles as defined above. Said fees must be approved by resolution
of the governing body, shall be valid for a minimum period of one year
or until modified by the governing body, and must be on file with the
borough Clerk and at the principal place of business of the towing
operator and available to the public during normal business hours.
d. Towing operators may charge additional fees for nonbasic towing
services involving the recovery of an automobile from a position beyond
the right-of-way or berm, or from being impaled upon any object within
the right-of-way or berm. A schedule of said additional fees shall be
attached to the license application and shall be subject to approval by
the governing body.
e. Storage charges per twenty-four-hour period shall start at 12:01 a.m.
for a twenty-four-hour period or fraction thereof. No storage charge
shall be imposed for any day the yard is closed, such as Sundays or
holidays.
f. Towing rates shall be calculated based on the total distance traveled
from the towing operator vehicle's base of service to the motor vehicle
to be towed and to the storage area by way of the shortest route
available. Fractions shall be rounded up to the nearest whole mile.
There shall be no additional charges to the vehicle owner when picking
up or removing a vehicle from the storage area, or for flatbedding,
waiting time, winching, cleanup costs, and additional labor.
g. The borough Clerk and each licensed towing operator shall have
available at the municipal building and the principal place of business
of the towing operator a copy of the fee schedule guidelines and shall
make same available to the public during normal business hours.
h. Every tow operator shall give the owner of the vehicle a written receipt
for the fee paid.
i. Every operator or owner of a wrecker shall comply with any request of
the owner of a towed vehicle, including but not limited to the towing of
the vehicle to another location within the Borough of Pine Hill
designated by the driver, owner or police officer and the payment of
fees, provided that the request does not conflict with any order or
§ 3-9.9 PINE HILL CODE § 3-9.9
AO:78
§ 3-9.10. Denial, Revocation or Suspension of License.
A license may be denied, suspended or revoked upon any of the following
grounds after an appropriate hearing in accordance with the terms of this
section:
§ 3-9.11. Hearings.
investigation from any member of the police department acting in his
official capacity.
j. The owner of said automobile which has been towed pursuant to this
section shall be permitted to recover items of personal property in the
vehicle at the time it was towed. However, said owner shall not be
permitted to remove from the vehicle any integral part of the vehicle
whether attached to the vehicle or not, including but not limited to
batteries, tires and license plates.
k. A flat $50 fee shall be charged the borough for towing, storage or other
services provided to the borough, its vehicles or emergency fire and
rescue vehicles or for any vehicle used in the commission of a crime,
provided that said vehicle is located within the Borough of Pine Hill.
a. Submitting a fraudulent or misleading application.
b. A criminal conviction of the towing operator or a named principal of the
towing operator.
c. Failure to respond reliably and promptly to calls for assistance or any
other action which interferes with the proper operation of the rotating
system maintained by the police department.
d. Violations of motor vehicles laws and/or borough ordinances.
e. Failure or refusal to tow or remove a motor vehicle when requested to
do so by an appropriate borough official.
f. Violations of the zoning ordinance, property maintenance code, or any
other applicable ordinances or codes of the Borough of Pine Hill
pertaining to the use or condition of the premises used by the licensee
in conducting the towing business.
g. Violation of the provision of this ordinance or any of its rules or
regulations established pursuant to this section.
a. Proceedings for the suspension or revocation of a license shall be
initiated by the service of a notice of charges filed against the licensee.
Said notice shall be served by the Chief of Police or his designee, either
personally or via certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall
contain a date, time and place for a hearing to be held by the governing
body of the Borough of Pine Hill. Said hearing shall be scheduled no
less than seven days, nor more than 30 days, after the notice of the
proposed suspension or revocation shall be served upon the licensee.
§ 3-9.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-9.11
AO:79
§ 3-9.12. Violations and Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject-to a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or
both. These penalties shall be in addition to and separate from any action
taken by the Borough of Pine Hill pursuant to subsection 3-9.10 hereof.
§ 3-10. LOITERING.
§ 3-10.1. Definitions.
As used in this section:
§ 3-10.2. Prohibition.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
The licensee shall have the right to file an answer to the notice and
to appear in person, or be represented by counsel, and give testimony
under oath at the place and time fixed for the hearing.
b. When an application for a license is denied by the Borough of Pine Hill,
the applicant may request a hearing on said application by the service
of a notice requesting a hearing. Said notice shall be served on the
borough Clerk and at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
governing body a hearing date shall be set which shall be no less than
seven days, nor more than 30 days, from the date scheduled.
a. LOITERING - Shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location, and
shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking
about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression
"hanging around."
b. PUBLIC PLACE - Shall mean a place to which the general public has a
right to resort, either by reason of public ownership or by express or
implied invitation to the general public by private ownership, including,
but not limited to, sidewalks and streets open to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, and the parking spaces, outside areas and ways of ingress and
egress to and from the same.
a. Create or cause to be created a danger or a breach of the peace.
b. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
c. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
d. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in subsection 3-10.1. This subsection shall include the
making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive disgusting or insulting
§ 3-9.11 PINE HILL CODE § 3-10.2
AO:80
§ 3-10.3. Discretion Of Police Officer.
Whenever any police officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in subsection 3-10.2, he
may, if he deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and
safety, order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse
to leave after being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
§ 3-10.4. Duty Of Parents.
It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care or custody of any minor under the age of 18 years to knowingly
permit such minor to remain idle or loiter in violation of subsection 3-10.2.
§ 3-10.5. Notice To Parents.
Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is arrested for violating this
section, the Chief of Police shall notify the parent, guardian or other person
having custody of such minor of such arrest.
§ 3-10.6. Presumption Of Knowledge.
If it is established that any minor under the age of 18 years remained idle
or loitered in violation of subsection 3-10.2 between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m. of the following day, then it shall be presumed, in the absence
of proof to the contrary, that the parent, guardian or other adult person
having the care or custody of such minor knowingly permitted such minor
to do so.
§ 3-10.7. Further Presumption.
If it is established that the parent, guardian or other adult person having
the care or custody of any minor under the age of 18 years was duly notified
pursuant to subsection 3-10.5 that such minor had been arrested for a
violation of subsection 3-10.3, and it is further established that such minor
subsequently remained idle or loitered in violation of this section, then it
shall be presumed, in the absence of proof to the contrary, that such parent,
guardian or adult person knowingly permitted this violation.
§ 3-11. DISORDERLY PERSONS.
§ 3-11.1. Prohibited Acts And Conduct.
No person shall, within the limits or bordering the limits of the borough:
nature, or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to whom
or in whose hearing they are made.
§ 3-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-11.1
AO:81
a. Be intoxicated, drunk or disorderly in or about any public omnibus or
conveyance, street, thoroughfare, sidewalks or in or about any store,
private house, home, commercial establishment, restaurant or other
public, private or quasi-public place or house to the annoyance or
discomfort of any person.
b. Behave in a disorderly manner or loiter on any sidewalk, street, or
public place or in any store, place of amusement, school or any other
public building.
c. Utter any loud and offensive or indecent language or make offensive
remarks to any person or persons while being upon or about any
sidewalk, street, or other public or private place or obstruct or interfere
with any person lawfully being upon them.
d. Keep or harbor any dog, other animal or fowl which shall disturb the
neighborhood by excessive barking, whining, howling or other noise.
e. Throw, discard or discharge any papers, posters, glass, metal, paint,
stones, sticks, tin cans, garbage, debris, junk or refuse of any kind or
any hard, dangerous or offensive substance upon any sidewalk, street,
or public or private place, or at any vehicle, building, house, fence or
person or in any spring, stream, body of water or private or public
water supply.
f. Appear on any street, highway, sidewalk, drinking and eating
establishment, or other public place in a state of nudity, in a bathing
suit or make any indecent exposure of his or her person. Persons
dressed in customary bathing suits at bathing beaches are hereby
excepted.
g. Disrobe in any automobile, truck or vehicle while the same is upon any
parking place, street, park or other public place.
h. Commit or do any lewd or indecent act or behavior in a lewd or indecent
manner.
i. Sell or offer to sell any indecent picture, book, literature or article or
exhibit, perform or render any indecent, immoral or lewd play, song,
motion picture or other representation.
j. Make, permit, continue or cause any noise which shall disturb the
comfort, rest and repose of any persons being in his or her place of
abode or at any private or public meeting or church services except
during the normal working hours on normal working days. Make or
permit any unnecessary noise at any time which shall disturb the
neighborhood.
k. Operate or use any radio, phonograph, television or other soundproducing
equipment or device in such manner that the sound thereof
shall annoy any person or disturb their rest and comfort.
§ 3-11.1 PINE HILL CODE § 3-11.1
AO:82
l. Operate any sound truck without first obtaining permission from the
borough Clerk, Chief of Police or acting Chief of Police.
m. Intentionally or maliciously destroy, damage or injure any private or
public property.
n. Destroy, shut off, tap, alter, change, obstruct or to interfere in any way
with the borough water or sewer lines, meters or other devices
connected thereto on any public or private property.
o. Obstruct or hinder any elected or appointed officer or employee of the
borough in the discharge of his duties or refuse or neglect to assist such
person when lawfully called upon to do so.
p. Permit or cause to be emitted any vile, offensive, obnoxious or
nauseating odor or fumes which may be vile, offensive, nauseating or
detrimental to the general well-being of the health or property of any
resident of the borough.
q. Permit any child under the age of 16 years not accompanied by a parent
or guardian, to play a pinball machine in his establishment or place of
business.
r. Possess, keep, sell, distribute or transport any switchblade knives,
firecrackers or fireworks of an explosive nature unless a permit for such
shall have been obtained from the borough Clerk.
s. Have upon his person or in his possession any pick lock, bit, jack,
crowbar, key or other device or implement with any intent to break and
enter into any building.
t. Obstruct unnecessarily any sidewalk, street or public place with any
any kind of wood, lumber, crates, stone, dirt, vehicle or other thing.
u. Trespass or enter upon the land or property of any other person without
lawful permission to do so.
u.1. All delivery personnel, including letter carriers, whether employed by a
private firm or government agency or government supported
corporation shall use sidewalks and accepted and approved walkways
and shall refrain from traversing lawns or other private property not
normally used as a walkway by the general public in order to effect
delivery.
v. Attempt, make aid, countenance or assist in making any improper
noise, riot, disturbance or breach of the peace in or upon any of the
streets, highways, sidewalks, public places or anywhere else in the
borough; or collect in bodies or crowds for idle or unlawful purposes to
the annoyance or disturbance of persons within the borough.
w. Invite, solicit or in any manner suggest by word, action, writing or other
communication or by the use of any medium whatever any lewd,
lascivious or immoral act.
§ 3-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-11.1
AO:83
§ 3-12. LITTERING.
§ 3-12.1. Definitions.
As used in this section:
x. Keep or maintain disorderly house or a house of ill fame or allow or
permit any house, shop, store, building or other structure owned,
leased or occupied by him or her to be used as a disorderly house or
house of ill fame.
y. Permit any house, shop, store, building or other structure occupied by
him or her to be frequented or resorted to by noisy, rioutous or
disorderly persons, prostitutes, gamblers, or vagrants.
z. Prevent, hinder or deter in any manner or by any device whatever any
emergency vehicle, fireman or other person from rendering lawful
assistance in abating or quelling a fire or hinder or interfere with any
fireman going to or returning from any fire or place from which a fire
alarm proceeds.
aa. Contribute to the delinquency of any minor by any word, act, writing, or
other communication or by the use of any device or thing whatsoever.
bb. Sell, barter, give or distribute any ammunition of an explosive nature
for firearms or any pistol, rifle, shotgun, or firearm of any description or
kind to any person or child under the age of 21 years.
cc. Discharge, fire or cause to be fired or discharged any pistol, rifle,
shotgun or firearm of any kind within the limits of the borough, unless a
permit for such shall have been obtained from the police department.
dd. Willfully or maliciously take or steal, or attempt to take or steal any
money, goods, or chattels from the person of another whether with or
without his knowledge, or who is present aiding and abetting therein,
or to carry away or unlawfully appropriate with intent to steal any real
or personal property of another or any part thereof.
ee. No person or persons under the age of 21 years shall have, hold,
possess, use, consume or store alcoholic beverages of every kind and
description in his or their motor vehicle. The term "motor vehicle" as
applied herein shall mean any motor vehicle which shall be either
owned or under the control of the person.
ff. Any and all other disorderly, indecent and riotous acts or breach of the
peace or vagrancy not specifically enumerated above are hereby
prohibited.
a. LITTER - Shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein,
and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein
prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and
welfare.
§ 3-11.1 PINE HILL CODE § 3-12.1
AO:84
§ 3-12.2. Prohibitions.
No person shall sweep, throw, deposit or dump litter in or on any property
whether occupied, open or vacant and whether owned by that person, or
in a public place or pond, lake or stream or other body of water within the
borough, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles
for collection.
§ 3-12.3. Placing In Receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in a manner which prevents the litter from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon a public place or upon private
property.
§ 3-12.4. Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited.
No person, including merchants owning or occupying a place of business,
shall sweep into or deposit in a gutter, road, right-of-way or other public
place within the borough the accumulation of litter from the building or
lot or from a public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 3-12.5. Litter Thrown By Persons In Vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter in or upon any public or private property.
b. GARBAGE - Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of
food.
c. REFUSE - Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste
(except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and
industrial waste.
d. RUBBISH - Shall mean nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
e. VEHICLE - Shall mean any device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including
devices used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
f. PUBLIC PLACE - Shall mean all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys,
beaches or other public ways, and all public parks, squares, spaces,
docks, grounds and buildings.
§ 3-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-12.6
AO:85
§ 3-12.6. Transportation From Outside Borough.
No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside the borough and bring it into the borough for the purpose of
dumping or disposing thereof. No truck or other vehicle containing litter
which has been transported into the borough shall be parked or allowed
to remain standing on any street in the borough or on any public street,
sidewalk, building or vehicle within the borough.
§ 3-12.7. Handbills.
Advertisements, handbills, circulars and papers may be distributed in the
borough only if they are so securely placed at each dwelling that they
will not be blown away by the wind; otherwise no person shall place any
advertisement, handbill, circular or paper on or in any public street,
sidewalk, building or vehicle within the borough.
§ 3-13. CONSUMPTION AND POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES.
§ 3-13.1. Prohibitions.
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages and no person shall possess
unsealed containers of alcoholic beverages:
§ 3-13.2. Definition.
For purposes of this section alcoholic beverage shall be defined as any
fluid or solid capable of being converted into a fluid, suitable for human
consumption and having an alcoholic content of more than 0.5% by volume,
including beer, ale, still and sparkling wines, distilled liquors, blended
liquors, fermented fruit juices, or any brewed, fermented or distilled liquors
fit for use for human consumption, or any mixture of the same. For purposes
of this section, it shall be presumed that any container labeled as containing
an alcoholic beverage contains said beverage with the amount of alcohol, by
volume, marked on the label, without the necessity of chemically analyzing
the contents.
§ 3-13.3. Presumption.
For purposes of this section, a person shall be presumed to possess an
alcoholic beverage if such a beverage is within the custody or under the
a. While in or on a public street, lane, sidewalk, public or quasi-public
place or in any public conveyance; or
b. In a private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or parked in any
public street, lane, or public parking lot; or
c. While upon any private property not his own without the express
permission of the owner or other person having authority to grant such
permission.
§ 3-12.6 PINE HILL CODE § 3-13.3
AO:86
control of such person. Possession need not be exclusive but may be
exercised jointly or severally.
§ 3-13.4. Special Permit.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession or
consumption of alcoholic beverages pursuant to a special permit issued by
the council of the borough when the person possessing or consuming an
alcoholic beverage is doing so in accordance with the terms and conditions
of said permit and at the location authorized by said permit.
§ 3-13.5. Non-Applicability.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit the consumption,
possession or sale of alcoholic beverages on premises which are duly
licensed, pursuant to a retail consumption, retail distribution, retail transit,
wholesale or club license issued by the governing body of the Borough of
Pine Hill or by the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 3-13.6. Posting of Sign.
Upon adoption of this section, the holders of all liquor licenses issued by the
Borough of Pine Hill or by the State of New Jersey, with places of business
in the borough shall be required to post a sign, in a conspicuous place,
advising patrons, customers or other persons legally on the premises, of the
existence of this ordinance. Such sign shall be provided free of charge to
each licensee by the borough department of public safety.
§ 3-13.7. Violation and Penalty.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall for a first offense be fined not less than $100 and shall for a
second offense be fined not less than $200 and shall for a third subsequent
offense be subject to a fine of not less than $200 and not more than $500 or
to imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the
court.
§ 3-14. DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 3-14.1. Drug-Free School Zone Map Adopted.
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, C. 44
(C.2C:35-7), the drug-free school zone map produced on or about May 26,
1998 by Remington and Vernick. Engineers, municipal engineer, is hereby
approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the location and
areas within the municipality of property which is used for school purposes
and which is owned by or leased to an elementary or secondary school
or school board, and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet of such school
property.
§ 3-13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-14.1A
AO:87
§ 3-14.1A. Driving While Under the Influence Map.
A map produced by Charles J. Riebel. Jr., professional engineer and land
surveyor, dated May 10, 2000, "Driving While Under the Influence Map", is
hereby in addition to any other approved map, approved and adopted as an
official finding and record of the location and areas within the municipality
as stated in Chapter 3-14 of the General Code of the Borough of Pine Hill, in
accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, c. 44 (C.2C:35-7).
§ 3-14.2. Location And Boundaries Of School Property.
The drug-free school zone map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-14.1 of this section shall continue to constitute an official
finding and record as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within
1,000 feet of property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board which is used for school purposes until such time if
any that this section shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions
with respect to the location and boundaries or school property and drugfree
school zones.
§ 3-14.3. Notification Of Changes In Location And Boundaries.
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the municipal engineer and the municipal
attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 3-14.4. Copy Of Map On File.
The Clerk of the municipality is hereby directed to receive and to keep on
file the original of the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection
3-14.1 of this section, and to provide at a reasonable cost a true copy thereof
to any person, agency or court which may from time to time request such
a copy, along with a certification that such copy is a true copy of the map
approved and adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed
that a true copy of such map and of this section shall be provided without
cost to the County Clerk and to the office of the Camden County Prosecutor.
§ 3-14.5. Map To Be Used As Evidence.
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-14.1 of this section was prepared and is intended to be
used as evidence in prosecution arising under the criminal laws of this
State, and that pursuant to State law, such map shall constitute prima
facie evidence of the following:
§ 3-14.1A PINE HILL CODE § 3-14.5
AO:88
§ 3-15. USE OF UNAUTHORIZED MOTOR AND MOTORIZED
VEHICLES ON BOROUGH OWNED PROPERTY.
§ 3-15.1. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to use, operate, park,
locate, or permit the use, operation and/or parking of any motor vehicle
upon any public playground, open spaces, ballfield, or publicly-owned
recreation area located within the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 3-15.2. Definition.
As used in this section the term "motor vehicle" shall include, but shall not
be limited to, cars, trucks, all-terrain vehicles, mopeds, and/or any other
type of motorized or motorpowered vehicle.
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
b. (Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map.) All of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by (or leased to) a school
or school board and was being used for school purposes as of July 9,
1987, that being the effective date of L. 1987, C. 101 (C.2C:35-7).
c. Pursuant to the provisions of L. 1988, C.44, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to subsection 3-14.1 of this section. The failure of the
map approved herein to depict the location and boundaries of any
property which is, in fact, used for school purposes and which is owned
or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board,
whether the absence of such depiction is the result of inadvertent
omission or the result of any changes in the location and boundaries of
such property which have not yet been incorporated into a revised
approved map, shall not be deemed to be an official finding and record
that such property is not owned by or leased to a school or school
board, or that such property is not used for school purposes.
d. All the requirements set forth in L. 1988, C. 44 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free school zone map have
been complied with.
§ 3-14.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-15.3
AO:89
§ 3-15.3. Violation And Penalty.
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment
for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
§ 3-15.4. Impoundment Of Vehicles.
In addition to the penalties prescribed in Section 3-15.3, the motor vehicle
of any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to
immediate seizure by officials of the Borough of Pine Hill. Such vehicles
shall be held by the Pine Hill Police Department until such time as the judge
of the municipal court determines the guilt or innocence of the underlying
violation. In the event of a finding of innocence, the motor vehicle shall
promptly be returned. In the event of a finding of guilt, the judge of the
municipal court may direct the return of the motor vehicle on such terms
and conditions as are deemed appropriate.
§ 3-16. SMOKING IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND ON PUBLIC
PROPERTY.
Prior history includes Ord. No. 94-565.
§ 3-16.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2018-961 § 2]
The Borough of Pine Hill finds and declares that the resolution of conflict
between the right of the smoker to smoke and the right of non-smoker
to breathe clean air involves a determination of when and where, rather
than whether, a smoker may legally smoke. It is not the Public Policy of
the Borough of Pine Hill to deny anyone the right to smoke. However,
the Borough of Pine Hill finds that, in Governmental Buildings owned or
leased by the Borough of Pine Hill and on all public property owned or
leased by the Borough of Pine Hill, the right of a non-smoker to breathe
clean air supersedes the right of the smoker to smoke. In addition to the
deleterious defects upon smokers, tobacco smoke is at least an annoyance
and a nuisance to a substantial percentage of the non-smoking public and a
substantial health hazard to a smaller segment of the non-smoking public.
Furthermore, smoking creates a substantial health hazard to the youth of
the Borough of Pine Hill who may be participating in activities in buildings
or properties owned or leased by the Borough of Pine Hill. Therefore, the
purpose of this chapter is to protect the interest of non-smokers in public
buildings and on public properties owned or leased by the Borough of Pine
Hill and to allow smokers the right to smoke only in designated areas
established by the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 3-16.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2018-961 § 3]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
§ 3-15.3 PINE HILL CODE § 3-16.2
AO:90
PUBLIC BUILDING — Shall mean any building or portion of a building
owned or leased by the Borough of Pine Hill.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Shall mean any real property, or portion thereof,
owned or leased by the Borough of Pine Hill, to include parking lots, parks,
playgrounds, and other recreational facilities.
SMOKING — Shall mean the burning of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe
or any other matter of substance which contains tobacco or a similar
substance.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Shall mean any cigarette, cigar, smokeless tobacco
to include snuff, chewing tobacco or any other substance that contains
tobacco.
§ 3-16.3. Smoking Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2018-961 § 4]
Smoking Prohibited. Smoking is prohibited in all public buildings owned
or leased by the Borough of Pine Hill and on all public property owned or
leased by the Borough of Pine Hill. In public buildings or public property
owned or leased by the Borough of Pine Hill, a designated smoking area
may be established, which shall be clearly identified, and is the only area
within a public building or on any public property where smoking is
permitted.
§ 3-16.4. Other Prohibited Acts. [Ord. No. 2018-961 § 5]
No officer, employee, agent or other person shall smoke in any vehicle
owned or registered in the name of the Borough of Pine Hill except when
that driver has no other person present. Smoking is also prohibited at any
time in any bus or similar type vehicle owned or operated by the Borough of
Pine Hill.
§ 3-16.5. Posting of Signs. [Ord. No. 2018-961 § 6]
All places affected by this section shall be identified by signs posted by
the Borough with letters at least one inch in height, stating "Smoking
Prohibited" or "Smoking Permitted" or the sign shall be designated by
the appropriate "Smoking Prohibited" or "Smoking Permitted" International
symbol. The letters or symbols shall contrast in color with the sign. The sign
shall also indicate that any person violating this section shall be subject to
a fine and that a person who smokes in a non-smoking area may be denied
continued access to that area or to the services offered by the Borough
until compliance with this section. Every sign required by this section shall
be located so as to be clearly visible to both the public and the Township
employees.
§ 3-16.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2018-961 § 7]
Any person violating the provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $50 for the first offense and not less
than $100 for each subsequent offense.
§ 3-16.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-17
AO:91
§ 3-17. UNLICENSED MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLES.
§ 3-17.1. Operation of Unlicensed Motor-Driven Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any unlicensed motor-driven
or motorized vehicle, as defined herein, within the Borough of Pine Hill on
any property or under any of the circumstances hereinafter enumerated.
§ 3-17.2. Owners Of Unlicensed Motor-Driven Vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any unlicensed motor-driven or
motorized vehicle, as defined herein, to permit or suffer any person to
operate said vehicle within the Borough of Pine Hill on any property or
under the circumstances described and enumerated in paragraphs a, b, c,
d, e, f, and g of the preceding subsection 3-17.1 of this section.
§ 3-17.3. Penalty: Violations.
The provisions of subsection 8-3.5c and d shall apply to any person violating
the provisions of this section.
§ 3-18. ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS OR SCOOTERS.
a. On private property of another without the prior express written
permission of the owner and occupant of said property. Where such
prior express written permission has been obtained, the operator shall
keep the same on his person, available for immediate display during the
period of such operation.
b. On any public, municipal or board of education grounds or property,
including public parks, recreational areas, ball fields, tot lots and school
grounds.
c. On any public sidewalks or public streets or areas dedicated or
commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
d. On any common areas, parking areas or open space areas of any
apartment, multifamily, residential, commercial or industrial site,
complex or development.
e. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger or be
likely to endanger the safety or property of any person or persons.
f. In such a manner as to create loud, unnecessary or unusual noise so as
to disturb or interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons and no
person shall operate such unlicensed motor-driven or motorized vehicle
as defined herein before the hour of 9:00 a.m., prevailing time or after
sunset.
g. Each unlicensed motor-driven or motorized vehicle shall at all time be
equipped with a muffler in good working order and no person shall use
a muffler cut-out, by-pass or similar device on said vehicle.
§ 3-17 PINE HILL CODE § 3-18.1
AO:92
§ 3-18.1. Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this section, are defined below:
ROLLER SKATES — Shall mean a pair of devices worn on the feet with a set
of wheels attached, regardless of the number or placement of those wheels
and used to glide or propel the user over the ground.
SCOOTER — Shall mean a low board fitted with a wheel at each end and
a steering handle attached to the axle of the front wheel used to glide or
propel the user across the ground either with or without a motor attached.
SKATEBOARD — Shall mean a piece of wood, fiberglass or other rigid
material, mounted on skate wheels used to glide or propel the user across
the ground.
§ 3-18.2. Requirements.
Every person operating any roller skates, skateboard or scooter upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by Chapter 4 of Title 39, except
as those provisions thereof which by their nature can have no application.
§ 3-18.3. Regulations.
The Borough of Pine Hill, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-10.10a may regulate the
operation of roller skates, skateboards and scooters upon the roadways and
public properties under municipal jurisdiction.
§ 3-18.4. Protective Gear.
No person under the age of 14 may operate roller skates, skateboards or
scooters without wearing a properly fitted and fastened helmet, as defined
in N.J.S.A. 39:4-10.5, which meets the standards of the American National
Standards Institute, the Snell Memorial Foundation's 1990 Standard for
Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling, the American Society for Testing
and Materials standard or other such standard, as appropriate.
§ 3-18.5. Operation Of Roller Skates, Skateboards Or Scooters On
Roadways.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:4-10.11, any person operating any roller
skates, skateboard or scooter upon a roadway shall ride as near to the
right side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing
a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction; provided,
however, that any person may move to the left under any of the following
situations.
a. To make a left turn from a left-turn lane or pocket.
b. To avoid debris, drains, or other hazardous conditions that make it
impracticable to ride at the right side of the roadway.
§ 3-18.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-18.5
AO:93
§ 3-18.6. Prohibited Roadways.
The operation of any roller skates, skateboard or scooter by any person
under the age of 14 is prohibited upon the following roadways:
§ 3-18.7. Motors Prohibited.
The use of motorized roller skates, scooter, or skateboard is hereby
prohibited on any public road or parking lot. The motor need not be
engaged in order for a person to be in violation of this prohibition.
§ 3-18.8. Violations; Warnings: Fines.
§ 3-19. FLOODING OF PUBLIC ROADS.
c. To pass a slower moving vehicle.
d. To occupy any available land when traveling at the same speed as other
traffic.
e. To travel no more than two abreast when traffic is not impeded.
a. State roads.
b. County roads.
c. Any section of roadway with a posted speed limit in excess of 35 miles
per hour.
a. A person who violates any requirement of this section for the first
offense shall be issued a warning by the enforcing official. After being
warned, upon a subsequent offense, a person shall be fined a minimum
of $50 and a maximum of $250 per offense, as determined in the
discretion of the judge of the municipal court.
b. However, the penalties provided under the provisions of this section for
failure to wear an approved helmet may be waived if the parent or legal
guardian of the violator provides suitable proof that an approved
helmet or appropriate personal protection equipment has been
purchased since the violation occurred.
a. No property owner within the Borough of Pine Hill shall permit, allow,
and/or create any obstruction on their property which shall cause
flooding onto any public road.
b. In the event that a property owner created such an obstruction such
property owner shall be in violation of this section.
c. Any such property owner shall receive written notice of such violation
by regular mail to the last known address of the property owner and be
provided an opportunity to remove the obstruction within seven days of
the date that the notice is mailed.
§ 3-18.5 PINE HILL CODE § 3-19
AO:94
§ 3-20. SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY PROHIBITION.
§ 3-20.1. Prohibition.
No person over the age of 18 who has been convicted of a violation of any
crime against a minor as listed in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2, and who as a result of
said conviction is required to register with the proper authorities pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., Registration and Notification of Release of Certain
Offenders, shall be permitted to reside or live within 2,500 feet of any
school, public park, public playground or daycare center in the borough.
§ 3-20.2. Exemption.
This section shall not apply to a person who has established a residence
prior to November 21, 2005 within the 2,500 feet area.
§ 3-20.3. Violations and Penalties.
Any violation of this section shall be punishable by one or more of the
following penalties: a fine not to exceed $1,000; imprisonment for a term
not to exceed 90 days; and/or a period of community service not to exceed
90 days.
§ 3-21. WILDLIFE FEEDING.
§ 3-21.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park or on any other property owned or operated by Borough
of Pine Hill, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 3-21.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
d. In the event the obstruction is not removed within that time, the
borough may direct its personnel to remove the obstruction and
thereafter report the costs of such removal to borough council. Borough
council may thereafter lien the property for the costs of said removal.
e. In the event that the Police Chief and the public works supervisor
determine that an immediate hazard to public safety exists, the borough
shall immediately take steps to remove the obstruction and thereafter
lien the property for the costs of such removal.
§ 3-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-21.2
AO:95
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 3-21.3. Prohibited Conduct.
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned or
operated by Borough of Pine Hill, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 3-21.4. Enforcement.
§ 3-21.5. Violations and Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 3-22. STORAGE OF REGISTERED NON-MOTOR VEHICLES AND
BOATS.
a. This section shall be enforced by the police department and/or other
municipal officials of Borough of Pine Hill.
b. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
a. Any non-motor vehicle or boat subject to registration by the State of
New Jersey is subject to the provisions of this section.
b. It shall be a violation of this section to store, place or leave a non-motor
vehicle or boat subject to this section on any property, excluding
enclosed garages, within the Borough of Pine Hill, unless that vehicle is
properly registered within the State of New Jersey and that nonmotor
vehicle or boat is in good working order.
Only vehicles owned by the occupants of the property may be stored on
that property.
c. It shall be a violation of this section to store more than one vehicle
subject to this section in a driveway and one vehicle subject to this
section in a back yard.
d. For the purposes of this section, storage is defined as a motor vehicle
not leaving the property for period of 30 days.
§ 3-21.2 PINE HILL CODE § 3-22
AO:96
§ 3-23. NUISANCES, PUBLIC HEALTH.
§ 3-23.1. Public Health Nuisance Code Adopted. [Ord. No.
2018-968]
The Borough of Pine Hill hereby establishes and adopts the "Public Health
Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)", excepting out any portions of said
Public Health Nuisance Code that may have been stricken therefrom, and
including any addition, supplement or revision that has been made to said
Public Health Nuisance Code as is set forth on the printed Public Health
Nuisance Code attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein.
§ 3-23.2. Copies on File. [Ord. No. 2018-968]
Three copies of the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953)"
have been placed on file in the office of the Borough Clerk for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 3-23.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2018-968]
Any person who violates or neglects to comply with the provision of this
section or Public Health Nuisance Code established herein on notice issued
pursuant thereto shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty of not
less than $100 and no more than $500 for each offense.
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
§ 4-1. LICENSING OF SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS AND ITINERANT
VENDORS.
§ 4-1.1. Definitions.
When used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated:
HAWKER, PEDDLER AND VENDOR — Shall mean and include any person,
whether or not a resident of the Borough of Pine Hill, traveling about the
Borough of Pine Hill either on foot, by vehicle or by any other manner,
means or method, who shall go from house to house, place to place or street
to street conveying or transporting goods, products, wares, merchandise,
food or drink or any product thereof, offering or exposing the same for sale
or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
HIS — Includes "her" or "its."
e. For the purposes of this section, a non-motor vehicle shall mean any
wheeled vehicle that moves as a result of force or energy from another
vehicle or a person such as a boat trailer, pop-up trailer, recreational
vehicle trailer or landscaping trailer.
§ 3-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.1
AO:97
ITINERANT AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND PEDDLERS — Is
included in the definition of "hawker," "peddler" and "vendor" as above set
forth.
PERSON — Shall mean and include any individual, partnership, partner,
corporation or corporations.
VENDING UNIT — Shall mean a cart, truck or other mode of transporting
food, goods or wares for the purpose of hawking, peddling and vending.
§ 4-1.2. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any hawker, peddler or vendor, as herein defined,
to engage in such activity within the Borough of Pine Hill without first
obtaining a license therefor in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
§ 4-1.3. Application.
Applicants for a license under this section shall file with the Borough Clerk
an application, in duplicate, on forms to be furnished by the Borough Clerk,
that shall give the following information, all of which shall be sworn to:
a. Name and physical description of the applicant.
b. Permanent home address and local mailing address and telephone
number, if any, of the applicant; motor vehicle license and registration if
a motor vehicle is to be used in the activity for which the applicant
requests a license.
c. A brief description of the business or activity; the goods or items as
described in the definition of hawker, peddler and vendor in Subsection
4-1.1, Definitions hereof, intended to be sold; the name and address of
the principal office of the manufacturer thereof and/or of the principal
for whom or which such applicant is acting as agent, employee or
representative; and the length of time for which such agency,
employment or representation has existed, and credentials establishing
such relationship.
d. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired, in
accordance with the schedule hereinafter set forth, and some reference
or evidence which will help to properly evaluate the character and
responsibility of the applicant.
e. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor or violations of any municipal ordinance,
other than a traffic violation; the nature of the offense; the place where
convicted; and the punishment or penalty, if any, assessed therefor.
f. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, then it shall set forth
the names of its employees or representatives who are to engage in the
business or activity for which the license is requested, as part of its
§ 4-1.1 PINE HILL CODE § 4-1.3
AO:98
§ 4-1.4. Types Of Licenses.
The license issued shall be classed as "individual" for those issued to
individual applicants, and "firm" for all others.
§ 4-1.5. Terms Of License.
The applicant shall request a license for the following periods of time:
§ 4-1.6. Investigation And Issuance.
application, and shall furnish the same information for each of such
persons as above set forth.
g. Proof of an insurance policy issued by an insurance company licensed to
do business in the State of New Jersey protecting the licensee and the
Borough from all claims and damages to property and bodily injury,
including death, which may arise from operations under or in
connection with the hawking, vending or peddling. The amounts of the
insurance to be maintained are: Personal injury $100,000 per person;
$300,000 per occurrence; Property damage $50,000. Such insurance
shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be cancelled prior to
the expiration date without 30 days advance written notice to the
Borough.
a. Annual.
b. Semiannual.
c. Quarterly.
d. Monthly.
e. Weekly.
a. Upon the receipt of such application, the original thereof shall be
referred immediately by the Borough Clerk to the Chief of Police of the
Borough, who shall cause to be made such investigation of the
applicant's business and moral character as he deems necessary for the
protection of the public welfare.
b. Such investigation shall be completed within three days after the
receipt of such application, and said chief shall endorse thereon his
approval or disapproval and, if disapproved, his reasons therefor; and
he shall immediately notify the applicant that his application has been
disapproved. The application, so endorsed, shall be returned forthwith
to the Borough Clerk.
c. If the application has been disapproved by the Chief of Police, such
applicant may file with the Borough Clerk a request, in writing, for a
hearing on the ruling of the Chief of Police, and the Borough Council
shall then set a time and place for a hearing on such request, which
hearing shall be within 30 days after receipt of the written request
§ 4-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.6
AO:99
§ 4-1.7. Badges.
At the same time the license is issued by the Borough Clerk, the licensee
shall also be given a badge containing the words "licensed vendor." If the
licensee is a partnership or corporation and has one or more employees
or representatives, or an individual having employees or representatives
who are to participate in the business or activity for which a license has
been issued, then a badge shall be issued for each of such persons or
individuals, as well as a duplicate copy of such license for each of them,
which copy or copies shall be serially numbered. In order to obtain such
badges, such licensee, in addition to the license fee, shall leave a deposit
with the Borough Clerk in the sum of $5 for each badge, which sum shall
be refunded to the licensee on return of each badge or badges in good
condition.
§ 4-1.8. Fee; License Expiration: Nontransferability.
§ 4-1.9. Exhibition Of License.
therefor. At such hearing, the applicant shall have full and ample
opportunity to present facts and circumstances to support the issuance
of a license in accordance with the application, and said body shall then
decide whether the applicant should receive such license.
d. If the application has been approved by the Chief of Police, he shall
endorse his approval thereon and shall promptly return it to the
Borough Clerk, who, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, as
hereinafter set forth, shall execute and deliver the license to the
applicant. The Borough Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued,
the fees received and of all complaints made, if any, concerning each
license.
a. The fees for licenses, which are intended for revenue purposes, shall be
in accordance with the following schedule:
Term of License Individual Firm
Annual $50 $50
Semiannual $30 $30
Quarterly $20 $20
Monthly $15 $15
Weekly $10 $10
b. All licenses shall expire on January 31 of each year. They are not
transferable and shall be surrendered after expiration, before a renewal
license can be issued; and they shall not be used at any time by any
person other than the one to whom they are issued.
a. All persons holding a license shall exhibit it upon the request of any
citizen; and while engaged in activity for which the license was issued,
§ 4-1.6 PINE HILL CODE § 4-1.9
AO:100
§ 4-1.10. Notification To Police To Engage In Licensed Activity.
On each day that such licensee or its agents or employees shall travel about
the Borough of Pine Hill to engage in the activity for which the license
was issued, the Chief of Police or his representative shall be notified of
the intention to do so in order that the Police Chief shall know who is
traveling about the Borough and for what purpose and whether such person
is licensed to do so.
§ 4-1.11. Revocation.
§ 4-1.12. Health and Sanitation Requirements.
Hawkers, peddlers and vendors of food and beverages shall comply with
the inspection provisions and standards of the New Jersey Sanitary Code
(in particular N.J.A.C. 8:24 8.1 through 9.11). The equipment used in the
vending of food and beverages shall be inspected upon application for
registration and receive a certificate of inspection upon compliance with all
applicable or Borough ordinances and state statutes. Such certificate shall
each person shall wear and display such badge conspicuously on the
front of his clothing.
b. All persons holding a license shall notify the Borough Clerk either in
writing or in person of any change in business address or residence of
said license within 30 days of said change.
a. Licenses issued under this section may be revoked by the Borough
Council of the Borough of Pine Hill after reasonable notice and hearing,
for any of the following causes:
1. Misrepresentation, fraud or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
2. Misrepresentation, fraud or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the activity for which the license was issued.
3. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
4. Any violation of this section.
5. Conducting the business of a peddler, as herein defined, in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
b. Notice of a hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing,
setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and
place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, with postage prepaid
thereon, or may be hand delivered, at the last known address of the
licensee, or may be given to the licensee personally at least five days
prior to the date of the hearing.
§ 4-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.12
AO:101
be clearly displayed on the peddling vehicle or cart. Each food and beverage
vending unit shall be inspected at least once a year.
§ 4-1.13. Safety Requirements.
All vending units, whether in motor vehicles or not, in or from which food is
prepared or sold, shall comply with the following requirements:
§ 4-1.14. Regulations.
a. All equipment installed in any part of the vending unit shall be secured
in order to prevent movement during transit and prevent detachment in
the event of a collision or overturn.
b. All utensils shall be stored in order to prevent their being hurled about
in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder
shall be provided to avoid loose storage knives.
a. Prohibition of fixed location sales.
1. The right to hawk, peddle and vend is the right to go from door to
door, place to place selling one's wares, not the right to remain
indefinitely at a fixed location.
2. A hawker, peddler and vendor shall not sell or offer for sale to the
general public any food, goods, wares or merchandise from a fixed
location. Hawkers, peddlers and vendors are obligated to move
about, going from door to door, place to place, to sell foods, goods,
wares and merchandise.
(a) A peddler sells or offers for sale from a fixed location for a
period of time of 20 minutes or longer, unless extended as
provided below.
(b) The 20 minute time limitation is extended beyond 20 minutes
for such period of time that customers are being served by the
hawker, peddler or vendor wherein the customers or
prospective customers:
(1) Are examining, viewing, testing, pricing, returning, etc.
the merchandise.
(2) Are seeking information from the peddler, and/or
(3) Are making a purchase or sale, and/or
(4) Are waiting to be attended by the peddler.
(5) The 20 minute time limitation is further extended for such
time following a sale or purchase that the hawker, peddler
or vendor may need to replace or replenish merchandise,
to perform that which is necessary to clean or straighten
up his cart, merchandise, etc., to secure the proceeds of
§ 4-1.12 PINE HILL CODE § 4-1.14
AO:102
the sale; to file copies of receipts and other such acts that
occur following a sale of merchandise. However, the total
time allotted for acts following a sale under this subsection
shall not exceed 10 minutes.
(6) At the expiration of the 20 minutes plus the extended
period as provided above, the peddler must move from
such location to a location at least 25 feet away. Such
hawker, peddler or vendor cannot return to within 25 feet
of such location for a period of at least one hour. No
peddler has the right to any particular location on the
public streets and sidewalks or public place.
b. Prohibited conduct. No hawker, peddler or vendor shall:
1. Stock or display items to be sold upon the sidewalks, street, rightof-
way, parking lots or vacant lands and premises. All food, goods
and wares or merchandise must be located solely on one vending
unit.
2. Stock, display, sell or offer for sale to the general public any foods,
wares or merchandise from a fixed location on any public or private
property, including parking lots, vacant lands and premises or
other open areas.
3. Station, place, set up or maintain his vending unit to allow it to
remain on any sidewalk in such a way as would:
(a) Substantially restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the
pedestrian's right-of-way;
(b) Substantially restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede the
ingress or egress from the abutting property;
(c) Create or become a nuisance;
(d) Increase traffic congestion, cause or increase traffic delay or
hazards;
(e) Cause or create or constitute a danger to life, health or
property;
(f) Sell food, drinks, ice cream or confections of any kind for
immediate consumption unless he has available for public use
his own litter receptacle which must be attached to his cart or
vehicle which shall be clearly marked and maintained for his
patronage's use, nor shall any peddler leave any location
without first picking up, removing and disposing of any trash or
refuse remaining from sales made by him.
4. Station, set up or maintain his vending unit or goods against
display windows of fixed location businesses, nor shall they be
within 20 feet from an entranceway to any building, store, theater,
§ 4-1.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.14
AO:103
library, school, museum, movie house, sports arena or other place
of public assembly.
5. Place a vehicle or cart or conduct a general peddling business at a
location in the street where stopping, standing or parking is
prohibited, or being a time period when stopping, standing or
parking is restricted.
6. Violate any traffic parking law, ordinance or regulation, or operate
in such a manner as to restrict the continued maintenance of a
clear passageway for vehicles.
7. Station, place, set up or maintain his cart or his goods, wares or
merchandise, or allow it to remain on any part of the sidewalk for
sale or display or to be sold if to do so would place the seller or his
goods, wares or merchandise closer than 10 feet from intersecting
streets or sidewalks.
8. Station, place, set up or maintain his cart or allow it to remain on
any sidewalk if to do so would obstruct pedestrian right-of-way.
9. Engage in the business of peddling within 10 feet of any location
where the curb has been depressed to facilitate pedestrian or
vehicle movement.
10. Engage in the business of peddling on any sidewalk or along any
street which has been designated as a bus stop. For the purposes of
this act, the word bus stop shall include the sidewalk and the
adjoining street where that street has been designated as a bus
stop.
11. Engage in the business of peddling on any sidewalk or along any
street within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, crosswalk or driveway or
within 200 feet of the grounds of any school between 1/2 hour prior
to the school day and one half hour after dismissal at the end of the
school day and within 200 feet of the grounds of any church,
synagogue or other house of worship while same is in session.
12. Station, place, set up or maintain his cart or vending unit or allow
the same to remain on any sidewalk or right-of-way if to do so
would place him closer than 30 feet to any other peddler who is
selling on the sidewalk if not separated by a public street.
13. Station, place, set up or maintain his cart or vending unit on the
sidewalk or allow it to remain there except at the curbline for the
purpose of selling goods, wares or merchandise therefrom.
14. Use any vending unit which, fully loaded with merchandise, cannot
be easily moved and maintained under control by the licensee, his
employees or attendants.
§ 4-1.14 PINE HILL CODE § 4-1.14
AO:104
§ 4-1.15. Hours Of Operation.
The hours of operation by a hawker, peddler or vendor under this section
shall be 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. local time.
§ 4-1.16. Door To Door Sales.
This amended section does not prohibit peddlers, solicitors, canvassers or
transient merchants from selling merchandise from door to door wherein
such sales are to the owners or occupiers of dwellings or buildings wherein
such sales and the delivery of merchandise occurs on the private property
of such owners and/or occupiers.
Exceptions:
15. Leave any cart or vending unit unattended at any time or store,
place or lease the same overnight on any sidewalk or public way of
the city.
16. Use, set up, attach, place or permit the use of any table, crate,
carton, rack, device or structure of any kind to increase the selling
or display capacity of his unit.
17. Solicit or conduct business with or sell to persons in motor vehicles.
18. Engage in the business of selling at any location without giving a
written receipt to each customer, or engage in the business of
selling in any location without maintaining on his person or on the
cart or vehicle receipts showing the sales made during the
preceding week. The receipts shall show clearly the seller's name,
business address, license number, a description of the merchandise
sold, the purchase price and shall be sequentially numbered.
19. Use or operate any loudspeaker, public address system, sound
amplifier, horn, bell, radio, record player, tape player, CD player,
musical instrument or any similar device used to attract the
attention of the public.
a. This section shall not be construed as to apply to the selling of any item
or article to wholesale dealers in such articles or items or to the
delivery of milk, bread, butter or newspapers or to the other articles or
item of food or merchandise of a type which are generally considered
household necessities and that are commonly delivered on a house to
house basis at intervals of a week or less.
b. Any persons possessing a valid special state license properly issued
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq. shall be exempt
from obtaining the license issued by the municipality or paying the fee
therefor. Prior to engaging in hawking, peddling or vending pursuant to
such special state license within the Borough of Pine Hill, the person
holding such special state license shall produce and exhibit same to the
Borough Clerk and complete and sign a registration form providing all
§ 4-1.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.16
AO:105
necessary information for the issuance of a municipal badge,
whereupon the Borough Clerk shall issue a badge without charge. The
person holding said special state license, however, shall be required to
comply with all other applicable regulatory provisions of this section.
c. Nonprofit organizations.
1. Any nonprofit religious, charitable, educational, political, civic or
veterans organization, society, association or club desiring to sell
any item or merchandise for a religious, charitable, patriotic,
educational, civic or philanthropic purpose shall be exempt from
the fee provisions, provided that there is filed a sworn application
in writing with the Borough Clerk or the Chief of Police, either by
the individual so doing, if done on an individual basis, or by the one
in charge thereof, if being done on a group basis by numerous
individuals as agents or employees, who shall give the following
information:
(a) Name of the individual or organization and purpose of the
cause for which the permit is sought.
(b) Names and addresses of the individual officers and directors or
trustees of the organization and the address of such
organization.
2. Upon being satisfied that such person is a bona fide representative
of such an organization or that such organization, as aforesaid, is
bona fide, and that the agents or representatives who shall conduct
the transactions are approved representatives, the Borough Clerk
shall issue a permit without charge to such organization,
association or corporation to operate in the Borough. Such
organization shall supply its agents, representatives or employees
with a badge or ribbon containing the name of such organization,
which shall be worn and conspicuously displayed on the front of the
clothing of such agent, representative or employee.
d. Any person who conducts a judicial sale under the state or national
laws.
e. Residents of New Jersey who hold an exemption certificate as an
exempt member of a volunteer fire department or volunteer fire engine,
hook and ladder, hose, supply company or salvage corps, from any
municipality or fire district of New Jersey.
f. Persons engaged in the sale of food, goods, wares or merchandise at
governmental sponsored or approved events such as Pine Hill Day,
provided said persons have been approved to participate by the
appropriate official designated for such purpose.
§ 4-1.16 PINE HILL CODE § 4-1.17
AO:106
§ 4-1.17. Severability.
If any of the provisions of this section or its application to any person or
circumstances shall be held invalid, the remainder of the section or the
application of the provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected.
§ 4-1.18. Violations And Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of a court
of competent jurisdiction.
§ 4-1.19. Establishment of Do Not Knock Registry. [Added
5-20-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-978]
a. The Borough hereby establishes a Do Not Knock Registry. The Borough
Clerk shall prepare a list of addresses of those premises where the
owner and/or occupant of same has notified the Borough Clerk that
peddling, soliciting, canvasing, hawking and door-to-door sales as
identified in this chapter are not permitted on the premises. Any
property owner or occupant that wants to be included on the Do Not
Knock Registry shall complete a form that will be available at the
Borough Clerk's Office during normal business hours.
b. Do Not Knock Registry Display.
1. Any owner and/or occupant who has requested to be identified on
the Do Not Knock Registry shall be provided a sticker from the
Borough Clerk's Office for prominent posting or display at their
premises indicating it is part of the Do Not Knock Registry and
peddling or soliciting of any type is not permitted at the premises.
2. Owners and/or occupants who are identified on the Do Not Knock
Registry at their request shall remain on the Registry until such
time as written notice is provided to the Borough Clerk to remove
their name from the Registry.
c. Distribution of Do Not Knock Registry. The Borough Clerk shall provide
and distribute the current Do Not Knock Registry to any licensee under
this chapter at the time of issuing a license for peddling, soliciting,
canvasing, hawking or any other type door-to-door selling permitted
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The Do Not Knock Registry
provided to these licensees shall only identify the physical address of
the premises/properties on the Do Not Knock Registry. The licensee
shall not peddle, solicit, canvas, hawk or conduct door-to-door sales at
these premises identified on this Registry.
d. Notwithstanding the right of revocation, reserved to the Borough
governing body, and in addition to same, it shall be the duty of any
police officer or enforcement official of the Borough to require any
§ 4-1.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.19
AO:107
§ 4-2. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS.
§ 4-2.1. Application For Permit.
Every person desiring to solicit subscriptions of money or anything of value
in the Borough for charitable or benevolent purposes or enterprises shall
first make application to the Borough Chief of Police for a permit to solicit
such contributions.
§ 4-2.2. Investigation.
Upon filing with the Chief of Police of any such application for such a
permit, it shall become the duty of the Borough Chief of Police or of a
subordinate acting under the authority and direction of the Chief of Police,
to make an investigation of the character, credit, reputation and substance
of the person making the application.
§ 4-2.3. Issuance Of Permit.
If the Chief of Police is satisfied that the persons making such application
are of good character and reputation, the Chief of Police shall forthwith
issue to the applicant a permit to make such solicitations. Such permit shall
include the name of the person making such application, the purpose for
which such charitable or benevolent subscriptions are sought, and such
permit shall also signify a date when the right to make such solicitations
shall expire.
§ 4-3. (RESERVED)14
§ 4-4. LICENSING OF JUNK YARDS.
§ 4-4.1. Definitions.
As used in this section:
person peddling, soliciting, canvasing or hawking and who is not known
by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce their peddlers license
and/or to otherwise enforce any of the provisions of this chapter against
any person found to be violating same.
a. JUNK - Shall mean old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries,
paper, bottles, glass, cans, wood, trash, rubber, waste, or junked,
dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, iron, steel and
other old or scrap ferrous or non-ferrous material.
b. AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD - Shall mean any establishment or place of
business which is maintained, used, or operated, for storing, keeping,
14.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ordinance No. 334, former § 4-3, "Licensing of Businesses" is
now codified as Chapter 4-A, Mercantile Licenses.
§ 4-1.19 PINE HILL CODE § 4-4.1
AO:108
§ 4-4.2. Application Of Section.
Recognizing the junkyards are prohibited in the Borough, this section shall
apply to already existing junkyards that are nonconforming uses.
§ 4-4.3. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or operate a junkyard
without obtaining a license therefor, in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
§ 4-4.4. Issuance Of License.
The Borough Clerk shall as provided herein, on applications submitted
in duplicate, issue a license or renewal of a license to any person to
keep or operate a junkyard for the purpose of buying, selling, exchanging,
displaying, storing or keeping any or all of the aforesaid articles. The
Borough Clerk shall secure the approval of the Chief of Police before issuing
any such license or renewal thereof. The Chief of Police shall give such
approval unless the applicant has been a habitual violator of the terms
of this section, or unless he has reason to believe that the issuance of
such license will result in violations of Borough ordinances. Every person
receiving such license or renewal thereof shall pay to the Borough an
annual license fee of $250, if the land used shall be one acre or less in area,
and $350 if such area is over one acre; provided that any such license may
be revoked by the Chief of Police, for good cause shown on complaint after
due notice thereof, and a hearing thereon. All such licenses shall expire on
July 31 of each year.
§ 4-4.5. Location Of Junkyard.
Both the application for any license hereunder, and the license itself, shall
contain a legal description of the land or premises on which any junkyard
operation may be carried on. No license issued hereunder shall entitle
such licensee to operate thereunder at, in, or on any other lot, building or
location, in whole or in part, than that which is specified in the license;
however, this section shall not be interpreted as authorization to extend,
expand, or enlarge the already existing nonconforming or presently
prohibited use.
displaying, exchanging, buying, or selling wrecked, scrapped, ruined,
or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts.
c. JUNKYARD - Shall mean an establishment or place of business which is
maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying, or selling
junk, or for the maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard.
§ 4-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4.6
AO:109
§ 4-4.6. Pawning Articles Prohibited.
No licensee hereunder shall receive in the line of his business any article or
thing by way of pledge or pawn, nor shall be advance any sum of money on
the security of any such article or thing.
§ 4-4.7. Lost Or Stolen Articles.
Every licensee hereunder who shall receive or be in possession of any
goods, articles or things which may have been lost or stolen, shall forthwith
give information thereof in writing at the office of the Chief of Police and
shall also state from whom the same was received, and shall forthwith, on
demand to view the same, present the same to the Chief of Police or other
police authorities of the Borough.
§ 4-4.8. Licensing Of Vehicles.
Every person licensed hereunder shall be entitled to keep one truck, cart,
wagon, or vehicle for the purpose of collecting the articles above
mentioned; provided that if the person so licensed as aforesaid desires to
keep more than one truck, cart, wagon or vehicle, the licensee shall first
apply to the Borough Clerk for such privilege; and shall pay the sum of $10
for each additional truck, wagon, cart or vehicle; provided also, that any
licensee using any such wagon, cart, truck or vehicle or who shall authorize
the same to be used, shall cause to be painted on the outside of such truck,
cart, wagon, or vehicle the full name of the licensee and the address of the
licensee's place of business, in plain letters which shall not be less than 2 1/
2 inches in height. Such licensee shall also attach to one side of every such
truck, cart, wagon or other vehicle a metal tag bearing the number of such
license, which tag shall be furnished by the licensing authority.
§ 4-4.9. Exhibition Of Licenses.
Every person engaged in drawing or driving any cart, wagon, truck or
vehicle for the purpose of collecting rags, old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead
and other metals, and other junk as defined above, including old motor
vehicles and other abandoned or nonusable vehicles, shall at all times carry
with him when so engaged, the license issued for the cart, wagon, truck or
vehicle, and shall exhibit the same on demand to any official or inspector of
the Board of health or to any police officer of the Borough, and shall upon
demand by any such person, exhibit the contents of the cart, wagon, truck
or vehicle.
§ 4-4.10. Placement Of Junk.
No junk, as defined above, shall be kept on any sidewalk, or within the
public right-of-way, in the Borough or in front of the place of business
conducted by the licensee as a junkyard.
§ 4-4.6 PINE HILL CODE § 4-4.11
AO:110
§ 4-4.11. Storage Of Bottles.
All bottles shall be washed immediately upon receipt of the same and shall
be stored bottom-side up.
§ 4-4.12. Fences.
Any such junkyard which may be conducted on any lot in the Borough shall
have the lot fenced in by a fence, which fence shall be at least seven feet
high, but not more than 10 feet high, and shall be of such construction as
shall keep within its bounds the contents of such lot or open space. Such
fence as is prescribed by this subsection shall be erected not later than
February 1, 1973, and shall be of uniform noncombustible construction.
That portion of such fence which faces any public street or highway or is
visible from any public street or highway or is visible from any public street
or highway shall also be of solid rigid construction preventing a view of
the interior of such junkyard. Existing cyclone fencing satisfying the height
requirement may serve as a foundation for the attachment of a uniform
material satisfying the requirement for a fence of solid uniform construction
prohibiting a view of the interior.
§ 4-4.13. Height Of Junk.
Under no circumstances shall any of the contents of any junkyard be piled
or stacked to a height in excess of the height of the fence specified in the
foregoing section.
§ 4-4.14. Sanitary Conditions.
All such licensed premises shall be kept free of noxious odors and vermin,
insects, and rats, and shall at all times be kept in such condition as shall not
endanger the public health.
§ 4-4.15. Weeds And Vegetation.
No junkyard licensed hereunder shall be permitted to become overgrown
with weeds or other wild vegetation.
§ 4-4.16. Hours Of Prohibited Operation.
No person operating or conducting any junkyard shall receive or purchase,
as part of his business, any goods, articles or things from any person
whatsoever, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 4-4.17. Record Of Purchases.
Every keeper of a junkyard shall provide and keep a book in which shall
be written at the time of each purchase a reasonable description of the
article so purchased, the name and address of the person from whom such
purchase was made, the day of the purchase, and the consideration paid
therefor; provided, that this subsection shall not apply to the purchase of
§ 4-4.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4.17
AO:111
old paper, old rags, old bottles or glass, or old newspapers. The aforesaid
book shall, at all reasonable times, be open to inspection by any members of
the Board of Health, Borough Councilmen, the Mayor, or the Borough police
officers.
§ 4-5. LICENSING OF JITNEYS.
§ 4-5.1. Definitions.
As used in this section. "Jitney" or "autobus" shall mean any automobile,
motor bus, jitney or motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire over any of the streets in the Borough, the owner of
which jitney or autobus hold the same out to the public as accepting or
discharging passengers who offer themselves for transportation at points
along the route on which it operates.
§ 4-5.2. Compliance With Regulations.
No person shall run or operate or cause to run or be operated any autobus
or jitney carrying of passengers for hire within the Borough except under
and in strict compliance with the conditions, requirements, rules and traffic
and police regulations established or to be hereafter established by the
Borough Council by resolution or ordinance duly passed at any regular
meeting thereof.
§ 4-5.3. Revocation.
All licenses hereinafter provided for shall be issued subject to revocation by
resolution of the Council at any time, for the violation of any of this section
or any of the rules or traffic or police regulations aforesaid, such traffic
and police rules and regulations shall provide for and include the manner
in which all jitneys or autobuses shall be operated within the Borough
and the prices and fares to be charged to passengers for transportation,
together with such other rules, conditions and regulations as the Council
shall establish and provide.
§ 4-5.4. Issuance Of License: Fee.
All applicants for a license to operate an autobus or jitney to be used or
operated for the transportation of passengers for hire within the Borough
shall be the owner thereof, and a bona fide resident of either the Borough
or the adjoining Borough of Clementon. Each applicant shall pay to the
Borough Clerk annually the sum of $20 for each vehicle so licensed.
Licenses for autobuses or jitneys shall at all times be limited to 15 vehicles,
so that at no time shall the licenses in force exceed those issued for
15 vehicles. Upon receipt of such fee the Borough Clerk shall issue a
license card for the vehicle to each applicant; provided, that no license
shall be issued to any applicant whose license was previously revoked
by appropriate action of the Council, without the express resolution of
the Council authorizing the issuance of such license. Before the owner or
§ 4-4.17 PINE HILL CODE § 4-5.4
AO:112
operator of any autobus or jitney secures from the Borough Clerk such
license as herein provided, he shall first apply by petition to the highway
committee of the Borough showing that he is duly qualified to operate the
vehicle as an autobus or jitney, and upon receiving the written consent
of such committee, shall thereafter apply to the Borough Clerk for such
license, but the Borough shall not issue the license without the written
consent of the highway committee. All licenses shall terminate annually on
December 31. Each license issued for the previous year may be renewed
upon proper application and proof of the requirements of this section to
the Borough Clerk. No licensee may receive a license for more jitneys
or autobuses than were licensed in the previous year without making an
application to the Mayor and Council. The license fees herein provided are
imposed for revenue.
§ 4-5.5. License Required.
No person shall propel, drive or cause to be propelled or driven within the
Borough, any autobus or jitney used for the conveyance or transportation
of persons for hire without first obtaining a license as provided herein for
the purpose from the Borough Clerk for each vehicle so engaged or used.
All licenses issued hereunder shall be subject to revocation as hereinabove
provided and shall be prepared and numbered annually by the Borough
Clerk from No. 1 consecutively, and shall be designated by the numbers;
and the driver of such vehicle shall at all times carry such license upon
his person or conspicuously display it in his autobus or jitney and may be
required to display the license for inspection by any constable or other
official of the Borough together with his driver's license issued by the state
director of motor vehicles.
§ 4-5.6. Statement Of Owner To Clerk.
Every owner of any autobus or jitney either resident in the Borough or
elsewhere who propels such vehicle within the Borough for the purpose of
conveying passengers for hire, shall annually file with the Borough Clerk
a statement in writing containing the name and address of the owner
thereof together with a brief description of such vehicle including the state
license number and seating capacity thereof and shall also pay annually to
the Borough Clerk the license fee before proceeding to drive the autobus
or jitney within the Borough. Upon the payment of the license fee, the
Borough Clerk, shall, subject to this section, issue a license for any vehicle
so registered in accordance with Subsection 4-5.4. The license shall be
subject to revocation for any violation of any of the terms or provisions of
this section or of the rules of police or traffic regulations established by the
Borough Council. The Borough Clerk shall cause the name of each owner
so applying together with his address and a description of the vehicle so
licensed, to be entered in a book to be kept for that purpose. Of the fees
hereinabove imposed the Borough Clerk shall receive the sum of $2 for
his service in issuing every license under this section and making a record
thereof in accordance with the terms and requirements herein above set
forth.
§ 4-5.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-5.7
AO:113
§ 4-5.7. Insurance.
The owners of all autobuses and jitneys before being permitted to operate
within the Borough shall have issued to them by some reputable company,
public liability insurance to the amount of $100,000 for more than one
person injured and $300,000 for more than one person injured in any one
accident and shall in addition carry insurance covering property damage
to the property to others in the amount of $5,000. All of such insurance
shall be maintained continuously during the period of the license. Failure
to maintain both kinds of the aforesaid insurance at any time during the
licensing period shall be deemed sufficient cause for the revocation of the
license.
§ 4-5.8. Inspection Of Vehicle.
The owner of every autobus or jitney operating within the Borough shall
submit the vehicle to an inspection at least twice during each year by an
inspector designated and appointed by the highway committee; such owner
shall have repaired or corrected any defects, mechanical or otherwise as
specified and required by the inspector, and the autobus or jitney shall not
be thereafter operated after notice of such defect, mechanical or otherwise,
until the repairs are completed to the satisfaction of the inspector.
§ 4-5.9. Cab Stand.
For the purpose of establishing a point at which passengers may convene
and cabs may be dispatched for the mutual convenience of both passengers
and cab operators, a cab stand is hereby established on the East side
of Erial Road, beginning at a point 125 feet South of the Southeasterly
intersection of Erial Road with Branch Avenue and proceeding thence for a
distance of 50 feet.
§ 4-5.10. Compliance With State Law.
Nothing herein contained shall exempt any person owning, operating any
autobus or jitney from complying with all existing statutes covering the
ownership, registration and operation of automobiles or motor vehicles in
this state.
§ 4-6. LICENSING OF AMUSEMENT GAMES.15
§ 4-6.1. License Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate or own
any amusement game or games as said terms are defined by the Amusement
Games Licensing Law, whether said game or games are of skill or chance
or both and whether said game or games are played and operated with or
without numbers or figures, without first having obtained a license from the
15.Editor's Note: See also Land Use Regulations, in Article XI, separate volume for licensing
pertaining to sexually oriented businesses.
§ 4-5.7 PINE HILL CODE § 4-6.1
AO:114
Mayor and Council of the Borough. Said license shall be issued pursuant to
and subject to the provisions of the Amusement Games Licensing Law.
§ 4-6.2. License Application.
Each applicant for a license shall file with the municipal Clerk and the Police
Chief a written application in such form as prescribed by and in accordance
with the Amusement Games Licensing Law. Each application for license
shall be submitted in duplicate form prescribed by the Commissioner of
amusement games control.
§ 4-6.3. Fee Schedule.
§ 4-6.4. License Required For Each Game.
A license must be obtained for the operation of each amusement game.
§ 4-6.5. Borough Right To License Games And Set Fees.
The Borough expressly reserves the right to license amusement games
other than the ones described herein and to establish fees therefor for use
in the area designated in accordance with the requirements set forth in
this section. The games hereinafter licensed shall be incorporated herein by
reference thereto.
§ 4-6.6. Borough Authority.
The Mayor and Council of the Borough shall have and exercise control and
supervision over all amusement games held or operated conducted under
a Borough license with all the powers authorized or granted to the New
Jersey Amusement Games Control Commissioner.
§ 4-6.7. Issuance Of License.
No license shall be issued except to persons of good moral character
approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 4-6.8. Number Of Licenses Issued For Each Location.
Subject to the provisions of the Amusement Games Licensing Law of New
Jersey, one license may be issued for each location where amusement games
or devices are to be employed.
a. The fee schedule for the license of Certificate #2 games to be issued
hereunder shall be $250 for the first 12 game machines; $20 for each of
the next 13 game machines and $10 for each of the next 25 game
machines.
§ 4-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.9
AO:115
§ 4-6.9. Fingerprinting And Identification Cards.
Each applicant shall pay a fee of $5 for fingerprinting and issuance of
identification cards when required under rules and regulations promulgated
by the Amusement Games Control Commissioner for each licensee and
employee of said licensee.
§ 4-6.10. Amusement Games To Be Kept In View Of Patrons.
The amusement games and devices shall be kept and placed in plain view
of any person or persons who may frequent and be in any place or place of
business where such devices or games are used and licensed.
§ 4-6.11. Gambling Devices Prohibited.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize or license any
gambling device or game not specifically permitted by the laws of New
Jersey.
§ 4-6.12. Windows And Doors Not To Be Obstructed.
No windows, doors or other openings in buildings where such devices or
games are located shall be in any way obstructed so as to limit the view of
the games or devices from outside the building.
§ 4-6.13. Inspections.
The Chief of Police of the Borough may inspect or cause to be inspected any
place or building in which amusement games or devices are operating.
§ 4-6.14. Gambling On Premises Prohibited.
No gambling between participants in any amusement games or the users of
any amusement devices shall be permitted at any time.
§ 4-6.15. Revocation Of License.
In the event that any licensee shall violate any of the provisions of this
section or the Amusement Games Licensing Law or the rules and
regulations promulgated by the Commissioner or the terms of such license,
in addition to suffering any of the penalties which may be imposed, said
licensee shall forfeit any license issued to said licensee under this section.
§ 4-6.16. Violations: Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation, violating any of the provisions of this
section shall be subject by the municipal court to a penalty not to exceed
$500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both, and the same shall be
in addition to the powers of suspension or revocation of any such license as
provided for herein by the governing body.
§ 4-6.9 PINE HILL CODE § 4-6.17
AO:116
§ 4-6.17. Locations.
No amusement/entertainment game or games, whether of skill or chance or
both or whether played or operated with or without numbers or figures, are
permitted within a range of 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any church or
school properties within the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 4-7. PARKING TAX ON COMMERCIAL FACILITIES.
§ 4-7.1. Established.
All commercial enterprises, situated in the Borough of Pine Hill with 300
or more parking spaces, shall collect on behalf of the Borough a parking
tax of $0.10 per vehicle per day that utilize the parking premises of the
commercial facility.
§ 4-7.2. Collection.
The parking tax shall be collected on behalf of the Borough by the
commercial entity providing the parking services to the customer.
§ 4-7.3. Liability Of Commercial Enterprise For Tax.
The commercial entity required to collect any tax imposed by the section
shall be liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected
hereunder.
§ 4-7.4. Remittance.
No commercial enterprise required to collect the parking tax hereunder
shall advertise or hold out to any person or to the public in general, in any
manner, directly or indirectly, that the tax is not considered as an element
in the charge payable by the customer, that the customer will pay the tax,
that the tax will not be separately charged and stated to the customer or
that the tax will be refunded to the customer.
All taxes collected pursuant to this section shall be remitted to the chief
fiscal officer of the Borough and shall be reported on the forms prescribed
by the director of finance and paid at such times as prescribed by the
director of finance.
a. At any location within the Borough, no more than three machines may
be operated under the mercantile license unless said location receives
approval authorization of the Planning Board and pays the requisite $50
fee for each machine exceeding the limit of three.
b. Any person, firm or corporation, violating the above provision shall be
subject to penalties set forth in Subsection 4-6.16.
§ 4-6.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.5
AO:117
§ 4-7.5. Effective Date.
This section shall take effect subsequent to final passage and publication on
January 1, 1985.
§ 4-8. MASS GATHERINGS FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT.
§ 4-8.1. Definitions.
The following words and terms when used in this section shall have the
following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
APPROVAL — Shall mean approval to conduct or to promote a mass
gathering as defined in this Ordinance and these rules and regulations shall
mean the obtaining of a valid written permit issued by the Borough Council.
MASS GATHERING — Shall mean a mass gathering of 200 or more people.
PERSON — Shall mean individuals, groups of persons, corporations,
companies, partnerships, associations, societies, firms, governmental unit
or agency of state of local government of any combination thereof.
§ 4-8.2. Administration.
a. Any person desiring to conduct or promote, by advertising or otherwise,
a mass gathering shall file with the Borough Clerk a written application
for a permit at least 90 days before the first day of the mass gathering.
b. All applications shall be in such form as prescribed by the Council and
shall be accompanied by the required filing fee, which shall be $500.
The fee may be waived by the Borough Council for nonprofit service
organizations.
c. The application shall include the following information:
1. The applicant's full name, residence, telephone number and post
office address, and whether such applicant is an individual,
partnership, firm, corporation or a governmental unit or agency
thereof. With the exception of a governmental unit or agency of the
state or local government, all applicants shall submit a financial
statement with their application;
2. A diagrammatic sketch plan of the proposed site of the mass
gathering showing the locations and dimensions of the proposed
service roads, potable water facilities, sanitary facilities, sewage
disposal facilities, medical service facilities, distribution of security
personnel, and provisions for food storage, as well as camping
facilities and projected plans for enclosure, if necessary of the
proposed site;
3. The application shall require a statement by the superintendent of
public works that reasonable access to public highways is
available;
§ 4-7.5 PINE HILL CODE § 4-8.2
AO:118
4. A statement of the purposes of the gathering and a program of
events scheduled;
5. A statement granting the permission of the owner of the property
on which the gathering is to take place. If the premises are not
owned by the applicant, then the names of the leasor or licensor
and a copy of the lease or license shall be attached;
6. A statement of the number of persons expected to attend such
event and the duration of such attendance;
7. The specific details, including certified copies of contracts entered
into of provisions relating to;
(a) Food and drink.
(b) Sanitary facilities.
(c) Transportation and parking facilities.
(d) Security and protection of surrounding areas, including
specific reference to the number of guards or special police
assisting in the control of traffic and supervision of those
attending. The contract should indicate the number of security
guards in shifts to cover the event from a period of three days
prior to the event until the area is cleaned and evacuated after
the event;
(e) On-site medical and hospital care;
(f) Janitorial services and post gathering trash removal. A
contract indicating the number of janitorial and clean-up
personnel in shifts to cover the area prior to the event, during
the event and until the area is evacuated;
(g) Outline of the action to be taken to insure the clean-up and
restoration of the area at which such event takes place within
48 hours after the close of the event.
(h) A plan for fire protection and prevention approved by the
Borough of Pine Hill Fire Chief.
8. A statement containing the names of licensed ticket printers to be
used and the plans for assuring the return of monies upon the
termination or cancellation of the event as well as the means of
notifying potential and existing ticket holders of such cancellation;
9. Examples of proposed advertising of the event, if any;
10. A certified copy of the bond or verified evidence of other suitable
financial arrangements, as hereinafter required, must be attached
to the application to include clean-up and restoration of the area at
which such event takes place within 48 hours after the close of the
§ 4-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.2
AO:119
§ 4-8.3. Applicability Of N.J.A.C. § 8:10-1.1 et seq.
The provisions of the New Jersey Administrative code, § 8:10-1.1 et seq.
are specifically incorporated herein; provided, however, that where the
provisions herein shall apply.
§ 4-8.4. Vendors' Permits.
During the occurrence of a mass gathering, the Borough Clerk may
authorize the issuance of up to 18 permits for vendors. Any persons
interested in acquiring a vendor's permit shall apply to the Borough Clerk
not earlier than 90 days or later than 45 days prior to the date of the mass
gathering. There shall be two classes of permits as follows:
§ 4-8.5. License Restrictions.
For purposes of this section the license shall accrue only to the benefit
of the person named in the application. No license holder may employ
any agent, employees, or other help of any nature whatsoever, on either a
permanent or part-time basis.
§ 4-8.6. Penalties.
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be
punishable by a fine of up to $500 or imprisonment in the Camden County
Jail for up to six months, or both. Each day or part thereof on which the
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 4-9. TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING OR BODY BRANDING.
§ 4-9.1. Definitions.
BODY BRANDING — Shall mean placing a mark or design on the skin with
a hot iron.
event. The amount of the bond shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer;
11. A policy covering liability, personal property and bodily damage.
d. Designated representatives of the Council shall be permitted to inspect
at any time the site of the mass gathering for the purpose of
investigating an application and for the purpose of insuring compliance
with the provisions of this section.
a. Unrestricted. There shall be 12 unrestricted permits available for
commercial enterprises, the licensing fee shall be $50 per day or part
thereof.
b. Restricted. There shall be six restricted permits available for nonprofit
service organizations. There shall be no licensing fee to the servicing
organizations.
§ 4-8.2 PINE HILL CODE § 4-9.1
AO:120
BODY PIERCING — Shall mean piercing the skin for the express intention
of insertion of any object, including but not limited to jewelry: provided,
however, that the piercing of the lobes of the ears shall be specifically
excluded from the purview of this section.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Shall mean written approval from the
county health officer or his authorized representative that said tattooing,
body piercing, and/or body branding establishment has been inspected and
meets all of the terms of this section.
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION — Shall mean the certificate held by
an operator upon registration with Camden County Health Department by
meeting the required provisions of this section.
COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER — Shall mean the Camden County Public
Health Coordinator or his authorized representative of Camden County
Department of Health and Human Services.
ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean the premises wherein tattooing, body
piercing or body branding is performed.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any individual, firm, company, corporation or
association that owns or operates an establishment where tattooing, body
piercing and/or body branding is performed and any individual who
performs or practices the above on the person of another.
TATTOO, TATTOOED OR TATTOOING — Shall mean and refer to any
method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any marks
under the skin with ink dye or any other substance resulting in the
coloration of the skin by the aid of needles or any other instruments
designed to puncture the skin.
§ 4-9.2. Requirements Of Business Licensing and Operator
Registration.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operating an establishment where tattooing or body piercing is
performed without first obtaining a license from the Borough of Pine
Hill to engage in such business in accordance with the provisions
hereof. Also, it shall be unlawful for any operator to engage in the
practice of tattooing or body piercing without first obtaining a
certificate of registration from the Camden County Health Department.
b. Persons applying shall submit to the Camden County Health
Department, a medical certificate issued by a physician duly licensed to
practice medicine and surgery in the State of New Jersey, stating that
the prospective licensee or registrant is free from all contagious or
communicable diseases or conditions which may endanger the health of
the client.
c. An application for an initial license shall be accompanied by a fee in the
amount of $50. Any change of ownership shall require a new
application and license with payment of fees therefor. An applicant shall
§ 4-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.2
AO:121
submit a floor plan of the establishment to the Camden County Health
Officer prior to initiation or construction and shall receive a preopening
inspection. All establishments shall be subject to periodic
compliance and/or annual inspection. Every operator shall be
registered with the Camden County Health Department and shall
acquire a certificate of registration upon payment of a fee prior to
business operation or practice. Fees for a plan review, inspections, and
operator registration shall be established by the Camden County Board
of Chosen Freeholders.
d. Any person, firm or corporation desiring to engage, or presently
engaged, in the tattooing or body piercing business shall first apply to
the Clerk of the Borough of Pine Hill, in writing, on forms supplied by
the Clerk of this municipality, for said purpose. The application shall be
accompanied by the license fee and shall set forth the following:
1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Local and permanent addresses and telephone number of the
applicant.
3. Name, local address and telephone number of the manager of the
business if different from applicant.
4. If the applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its
registered agent.
5. Federal Employer Identification Number if applicant is a
corporation, partnership or firm; Social Security Number if
applicant is a sole proprietorship.
6. Certificate of inspection and certificate of operator registration
issued by the Camden County Health Department as parts of the
application documents.
e. The annual license fee for engaging in the business of operating a
tattooing and/or body piercing establishment within the Borough of
Pine Hill, shall be $50 per year. All licenses shall expire on the last day
of each calendar year. If a renovation of the tattooing or body piercing
establishment is anticipated after the acquisition of the annual license,
plans must be submitted to the Camden County Health Department and
the applicant will be required to comply with the provisions of this
section. The license expiration date for renewal shall be December 31,
1998.
f. Each tattooing and body piercing business license issued by the Clerk
of the Borough of Pine Hill shall contain a license number and no such
license shall be transferable.
g. Nothing in the foregoing shall be construed so as to affect the practice
of medicine and surgery or any other recognized profession or
occupation by a person duly licensed by the State of New Jersey to
§ 4-9.2 PINE HILL CODE § 4-9.2
AO:122
§ 4-9.3. General Provisions.
§ 4-9.4. Sanitary Requirements Of Facility.
engage in such practice, profession or occupation and whose license
would lawfully authorize the tattooing or body piercing.
a. It shall be a violation of this section for anyone or any tattooing or body
piercing business to tattoo or pierce the body of an individual under 18
years of age without written authorization signed by the parent or legal
guardian as witnessed by the operator. The operator shall be
responsible for maintaining the original consent form for a period of
two years beyond the recipient's 18th birthday.
b. If the applicant is suspected to be under the influence of alcohol, drugs
or any other behavior modifying substance, the operator must refuse
the applicant.
c. Inquiry shall be made for anyone with a history of recent jaundice.
Hepatitis B or HIV/AIDS and the person shall not be tattooed or body
pierced.
d. Each person wishing to be tattooed or pierced must fill out an
application which will include the name, date of birth, address and
telephone number of the client as well as the design and location(s) of
the tattoo(s) or body piercing(s). The operator shall verify applicable
information from a valid photo ID of the applicant and so noted on the
application. All records regarding tattooing or body piercing are to be
maintained for a minimum of two years.
e. No person or operator shall state or imply, in any advertisement, that
the tattooing or body piercing establishment is endorsed or approved
by the Camden County Health Department in compliance with terms of
this ordinance.
f. No piercing of the tongue nor any part of the genitalia shall be
permitted.
g. The practice of body branding shall not be permitted within this
municipal jurisdiction.
a. No person, partnership, firm nor corporation engaged in the tattooing
or body piercing business shall be issued a municipal mercantile license
to engage in such activity unless the premises at which such activity is
to be conducted and the equipment to be utilized in conjunction
therewith meet the following standards and inspected/approved by the
Camden County Health Department.
1. Each tattooing and/or body piercing facility shall have a bathroom
accessible to the client and staff. Each bathroom shall be equipped
with a commode and a sink with the sink being connected to hot
and cold running water. Soap and sanitary towels, or other
§ 4-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.4
AO:123
§ 4-9.5. Requirements Of Tattooing And Body Piercing Practices.
approved hand drying devices shall be available at the sink at all
times. Common towels are prohibited. In addition to the above,
each tattooing or body piercing cubicle or work station must be
provided with a sink connected to hot and cold running water. This
area shall also be provided with soap and appropriate hand drying
devices.
2. The chair, seat or exam table reserved for the person receiving the
tattooing or body piercing shall be of material that is smooth and
easily clearable and constructed of a material that is nonabsorbent.
Any surfaces of the chair, seat or exam table that
become exposed to blood or body fluids must be cleaned and
sanitized prior to use by the next customer.
3. The work table or counter used by the operator shall be smooth and
easily clearable and constructed of material that is non-absorbent.
There shall be a covered junction between the table/counter and
the wall if the table/counter is to be placed against the wall. This
table/counter must be cleaned and sanitized or use single-use
disposable sheets, utilizing a method approved by the Camden
County Health Department, between customers.
4. The walls in the tattooing or body piercing area shall be smooth
and easily clearable and constructed of non-absorbent materials.
Floors shall be kept clean.
5. Lighting within the tattooing or body piercing area shall be
adequate so as to provide a minimum of 100-footcandles in all
areas.
6. The work area reserved for the tattooing or body piercing shall be
not less than 100 square feet and shall be separated from other
areas of the establishment by walls or durable partitions extending
at least six feet in height.
7. Any surfaces in the establishment that become exposed to blood or
body fluids must be cleaned and sanitized using a method approved
by the Camden County Health Department.
8. Products used in the cleaning, sanitizing and sterilizing procedures
must be clearly marked and stored in an acceptable manner.
Smaller working containers filled on-site from larger containers
must be clearly marked with the name of the product.
9. Proper waste receptacles shall be provided and waste disposed of
at appropriate intervals.
a. Tattooing or Body Piercing Operators.
§ 4-9.4 PINE HILL CODE § 4-9.5
AO:124
1. All operators while performing services shall neither be under the
influence of alcohol or drug, nor be infected with Hepatitis B, HIV/
AIDS, contagious dermatitis or any other communicable disease.
2. Hepatitis B pre-exposure vaccination or proof of immunity is
required for all operators. If a person cannot obtain the vaccination
for medical reasons, he/she shall submit to the Camden County
Health Department a letter from his/her physician certifying that
the individual does not have Hepatitis B and vaccination is
contraindicated. This certification shall be annually renewed. Any
accidental needle stick injury shall be immediately reported to the
Camden County Health Department.
3. All tattooing or body piercing operators shall attend a training
program sponsored by the Camden County Health Department.
4. Before working on each patron, each operator shall scrub and
thoroughly wash his/her hands with hot water and antiseptic soap.
The hands shall be dried with individual, single use towels.
Fingernails shall be kept clean and short.
5. Disposable vinyl or latex gloves shall be worn by the operator
during tattooing or body piercing preparation and application to
prevent contact with blood or body fluids. Universal precautions as
described by the U.S. Center for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) shall be followed. All materials shall be disposed of in
accordance with waste disposal provisions of this ordinance after
contact with each patron. Hands shall be washed immediately.
6. Immediately after tattooing or piercing a patron, the operator shall
advise the patron on the care of the site tattooed or pierced and
shall instruct the patron to consult a physician at the first sign of
infection. Printed instructions regarding these points shall be given
to each patron by the operator.
7. All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing or body
piercing which becomes known to the operator shall be promptly
reported to the county health officer by the person owning or
operating the body piercing establishment or by the operator.
b. Skin Preparation.
1. Tattooing or body piercing shall be done only on normal healthy
skin surface that is free of cuts, wounds, rashes, boils, pimples,
moles or infection, or manifests any evidence of unhealthy
conditions.
2. Only safety razors with disposable blades shall be used for the skin
preparation. Blades shall be disposed of according to the waste
disposal procedure of this section after each use and a new blade
used for each patron.
§ 4-9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.5
AO:125
3. Following shaving, the tattooing area shall be thoroughly cleansed
and scrubbed with tincture of green soap or its equivalent and
warm water. Before placing the tattoo design or body piercing on
the patron's skin, the area shall be treated with 70% alcohol and
allowed to air dry. A single use sponge shall be used to scrub the
area.
4. Only petroleum jelly (U.S.P. or National Formulary) or antiseptic
ointment shall be applied to the tattoo area prior to tattooing. The
ointment shall be applied in a sanitary manner, disposing of the
utensil after spreading. Collapsible tubes of ointment or jelly may
also be used.
5. Design stencils shall be thoroughly cleansed and rinsed in an
approved germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes or disposed of
following each use.
6. Only non-toxic dyes or pigments may be used. Pre-mixed sterile
materials are preferred. Pre-mixed dyes shall be used without
adulteration of the manufacturer's original formula. It shall be the
responsibility of the operator to provide certification to the Camden
County Health Department of the non-toxicity of the dyes or inks at
the time of license application and renewal.
7. No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded or treated with
chemicals for the purpose of removing, camouflaging or altering
any blemish, birthmark, scar or tattoo.
8. Ear piercing guns may not be used for body piercing, but may only
be used for piercing of the ear lobes.
c. Needles, instruments and supplies.
1. All clean and ready to use needles, gloves, gauze and instruments
shall be kept in a closed glass or metal case or storage cabinet
while not in use. Such cabinet shall be maintained in a sanitary
manner at all times.
2. Single service sterilized needles shall be used.
3. If needles and needle bars are to be reused, these items shall be
steam sterilized (autoclave) before reuse on any customer. Any
other method of sterilization shall be approved by the county health
officer.
4. The sterilizer shall be well maintained with a tight-fitting gasket
and a clean interior.
5. The manufacturer's operating instructions and the sterilization
specification shall be at hand. The operation of the sterilizer shall
conform to the manufacturer's specifications with regard to
temperature, pressure and time of the sterilization cycle.
§ 4-9.5 PINE HILL CODE § 4-9.5
AO:126
§ 4-9.6. Imminent Closure.
§ 4-9.7. Penalty Provisions.
6. Proper functioning of the sterilization cycles shall be verified.
7. Each item to be sterilized shall be individually wrapped using a
chemical indicator or strip to verify steam exposure.
8. Any needle that penetrates the skin of the operator shall be
immediately disposed of in accordance with the waste disposal
procedure of this section.
9. If the primary source of sterilization malfunctions, the county
health officer shall be notified within 24 hours. In an emergency
situation, the Camden County health officer may approve alternate
sterilization techniques.
d. Disposal of Wastes.
1. Needles shall not be bent or broken prior to disposal. Operators
shall take precautions to prevent puncture injuries from
contaminated needles. Needles shall be disposed of directly into a
solid puncture resistant container.
2. These medical wastes shall be disposed of by an authorized
contractor as per the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's regulation.
3. If blood contaminated gloves, gauze and other materials are
sterilized by autoclaving, these wastes can be placed for off-site
waste collection.
a. When it appears to the county health officer that the operation of the
tattooing or body piercing establishment poses an immediate and
imminent threat to the public health and safety such that irreparable
harm will occur if the tattooing or body piercing establishment is not
immediately closed, the county health officer shall have the power to
order the immediate closure of the tattooing or body piercing
establishment until such time that the violations complained of have
been corrected.
a. Any person, partnership, firm or corporation who violates any provision
of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more
than $1,000 for each violation of this section or imprisonment in the
county jail up to 90 days, or both. Each day that the violation exists is
considered to be a separate offense.
b. Reasonable counsel fees incurred by the Camden County Health
Department in the enforcement of this section shall be paid by the
defendant. The amount of such reimbursable fees and costs shall be
determined by the court hearing the matter.
§ 4-9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.7
AO:127
§ 4-10. FIREWORKS DISPLAY.
§ 4-10.1. Permit Required.
Any private person or entity desiring to put on a fireworks display shall
make application to do so to the Borough Clerk, who will issue a permit to
do so upon the following conditions being met;
§ 4-11. RAFFLE AND BINGO LICENSING.
The municipal Clerk is hereby delegated the authority to act as the "issuing
authority" to approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses.
§ 4-12. PUBLIC AUCTIONS.
§ 4-12.1. Compliance Required; Definition.
No person or entity shall conduct a public auction within the Borough of
Pine Hill without first complying with this section. Public auction for the
purposes of this section shall mean the sale of anything to the general public
by means of bidding and shall not include any sales by a governmental
entity or a bona fide charity, nor will it include any sale which does not
require the physical presence of a buyer or buyer's agent or representative.
c. In addition to being subject to the penalties provided herein, any
license or certificate of registration issued under this section may be
revoked or suspended for any intentional misstatement in any
application or for any violation of this section. No license shall be
revoked or suspended until the licensee has been afforded a hearing.
Notice of the filing of a complaint which seeks to suspend or revoke any
license or certificate of registration issued under this section shall be
served on the defendant personally or on the person designated to
receive service of this section. This notice will establish a date for a
hearing to be held not more than 10 days from the date of such notice,
at which time the defendant shall have the right to be represented by
counsel, call witnesses, cross-examine witnesses produced in support of
the complaint, as well as such other rights necessary in order to insure
due process. Should any license or certificate of registration be revoked
or suspended, no part of the license or registration fee shall be
returned.
a. Payment of a nonrefundable permit fee of $50
b. Compliance with state laws and regulations.
c. Payment of funds to be held in escrow account with the Borough Clerk
of a sum to cover all costs of municipal and/or fire district employees
necessary for the exhibition to comply with state law and regulations.
The balance of any escrow funds will be reimbursed to the applicant
upon payment of all bills and approval of the fire official following the
event.
§ 4-9.7 PINE HILL CODE § 4-12.2
AO:128
§ 4-12.2. Application for Permit.
Anyone desiring to conduct a public auction in the Borough of Pine Hill
shall make application to the Borough Clerk and provide the following
information:
§ 4-12.3. Review of Application; Issuance of Permit.
The Clerk shall have the application reviewed by the Chief of Police for
approval and if approved shall issue a permit for the auction.
§ 4-12.4. Permit Fee.
The fee for an auction permit shall be $750 payable at the time of its
issuance.
§ 4-12.5. Duration of Permit; Regulations.
Any permit issued pursuant to this section will be valid for only the
scheduled auction. In the event that the auction is continued for reasons
beyond the control of the permit holder, the permit will be valid for the
continued date.
The permit holder shall, when conducting the auction, keep books in which
shall be described and inventoried in a clear and legible manner all items
sold, the name and address of the buyer and the consideration paid, said
books to be open to inspection to the Borough's Police Department at all
times.
Any permit holder shall be permitted a period of 60 days prior to the auction
date to store items and prepare the auction site and shall be permitted a
period of 30 days after the auction date to remove all items related to the
auction from the auction site.
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any permit issued hereunder to engage
in any fraudulent, false and/or misleading conduct so as to deprive any
bidder or prospective bidder of a fair bid process.
§ 4-13. CHARITABLE CLOTHING BINS.16
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The date and location of the proposed auction.
c. The name and address of the auctioneer.
d. The items to be auctioned.
e. The anticipated attendance count and the plan for crowd and traffic
control.
16.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history Ord. No. 2008-829.
§ 4-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-13.1
AO:129
§ 4-13.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2017-957]
The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.60 et seq. to establish guidelines for the location and use of
charitable clothing bins throughout the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 4-13.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-957]
CLOTHING DONATION BIN — Shall mean any enclosed receptacle or
container made of metal, steel or any other material, or similar pattern or
design, which are intended for the donation and/or temporary storage of
clothing or other similar type materials.
SOLICITATION/SOLICIT — Shall mean for purposes of this section, the
request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit, property, financial
assistance or other thing of any kind or value. Solicitation shall include, but
not be limited to, the use or employment of canisters, cards, receptacles
or other similar devices for the collection of money or other thing of value.
The solicitation shall take place whether or not the person making the
solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 4-13.3. Requirements. [Ord. No. 2017-957]
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall
place, use or employ a donation clothing bin within the Borough of Pine Hill,
for solicitation purposes, without obtaining a permit from the Municipal
Clerk. Permits shall be renewable on an annual basis during the month of
January.
§ 4-13.4. Permit Fee. [Ord. No. 2017-957]
The annual permit fee is $25 per bin and will be used to offset the cost
involved in enforcing this section.
§ 4-13.5. Application Requirements. [Ord. No. 2017-957]
The application for obtaining a permit shall include:
a. The locations where the bin will be situated as precisely as possible.
b. The manner in which the applicant anticipates any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin will be used, sold or disbursed and the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations will be allocated
or spent.
c. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any person or
entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin and where such person can be reached during
normal business hours. For the purposes of this subsection, an
answering machine or service unrelated to the person does not
constitute a bona fide office.
§ 4-13.1 PINE HILL CODE § 4-13.5
AO:130
§ 4-13.6. Renewal Application Requirements. [Ord. No. 2017-957]
In addition to the above application requirements, renewal applications
must include:
§ 4-13.7. Placement of Bins. [Ord. No. 2017-957]
No application for a permit to place, use, or employ a donation clothing
bin shall be granted if it is determined that the placement of the bin could
constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall include, but not be limited
to, the placement of a donation clothing bin within 100 yards of any place
which stores large amount of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids
or gases; or the placement of a bin where it interferes with vehicular or
pedestrian circulation. Any person placing, using or employing a donation
bin shall maintain the bin in the area surrounding the bin so that there is
no accumulation of clothing or other donations outside the bin. No donation
clothing bin shall be permitted to be placed or operated on residential,
vacant and/or otherwise undeveloped property.
§ 4-13.8. Display of Permit Information. [Ord. No. 2017-957]
The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on
the exterior of the donation clothing bin.
d. Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his/her
property.
a. A statement of the manner in which the applicant used, sold or
disbursed any clothing or other donation collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have been
allocated or spent, and any changes the applicant anticipates it may
make in these processes during the period covered by the renewal.
b. The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of any entity
which shared or profited from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, and any of the entities which may do so during the period
covered by the renewal.
c. If the location of the bin is to be moved, a precise description of the new
location where the bin is to be situated as precisely as possible, and
written consent from the property owner of the new location.
a. The permit number and its date of expiration.
b. The name and address of the registered person who owns the bin, and
of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin.
c. The telephone number of the owner's bona fide office and, if applicable,
the telephone number of the bona fide office of any other entity which
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via
§ 4-13.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-13.8
AO:131
§ 4-13.9. Complaints/Investigations/Violations. [Ord. No. 2017-957]
§ 4-13.10. Additional Penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-957]
In addition to any other penalty or remedies authorized by the laws of the
State of New Jersey, any person who violates any provision of this section or
the bin. For purposes of this subsection, an answering machine or
service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office.
d. In cases where any entity other than the person who owns the bin may
share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable manner,
indicating the clothing or other donations collected via the bin, their
proceeds, or both, may be shared or given entirely to, an entity other
than the person who owns the bin, and identifying all such entities
which may share or profit from such donations.
e. A statement consistent with the information provided to the Borough in
the most recent permit or renewal application, indicating the manner in
which the owner anticipates any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin will be used, sold, or disbursed, and the method by which the
proceeds of collected donations will be allocated or spent.
a. The Borough Construction Code Official, or authorized designee, shall
be the person to receive and investigate within 30 days, any complaints
from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears to the Construction
Official, or authorized designee, that a person has engaged in, or is
engaging in any act or practice in violation of this section, the person
who placed the bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if the
violation is not rectified within 45 days, the bin will be seized or
removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be sold at public
auction or otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means used to
notify the person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed to
the exterior of the bin itself.
b. In the event that the person who placed the donation clothing bin does
not rectify the violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the
posting of the warning, the Borough may take the following action:
1. The bin may be seized or removed at the expense of the person who
placed the bin, and the Borough shall be permitted to sell at public
auction or otherwise dispose of the bin or any of its contents
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations
collected via the bin shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of
the Borough.
2. The permit issued to the person who placed the bin in accordance
with the provisions of this section shall be revoked.
§ 4-13.8 PINE HILL CODE § 4-13.10
AO:132
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. which results in the seizure of
the charitable donation bin shall be:
Chapter 4A
MERCANTILE LICENSES
§ 4A-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
BUSINESS — Shall mean any new or existing commercial business, trade,
profession, occupation or service conducted in the Borough of Pine Hill.
BUSINESS LICENSE — Shall mean the license issued to any business entity.
PERSON — Shall mean and include individuals, firms, copartnerships,
corporations or any combination thereof.
§ 4A-2. LICENSE REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
No person, or business entity, including a business entity licensed by the
State of New Jersey or the government of the United States as outlined in
this chapter, shall engage in, operate or conduct or maintain a business,
within the Borough of Pine Hill without first obtaining a license from the
Borough Clerk as provided in this chapter.
§ 4A-3. APPLICATION. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
Application for license shall be made to the Borough Clerk, and no license
shall be granted until the payment for same shall have been made in full.
Every license shall specify by name the person to whom it is issued, the
a. Subject to a penalty up to $20,000 for each violation, the Borough may
bring this action in the Borough Municipal Court or the Superior Court
of New Jersey as a summary proceeding under the "Penalty
Enforcement Law of 1999" P.L. 1999, c. 274 (C. 2A:58-10 et seq.) and
any penalty monies collected shall be paid to the Borough Chief
Financial Officer.
b. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to this section and P.L. 2007, c.209
(N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61). A person disqualified from placing, using, or
employing a donation clothing bin by violating the provisions of this
section or P.L. 2007, c.209 (N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq.) may apply to the
Borough Council to have that person's eligibility restored. The Borough
Council may restore the eligibility of a person who:
1. Acts within the public interest; and
2. Demonstrates that he/she made a good faith effort to comply with
the provisions of this chapter, P.L. 2007, and all other applicable
laws and regulations, or had no fraudulent intentions.
§ 4-13.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4A-3
AO:133
business for which it is granted, the location at which such business is to be
carried on, and the issuance and expiration dates of the license.
Each application shall contain the following information:
§ 4A-4. METHOD OF PAYMENT. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
All license fees shall be due and payable to the Borough Clerk at the office
of the Borough Clerk, on January 1 in each year, and all such licenses shall
expire, and become invalid on December 31 next ensuing. Any business
commencing original operation in the Borough on or after July 1 any year
shall be permitted to pay 1/2 of the normal license fee, and such first year
licenses shall expire on December 31 next ensuing.
§ 4A-5. APPROVAL OF LICENSE. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
Before any business license shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter or pursuant to the provisions of State law, the applicant shall secure
the approval of the following municipal departments and agencies having
jurisdiction as to the laws, ordinances or regulations listed:
a. The name under which the business is to be conducted;
b. The name of the owner;
c. The name of the franchise owner, if the business is a franchise;
d. The name of the local store manager;
e. The address of the owner;
f. The local telephone number of the business;
g. The type of business being conducted;
h. Federal ID number, State Tax ID number, NJ Business Registration
Certificate number;
i. Name, address and telephone number of the property owner.
a. The Board of Fire Commissioners of the Borough Fire District (as to
provisions of the Pine Hill Borough Fire Code).
b. The Camden County Board of Health (as to State and local health
regulations and ordinances), if applicable.
c. The Pine Hill Borough Construction/Building Department (as to
Building Code matters).
d. The Pine Hill Borough Zoning Officer as to type of business permitted
and location of the business.
No license under this chapter shall be issued for the conducting of
any business if the premises and building to be used for the purpose
§ 4A-3 PINE HILL CODE § 4A-5
AO:134
§ 4A-6. PLANNING/ZONING BOARD CERTIFICATION. [Ord. No.
2012-898]
No license shall be granted for any new commercial business which has
obtained Planning or Zoning Board approval unless and until that Board has
submitted in writing to the Borough Clerk that the applicant has complied
with all provisions of the approval.
§ 4A-7. DENIAL; REVOCATION. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
The Borough Council shall have the right to suspend or revoke any license
or permit whenever the holder thereof or any of the licensee's agents or
servants violate any provisions of this section, the laws of the State or any
rules or regulations promulgated as herein provided. Prior to the revocation
of a license, a written notice of the contemplated action of the Borough
Council shall be served upon said licensee, setting forth each charge as
may be the reason for said proposed revocation and the place, date and
hour when the Borough Council will hear the matter. The licensee may be
represented by counsel at such hearing.
§ 4A-8. NONTRANSFERABLE. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
No license provided by this chapter or issued hereunder shall be transferred
or assigned from one person to another person or from one place of
business to another.
§ 4A-9. LICENSES TO BE POSTED. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be posted at the place of
business shown thereon in a conspicuous place and shall remain so posted
as long as it is in effect and the licensed business is operated.
§ 4A-10. INSPECTION OF PREMISES. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
Whenever inspections of the premises or a licensed business or occupation
are provided for or required by ordinance or State law, or are reasonably
necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect
violations thereof; it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in
charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose
of making the inspection any officer or employee of the Borough who is
authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that
admission is requested. Any refusal to permit access to any building for
the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this or other
ordinances or State law and to determine the fees to be paid hereunder,
shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and be subject to penalty.
do not fully comply with the requirements of all ordinances and codes
governing structures within the Borough. No license shall be issued for
the conducting of any business which would involve a violation of the
Zoning Ordinance of the Borough.
§ 4A-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4A-11
AO:135
§ 4A-11. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
Any proper officer of the Borough including but not limited to the police,
Construction Code Official and Zoning Enforcement Officer, is authorized
and directed to act as necessary to execute and enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 4A-12. FEES. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
An initial licensing fee of $30 shall be paid to the Borough Clerk at the time
the applicant submits the registration form. Thereafter, an annual licensing
fee of $30 shall be paid on or before January 31 of each year. If any person
or entity, who is required to obtain a license or permit pursuant to this
chapter, does not obtain such a license or permit by January 31 of the
respective year, a late fee equal to 50% of the licensing fee will be assessed
for each month it is late. All late fees assessed against a business must be
paid with the licensing fee. In addition to any late fee, the business must
pay all licensing fees for previous years that were not paid and applicable
late charges. In any action to enforce this chapter, the Borough Clerk shall
include all late fees and past due licensing fee amounts in the summons and
complaints filed against the business or any other appropriate party.
§ 4A-13. FEE FOR COMBINED BUSINESSES. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
In the case where a person shall in one building conduct two or more
businesses, trades, professions or callings or occupations, such person shall
pay as a license fee for such combined businesses the highest fee required
to be paid for any such business as conducted by such person, together with
an additional sum of 1/2 of the initial fee for each additional business. The
aggregate of the license fees for any one applicant for all businesses, trades,
professions and trades or occupations to be conducted on any one premises
shall not be greater than $75.
§ 4A-14. TRANSACTION LIMITED TO LICENSE. [Ord. No.
2012-898]
No person shall transact any business under any license granted under
this chapter except that business for which such license was specifically
granted.
§ 4A-15. EXEMPTIONS. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
a. Nonprofit organizations duly qualified under the laws of the State of
New Jersey shall be required to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, except that such organizations shall not be required to pay any
fee required herein.
1. All nonprofit organizations must file an application with the
Borough Clerk's office for each separate fund-raising event.
§ 4A-11 PINE HILL CODE § 4A-15
AO:136
§ 4A-16. VIOLATION AND PENALTY. [Ord. No. 2012-898]
Any person that shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, before the magistrate or court having jurisdiction, be subject to
a fine not exceeding $500 for each offense or by imprisonment in the County
jail for a term not exceeding 60 days, or both. Each day the violation is
continued shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 4A-17. YARD SALES.
§ 4A-17.1. Limit Number Of Yard Sale Licenses(s). [Ord. No.
97-633]
A yard sale license shall not be issued more than three times within a
twelve-month period for the same resident address.
§ 4A-17.2. Limit Number Of Days Yard Sales(s) May Be Held. [Ord.
No. 97-633]
No yard sale license shall be issued for more than three days in succession.
Chapter 5
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 5-1. PURPOSE. [New]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the same and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Borough of Pine Hill in accordance with the provisions
of an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A.
33:1-1, et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 5-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meaning as in R.S. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of the
Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 5-3. LICENSES.
2. The Borough Clerk will maintain a calendar, for informational
purposes only, of each fund-raising event, stating the name of the
organization, date of event, and type of fund-raising effort.
b. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person engaged in
a home occupation within the meaning of the Borough Zoning
Ordinance.
§ 4A-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-3.1
AO:137
§ 5-3.1. Laws Applicable. [New]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in section 5-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 5-3.2. Issuing Authority. [New]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the borough council,
which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 5-3.3. License Required. [New]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the borough
without obtaining a license in accordance with the act referred to in section
5-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 5-3.4. License Fees; Maximum Number. [Ord. #26, SI; Ord. #22,
SI; Ord. #2004-741; Ord. #2005-766, SI; Ord. #2007-794, SI; Ord.
No. 2015-929]
The annual fees and maximum number of licenses for the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages in the borough shall be as follows:
Class of License
Annual License
Fee No. of Licenses
Plenary Retail Consumption
License
$732 6
Plenary Retail Distribution
License
$627.60 2
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
§ 5-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 5-4.1. Hours Of Sale. [Ord. #22, S2]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, delivered or served to or consumed in
any licensed premises on any day between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m. except Sundays and New Year's Day each year as hereinafter provided.
§ 5-4.2. Sunday. [Ord. #22, S2; Ord. #2004-741]
Provisions of subsection 5-4.1 shall not apply on Sundays. On Sundays, no
alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in the
licensed premises between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.
§ 5-3.1 PINE HILL CODE § 5-4.3
AO:138
§ 5-4.3. New Year's Day. [Ord. #22, S2]
Provisions of subsection 5-4.1 shall not apply on January 1. On that day
alcoholic beverages may not be sold, served, delivered to or consumed in
the licensed premises from the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless
January 1 is a Sunday, in which case alcoholic beverages may be sold,
served, delivered to or consumed in the licensed premises between the
hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
§ 5-4.4. Sales To Certain Persons. [New]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any habitual drunkard, intoxicated
person or minor, nor permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any
licensed premises by any of the above named classes or persons, or permit
any such persons to congregate in or about the licensed premises.
§ 5-4.5. Lighting On Premises. [Ord. #22, S2]
All lights on the exterior of licensed premises shall be extinguished at 2:00
a.m. except lights on that portion of the premises used for parking purposes
and no person shall be admitted to the licensed premises after the last
mentioned hour.
No music of any kind shall be played after 2:30 a.m. No such exterior lights
may be relit or music resumed until the hour above established when sales
of alcoholic beverages may be resumed.
During the hours sales of alcoholic beverages are hereinabove prohibited,
the entire licensed premises shall also be closed and no person shall be
admitted or permitted to remain therein except the licensee or bona fide
employees of the licensee.
§ 5-5. MINORS. [Ord. #22, S5; Ord. #2004-741]
No licensee shall sell or serve any alcoholic beverage to any person under
the age of 21 years of age.
§ 5-6. REVOCATION OF LICENSES. [New]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of R.S. 33:1-31 by service of a five day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 5-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-6
AO:139
Chapter 6
LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS
§ 6-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.1]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CAT — Shall mean any member of the domestic feline species: male, female
or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any cat which has attained the age
of six months.
CATTERY — Shall mean a room, group of rooms, cage, exhibition pen or
kennel where cats are kept for organized shows, breeding for exhibition, for
sale or display.
DOG — Shall mean any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any dog which has attained the age
of seven months or which possess a set of permanent teeth.
HARBORING — Shall mean maintaining custody, possession or control over
a cat or permitting a cat to remain on premises or providing shelter or food.
KENNEL — Shall mean any properly licensed and appropriately zoned
establishment wherein or whereon the business of boarding or selling more
than two dogs or cats or breeding more than two dogs or cats for sale is
carried on, except a pet shop.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the agency or department of the
Borough of Pine Hill or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this section.
NEUTERED — Shall mean rendered permanently incapable of reproduction
as certified by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — Shall include every person having a right of property (or
custody) in a dog or cat and every person who has such dog or cat in his/
her keeping, possession or control or who harbors or maintains a dog or
cat or knowingly permits a dog or cat to remain on or about any premises
occupied by the owner. The owner must be at least 18 years of age, a parent
or legal guardian shall become co-owner of the dog or cat and assume full
responsibility, in lieu of the minor, in order to comply with the provisions
in this chapter, which include obtaining a license under the name or names
of either the parent or guardian or under both the parent or guardian and
minor.
PET SHOP — Shall mean any properly licensed and appropriately zoned
retail establishment where the sale of domesticated animals and supplied
therefore is the primary business.
POSSESSING, POSSESSION — See the definition of harboring.
§ 5-6 PINE HILL CODE § 6-1
AO:140
POUND — Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs or other
animals seized either under the provisions of this act or otherwise.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Shall mean a dog or cat that damages or harms
persons, public or private property.
STRAY DOG OR CAT — Shall mean a dog or cat having no known owner or
custodian or known place of care and shelter.
§ 6-2. GENERAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ANIMALS.
[Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.2]
Hereafter, each and every person owning, harboring, keeping or having
charge of any animal as described in this chapter or any other chapter of
the Code of the Borough of Pine Hill shall:
§ 6-3. VACCINATION REQUIREMENTS.
§ 6-3.1. Vaccination Requirements. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.3a]
No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any dog or cat over six
months of age within the Borough of Pine Hill unless such cat or dog is
vaccinated and licensed. All dogs or cats as defined must be vaccinated
against rabies by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with the guidelines
of the latest Compendium of Animal Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations
for Immunization, published by the National Association of State Public
Health Veterinarians, or as otherwise required by the terms of this
Ordinance of the appropriate departments of the State of New Jersey.
§ 6-3.2. Vaccination Certificate. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.3b]
A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each vaccinated
cat or dog, on a form recommended by the State of New Jersey. It shall be
the duty of every veterinarian, at the time of vaccinating the cat or dog, to
provide a copy of the rabies vaccination certificate as set forth herein.
a. Be prohibited from owning, harboring, keeping or having charge of
more than two of any type of animal described in this or any other
chapter of the Code of the Borough of Pine Hill or more than a total of
six of any combination thereof, except for kennels and pet shops.
b. Be prohibited from constructing any building, shed, hutch, barn, stable,
pigeon coop, doghouse or any other such housing structure for the
keeping or harboring of any such animal described in this chapter or
any other chapter of the Code of the Borough of Pine Hill, which has as
its purpose the accommodation of more than two of any type of such
animal and which exceeds the reasonable space requirement to
accommodate more than two of such type of animal, except for kennels
and pet shops.
§ 6-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4
AO:141
§ 6-4. LICENSE REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.4]
Licenses must be procured for all cats or dogs over the age of six months.
Application for such license shall be made to the Animal Control Officer, and
the following information, including presentation of a valid rabies certificate
showing that the cat has been immunized for rabies shall be furnished.
§ 6-5. IDENTIFICATION. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.5]
Each person owning or possessing any cat or dog is obligated to make
certain that said cat or dog bears identification, either by collar, tag,
harness or other suitable means. The rabies vaccination tag must be
attached to and made a part of the identification.
§ 6-6. LICENSING DISPLAY, FEES, RENEWAL.
§ 6-6.1. Cats or Dogs Must Have License Number Displayed. [Ord.
No. 2008-810 § 6.6a]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a cat or dog of licensing age
shall annually apply for the procure from the Animal Control Officer of the
Borough or other official designated by the governing body license cats
and dogs, a license and official registration tag with license number or a
registration sleeve for each cat or dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall
place upon such cat or dog a collar or other device with the license number
securely fastened or displayed thereto. Acceptable methods of displaying
the license number shall include, but are not limited to, breakaway or
elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are not transferable.
§ 6-6.2. Time for Applying for License. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.6b]
The owner of any newly acquired cat or dog of licensing age or of any cat
or dog which attains licensing age shall make application for a license tag
or sleeve for such within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
This requirement will not apply to a nonresident keeping a cat or dog within
the Borough of Pine Hill for no longer than 90 days.
§ 6-6.3. Cat or Dog Brought into Jurisdiction. [Ord. No. 2008-810
§ 6.6c]
a. Name and address of the owner or persons possessing such cat or dog;
b. Such description of the cat or dog as may be required for the purpose of
identification;
c. The breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat or dog.
a. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this Borough
any cat or dog licensed in another state for the current year and
bearing a registration tag or sleeve and shall keep the same or permit
the same to be kept within the Borough for a period of more than 90
§ 6-4 PINE HILL CODE § 6-6.3
AO:142
§ 6-6.4. License Forms and Tags. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.6d]
License forms and official tags or sleeves shall be furnished by the
municipality and shall be numbered serially and shall bear the year of
issuance and the name of the municipality.
§ 6-6.5. Evidence of Inoculation with Rabies Vaccine or Certification
of Exemption; Requirement for License. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6e]
No official designated by the governing body of the municipality to license
cats or dogs therein shall grant any such license and official registration tag
or sleeve for any cat or dog unless the owner thereof provides evidence that
the cat or dog to be licensed and registered has been inoculated with an
appropriate rabies vaccine.
§ 6-6.6. License Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.6f; Ord. No.
2014-911]
A license shall be issued after payment of a fee of $15 for non-neutered/
spayed dogs, $12 for neutered/spayed dogs. The fee for cats is established
at $12 for non-neutered/spayed cats and $9 for neutered/spayed cats.
Persons who fail to obtain a license as required within the time period
specified in this section will be subject to a delinquent fee of $15 after April
15th of the applicable year.
§ 6-6.7. Fees, Renewals and Expiration Date of License. [Ord. No.
2008-810 § 6.6g]
days shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve
for such cat or dog.
b. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into this Borough
any unlicensed cat or dog and shall keep the same or permit the same to
be kept within the Borough for a period of more than 10 days shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag or sleeve for each
such cat or dog.
a. The person applying for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve
shall pay the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal of a license
and registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original. All
licenses shall expire on the 31st day of December of the calendar year
for which issued.
b. Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in the
licensing year for each cat or dog. Any valid New Jersey license tag or
sleeve issued by a New Jersey municipality shall be accepted by this
Borough as evidence of compliance.
§ 6-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-6.8
AO:143
§ 6-6.8. Loss of License. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.6h]
If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the Animal Control
Officer shall issue a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve for that
particular dog or cat at a fee of $1.
§ 6-6.9. Proof of Licensing. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.6i]
Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person owning, keeping,
maintaining or harboring a cat or dog, upon the request of any Health
Official, Police Officer, Animal Control Officer or other authorized person.
§ 6-6.10. Interfering with Persons Performing Duties Under This
section. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.6j]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 6-7. KENNELS, PET SHOPS, SHELTERS AND POUNDS.
§ 6-7.1. License Required. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.7a]
Any person who keeps or operates or purposes to establish a kennel or pet
shop shall apply to the Animal Control Officer for a license entitling him to
keep or operate such establishment and any person holding such license
shall not be required to secure individual license for cats or dogs owned,
by such licensee and kept at such establishment, such licenses shall not be
transferable to another owner or different premises.
§ 6-7.2. Fees. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 7b]
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for 10 or less
cats or dogs shall be $10 and for more than 10 cats or dogs $25. The annual
license fee for a pet shop shall be $10. No fee shall be charged for a pound.
§ 6-7.3. List of Establishments. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 7c]
The Animal Control Officer shall forward to the State Department of Health
a list of all kennels, pet shops and pounds licensed within 30 days after the
licenses thereof are issued, which list shall include the name and address of
the licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 6-7.4. Canvass of Cats and Dogs. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 7d]
The Animal Control Officer shall annually after February 1st cause a
canvass to be made of all cats or dogs owned, kept or harbored, within
the Borough and shall report to the local Board of Health and to the
State Department of Health the result thereof, setting forth in separate
columns the names and addresses of persons, owning, keeping or harboring
such cats or dogs, the number of unlicensed cats or dogs owned, kept
§ 6-6.8 PINE HILL CODE § 6-7.4
AO:144
or harbored by each of the persons, together with a complete list and
description of each of the unlicensed cats or dogs.
§ 6-7.5. Sale of Dogs and Cats at Pet Shops Restricted. [Ord. No.
2016-940]
a. Definitions.
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — Shall mean an animal control center or
animal shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county,
or municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole, or significant
part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or
rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Shall mean any not-for-profit
organization which has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of
the United States Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice
is, in whole or in significant part, the rescue and placement of animals
in permanent homes.
CAT — Shall mean a member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — Shall mean a member of the species of domestic dog, Canis
familiaris.
OFFER FOR SALE — Shall mean to sell, offer for sale or adoption,
advertise for the sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose
of a dog or cat.
PET SHOP — Shall mean a retail establishment where dogs and cats
are sold, exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the
general public at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care
facility or animal rescue organization, as defined.
b. Restrictions on the Sale of Animals.
1. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet
shop has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
(a) An animal care facility; or
(b) An animal rescue organization.
2. A pet shop shall not offer for sale a dog or cat that is younger than
eight weeks old.
c. Violations and Penalties.
Upon adoption of this subsection, the County of Camden shall provide
enforcement through the County Department of health and Human
Services.
Any person who violates this subsection shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 90 days or both. Each day that a violation is permitted to
§ 6-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-7.5
AO:145
§ 6-8. CATS RUNNING AT LARGE WHILE IN HEAT. [Ord. No.
2008-810 § 8]
It is hereby declared unlawful for any owner, keeper or harborer of any
female cat or dog to permit such cat or dog to run at large while in heat,
whether or not a valid registration tag is attached.
§ 6-9. PUBLIC NUISANCE. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.9]
Any dog or cat running at large in violation of the provisions of this chapter
is declared to be a public nuisance. Said dog or cat may be impounded by
the appropriate local authorities. All fees as per Animal Control Officer's
contract shall be charged against the owner of said dog or cat. Failure to
pay the fee shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
§ 6-10. ABANDONMENT. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.10]
No person shall abandon any dog or cat of any age or permit a dog or cat to
become a stray.
§ 6-11. SOILING OR DEFILING PROPERTY. [Ord. No. 2008-810
§ 6.11]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any cat or dog shall permit it to
soil, defile or commit any nuisance on any place where people congregate or
walk or upon any public property whatsoever. These provisions shall apply
to all privately owned property in the Borough, except the property of owner
or keeper of the cat or dog and the property owned or controlled by persons
who have invited or permitted the owner or keeper of a cat or dog to bring
such dog or cat upon the premises.17
§ 6-12. IMPOUNDING. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.12]
The Animal Control Officer shall take into custody and impound and
thereafter destroy or dispose of as provided in this chapter any cat or dog
whose owner is in violation of this chapter.
§ 6-13. SERVICE OF NOTICE OF SEIZURE. [Ord. No. 2008-810
§ 6.13]
If any cat or dog so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag of the owner or the person keeping or harboring such dog
is known the Animal Control Officer, or any person authorized by him in that
behalf, shall serve on the person whose address is given on the collar or
harness, or on the owner of the person keeping or harboring such cat or
exist after notice in writing has been served of violation shall constitute
a separate offense.
17.Editor's Note: See also Subsection 3-3.6, Pet Waste Disposal.
§ 6-7.5 PINE HILL CODE § 6-13
AO:146
dog, if known, in writing stating that the cat or dog has been seized and
shall be liable to be disposed or destroyed if not claimed within seven days
after the service of the notice.
§ 6-14. NOTICE PROHIBITION.
§ 6-14.1. Running at Large. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.14]
No person shall permit a cat or dog owned, kept or harbored, either licensed
or unlicensed, to run at large upon the public sidewalks or highways, unless
attached to a leash and no cat or dog kept in a kennel, pet shop or pound
shall be permitted off the premises wherein such kennel, pet shop or pound
is situated, except attached to a leash or in a crate or other safe control
within the Borough.
§ 6-14.2. Penalties for Violation. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.14b]
Each violation of this subsection shall be punishable by a fine of $30 plus
$25 court costs.
§ 6-15. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2008-810 § 6.15]
Whenever a penalty is not proscribed under the NJ Statutes, the following
penalty shall apply: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to pay a fine of $30 plus
$25 court costs.
§ 6-16. POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS. [Added 7-1-2019 by Ord.
No. 2019-980]
a. Any dog declared by the Borough Municipal Court pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-24 et seq. to be potentially dangerous must apply to the Borough
Municipal Clerk for a special municipal potentially dangerous dog
license, a municipal registration number and a red identification tag.
The owner of such a dog so identified shall, at its expense, have the
registration number placed into the dog by a microchip in a prominent
location. The owner such a dog shall be required to:
1. Display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure required
pursuant to Subsection a2 of this subsection;
2. Immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the potentially dangerous
dog will be kept and maintained, which has sound sides, top and
bottom to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by
climbing, jumping or digging and within a fence of at least six feet
in height separated by at least three feet from the confined area.
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the
enclosure to prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude
§ 6-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-16
AO:147
Chapter 7
LICENSING OF TAXICABS
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter:
CRUISING — Shall mean the practice of driving about the streets of the
borough with a taxicab for the purpose of soliciting passengers or
presenting the purpose of the taxicab to the attention of prospective
passengers. A taxicab driving along the streets of the borough for any
purpose other than while transporting a passenger going to a definite
destination by the most direct route in response to a call for a taxicab by a
prospective passenger or returning by the most direct route to the taxicab's
home by the most direct route shall be prima facie evidence of cruising.
DRIVER — Shall mean any person who drives a taxicab within the borough.
LICENSES — Shall mean licenses in accordance with the appropriate
section of this chapter.
OPERATION — Shall mean operation of a taxicab consisting of transporting
in such taxicab one or more persons for hire along any of the streets or
public highways of the borough, Accepting a passenger to be transported
for hire within the borough or from a point within the borough to a point
outside the borough shall be deemed to be operation by the owner thereof
as well as by the person actually driving the taxicab. The transportation of
any person other than the owner or driver in any motor vehicle bearing the
sign therein or thereupon using any of the words "taxi", "taxicab", "cab" or
"hack" shall be prima facie evidence of operation.
OWNER — Shall mean any person in whose name title to any taxicab is
registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State of New Jersey
or who appears in such records to be the conditional vendee or leasee
thereof.
TAXICAB — Shall mean any automobile or motor car, commonly called taxi,
engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out,
announced or advertised to operate or run or which is operated or run over
any of the streets or public highways within the borough aforesaid, and
any release or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by an
unknowing child or other person. All potentially dangerous dogs
shall be confined in the enclosure or, if taken out of the enclosure,
securely muzzled and restrained with a tether approved by the
Animal Control Officer and having a minimum tensile strength
sufficiently in excess of that required to restrict the potentially
dangerous dog's movements to a radius of no more than three feet
from the owner and under the direct supervision of the owner.
b. A dangerous dog license fee shall be assessed to the owner on an
annual basis to the owner of the dog in the amount of $700.
§ 6-16 PINE HILL CODE § 7-1
AO:148
which accepts passengers for transportation from points or places to points
or places within or without the borough.
§ 7-2. LICENSING OF TAXICABS AND DRIVERS.
No person shall operate any taxicab within the borough, unless both the
taxicab and the driver thereof are licensed pursuant to this chapter and
conform to all the provisions hereof and to the provisions of all applicable
statutes.
§ 7-3. CLASSES OF LICENSES.
§ 7-3.1. Types.
There are hereby established two classes of taxicab licenses to be known as
"taxicab driver's license" and "taxicab owner's license", respectively.
§ 7-3.2. Taxicab Driver's License.
A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the person named therein to operate
within the limits of the borough any taxicab duly licensed hereunder and
under the Laws of the State of New Jersey, until the license granted
pursuant to the terms of this chapter either expires or is surrendered,
suspended or revoked and shall not be transferable.
§ 7-3.3. Taxicab Owner's License.
A taxicab owner's license shall entitle the taxicab therein described to be
operated in the borough by a driver duly licensed hereunder and duly
licensed under the Laws of this State, until the license granted pursuant
to the terms of this chapter either expires or is surrendered, suspended or
revoked and shall not be transferable.
§ 7-4. LICENSES GENERALLY.
§ 7-4.1. Qualifications Of Licenses.
No taxicab license or taxicab driver's license shall be issued:
§ 7-4.2. Expiration Date Of Licenses.
All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at midnight
December 31 of each year, unless sooner surrendered, suspended or
a. To an individual who is not a citizen of the United States or who has
been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
b. To a corporation unless each of the officers, directors, and stockholders
thereof is a citizen of the United States and none of whom has been
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
§ 7-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-4.2
AO:149
revoked. No license fee payable under this chapter shall be prorated nor
shall any part thereof be refunded for any reason unless a license is refused.
§ 7-5. APPLICATIONS.
§ 7-5.1. Forms.
All applications for the issuance or renewal of any license of either class
shall be made to the Mayor and borough council on forms to be adopted
by the Mayor and borough council and to be obtained from the borough
Clerk and designed to elicit information respecting the identification,
responsibility and law abiding habits of the applicant.
§ 7-5.2. Verification Of Applications.
Every application for a taxicab license or a taxicab driver's license shall be
verified by the oath or an affirmation of the applicant or applicants, if an
individual or copartnership, and if a corporation, shall be verified by the
oath or affirmation of an officer thereof.
§ 7-5.3. Application For Taxicab Owner's License.
Every application for a taxicab owner's license shall set forth the full name
and address of the owner, lessee, or bailee of the taxicab to be licensed, the
make and character of the taxicab, the length of time it has been in use, the
number of persons the vehicle is suitable for carrying, the motor number
and serial number of the vehicle, the present value of the vehicle and the
place where it may be inspected by the Mayor and borough council or their
duly authorized representative. Each application shall be accompanied by
a license fee of $25 for each taxicab to be licensed. All applications for a
taxicab owner's license shall be filed with the borough Clerk at least three
weeks before the application shall be acted upon by the Mayor and borough
council.
§ 7-6. HOURS AND RATES.
Every applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall file with his application
a statement as to the hours when the taxicabs shall be in operation for
public use and a statement of the fares, charges or tariff rates. The failure
of any licensee to provide taxi service to the general public during the hours
named in the statement or receiving fares, charges or tariff rates other than
set forth in the statement shall be sufficient cause for revocation of any
license.
Fares that may be charged by licensed taxicab operators for transportation
of persons, are as follows:
$0.80 For the first 1/2 mile
$0.10 For each additional 1/7 mile
$0.20 For each person in excess of three
§ 7-4.2 PINE HILL CODE § 7-6
AO:150
A meter is required in each cab.
§ 7-7. INSURANCE POLICY.
No taxicab owner's license shall be issued until the applicant therefor files
with the borough Clerk an insurance policy of a company duly licensed to
transact business under the insurance laws of this state in the sum of not
less than $50,000, insuring against loss by reason of the liability imposed
by law upon the owner or driver of the taxicab for damages on account of
bodily injury or death suffered by any person as the result of or by reason
of the ownership, maintenance or use of any taxicab within the borough,
and in the sum of not less than $100,000 insuring against such loss or
damage suffered by more than one person as the result of such ownership,
maintenance or use; and the insurance policy shall also provide for property
damage insurance in the sum of not less than $25,000 for damage arising
out of such ownership, maintenance or use. Any license issued for any such
operation of the taxicab thereunder shall be permitted only so long as the
insurance policy shall remain in force to the full and collectible amounts
aforesaid.
§ 7-8. POWER OF ATTORNEY.
No taxicab owner's license shall be issued until the applicant therefore
shall have delivered to the borough Clerk, concurrently with the filing of
the insurance policy hereinbefore referred to, a power of attorney executed
by the applicant wherein and whereby the applicant shall appoint the
treasurer of the borough his true and lawful attorney for the purposes
of acknowledging service of any process out of a court of competent
jurisdiction to be served against the insured by virtue of the indemnity
granted under the insurance policy filed, and any license for a taxicab
issued upon any such application shall continue effective and the operation
of any taxicab thereunder shall be permitted, only so long as the power of
attorney shall remain in effect and unrevoked.
§ 7-9. OWNER'S LICENSE CARD.
If the application for a taxicab owner's license shall be granted, there shall
be issued to the applicant a license card in evidence thereof setting forth
the name and address of the licensee, the number of the license, and make
and character of the taxicab licensed, together with the motor number
and serial number of the vehicle and the maximum number of passengers
to be carried therein at any one time. The license card shall be signed
by the borough Clerk and shall at all times be prominently displayed and
adequately protected in the interior of any taxicab so licensed so that the
fact thereof shall be at all times in full view and plainly legible to any
passenger seated on the rear seat of such taxicab. There shall also be
displayed in the interior of the taxicab so licensed a statement or schedule
of the charges for the use thereof. Any taxicab license issued pursuant
hereto may be transferred to another vehicle owned or in the custody of
the same licensee, upon the payment of a transfer fee of $1 and upon the
§ 7-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-9
AO:151
approval of the Mayor and borough council. There shall also be displayed on
the exterior rear portion of each taxicab, so licensed, a metal license plate
or decal which shall be furnished and supplied by the borough.
The borough cannot issue more than one license for each 125 registered
voters of the borough.
§ 7-10. APPLICATION FOR TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE.
Every application for a taxicab driver's license shall set forth the full name
and address of the applicant, his age, whether or not he is a citizen of
the United States and whether or not he has ever been convicted of a
crime and, if so, the crime of which he has been convicted, the place of
conviction, the date thereof and the punishment therefor. Such applicant
shall also furnish satisfactory evidence that he has received a driver's
license from the Motor Vehicle Department of the State of New Jersey. No
taxicab driver's license shall be issued to any person who shall be under
19 years of age. Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall, at the
time of filing his application, be fingerprinted by the police department of
the borough, which fingerprint impressions may be used by the borough for
securing from any agency any report it may deem necessary with respect
to the application. The fingerprint impression and any report received with
respect thereto shall be affixed to the application before consideration
thereof by the Mayor and borough council. A license fee of $2 shall
accompany each application for a taxicab driver's license.
§ 7-11. DRIVER'S LICENSE CARD.
If the application for a taxicab driver's license shall be granted, there shall
be issued to the applicant a license card in evidence thereof setting forth
the number of the license, the name and address of the licensee and his
age. The license card shall be signed by the borough Clerk and shall at all
times be permanently displayed, adequately protected, in the interior of any
taxicab operated by the licensee so that the fact thereof shall be at all times
in full view of and plainly legible to any passenger seated on the rear seat
of such taxicab.
§ 7-12. REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
The Mayor and borough council may refuse to issue or renew or may,
after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend any license of either class if
the applicant or of insurance required by this chapter has lapsed or such
coverage is not maintained at all times.
§ 7-13. DISPLAYING OF RATES.
No taxicab shall hereafter be operated in the borough, unless and until
there is prominently displayed in the interior thereof, within the full view
and access of any passengers therein, a complete list of fares, charges or
tariff rates charged for transportation of passengers, which fares, charges
§ 7-9 PINE HILL CODE § 7-13
AO:152
or tariff rates so displayed, and no others, shall be those to be charged any
passenger or transported.
§ 7-14. MARKINGS.
Every taxicab so licensed shall have painted on both sides thereof one of
the words "taxi" or "cab", in letters at least three inches high, or the name
of the operating owner, containing at least one of the words "taxi", "cab" or
"taxicab". Every taxicab so licensed shall have painted on each side thereof,
in letters at least one inch high the name of the owner thereof followed or
preceded by the word "owner".
§ 7-15. WRITTEN LOG.
The owner of each taxicab so licensed shall keep or require to be kept a
written record of each trip made by the taxicab, showing the number of
daily trips. Such record shall not be destroyed for at least one year from the
date of the trip and shall be kept within the borough in readily accessible
form and shall be accessible at all reasonable times for inspection by the
Mayor and borough council.
§ 7-16. PARKING AND RANKING.
No person shall park or rank any taxicab on any of the streets on the
borough at any time, except at such place as may be lawfully designated as
municipal taxi stands.
§ 7-17. CRUISING.
No person shall cruise on the streets of the borough with any taxicab at any
time for the purpose of soliciting passengers.
Chapter 8
TRAFFIC
§ 8-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 8-1.1. Words and Phrases. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words
and phrases used herein.
§ 8-1.2. Official Time Standard. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use in the Borough.
§ 7-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-2
AO:153
§ 8-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [Ord.
No. 2001-688]
§ 8-3. TOW-AWAY. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any police
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage in accordance with the
Borough "Towing and Storage Service" ordinance18 which may result from
such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 8-4. PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
§ 8-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 8-6. REPEAL. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
All former traffic ordinances of the Borough of Pine Hill are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except
a. The Director of the Department of Public Safety or, in his absence,
disability or inability to act, then the Chief of Police of this municipality,
is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any
street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days
whenever he finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of
the public safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the abovementioned officials and in
accordance with Subsection a above, shall provide for the posting of
proper warning signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof
during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
18.Editor's Note: See § 3-9 for towing and storage regulations.
§ 8-2 PINE HILL CODE § 8-6
AO:154
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 8-7. TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET AND HIGHWAY
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS.
§ 8-7.1. Adoption Of The Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices For Streets And Highways. [Ord. No. 2001-688; Ord. No.
2001-701]
The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around street construction,
maintenance operations and utility work, above or below ground which
requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal flow of traffic;
and that such obstructions are and can become dangerous when not
properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health, safety,
peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulations
directed to the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through
construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work
force performing these operations.
The Borough of Pine Hill in the County of Camden, State of New Jersey,
does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
hereinafter known as M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and
amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction, maintenance
operations or utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person,
contractor or utility who fails to comply with the provisions of the
M.U.T.C.D. while performing such work is in violation of this section.
§ 8-7.2. Pre-Construction Meetings. [Ord. No. 2001-688; Ord. No.
2001-701]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility, as required under the public utility agreement, wishing to
conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Borough of
Pine Hill Police Department in order to arrange a pre-construction meeting
to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during such period of
construction or work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply
with this section prior to the start of such work or whose plans are not
approved by the Police Department is in violation of this section.
§ 8-7.3. Hazardous Conditions. [Ord. No. 2001-688; Ord. No.
2001-701]
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Police Department with
at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of
emergency at the construction or maintenance site prior to the start of any
work. If for any reason the emergency contact cannot be reached, or if
the emergency contact person does not respond to the call from the Police
§ 8-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-7.3
AO:155
Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Borough may respond to
correct such hazardous conditions. The reasonable fees for such emergency
service by the Borough shall be charged to the person, contractor, or utility
responsible for such conditions.
§ 8-7.4. Hours. [Ord. No. 2001-701]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work on
any roadway in the Borough before 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. The time
limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m.
by the Chief of Police. If it is determined by the Chief that the construction
or maintenance operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would
substantially delay traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall
then be permitted only between 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
§ 8-7.5. Road Closings and Detours. [Ord. No. 2001-701]
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Chief of Police.
§ 8-7.6. Traffic Directors. [Ord. No. 2001-701]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Chief of Police that same is necessary to provide
for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 8-7.7. Stop Work. [Ord. No. 2001-701]
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to stop work, including the
removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within the street rightof-
way, backfilling of open excavations and/or other related work, in order to
abate any nuisance and/or safety, hazard or for any violation of this section.
§ 8-7.8. Site Preparation. [Ord. No. 2001-701]
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicles or equipment are
to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk area until all construction signs,
lights, devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 8-7.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2001-701]
a. Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the County Jail
for a term not to exceed 90 days.
b. For a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than
$250 and/or be imprisoned in the County Jail for a term not exceeding
90 days.
§ 8-7.3 PINE HILL CODE § 8-7.9
AO:156
§ 8-8. PARKING.
§ 8-8.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 8-9. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY.
[Ord. No. 2001-688]
§ 8-10. TEMPORARY PARKING PROHIBITION FOR SNOW
PLOWING AND REMOVAL. [Ord. No. 2010-856]
c. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
the streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs are
displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking police
officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting
of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather conditions,
accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations dictate or
require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with
the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY NO PARKING
signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner
of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
b. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect until the
emergency has been declared over by the Chief of Police, or, in his
absence, the ranking police officer.
c. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this chapter
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic, and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall bear all costs charged for the removal
and storage, in accordance with the provisions of § 8-3, which may
result from such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
d. The effectiveness of this section is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets and highways, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall
be parked on the streets or highways or portions thereof indicated.
The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
§ 8-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-10
AO:157
§ 8-11. STOPPING OR STANDING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. No. 2001-688; Ord. No.
2012-893 § 1; Ord. No. 2017-951]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day unless otherwise indicated upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and
any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
c. Designation of Streets and Roads.
Snow Emergency Routes
Snow Emergency
Route
Starting
Intersection/Point
Terminal
Intersection/Point
Branch Avenue (CR
687)
Blackwood-Clementon
Road (CR 534)
Turnersville Road (CR
688)
Blackwood-Clementon
Road (CR 534)
East side of
intersection with
College/Laurel Road
(CR 673)
Guenther Avenue
Erial Road (CR 703) Sitley Avenue North side of
intersection with
Turnersville Road (CR
688)
Cross Keys Road (CR
689)
Approximately 400
feet south of Madison
Avenue
South side of
intersection with New
Freedom Road (CR
691)
Watsontown-New
Freedom Road (CR
691)
East side of
intersection with
Black-wood-
Clementon Road (CR
534)
West side of
intersection with Cross
Keys Road (CR 689)
Kayser Avenue Wright Avenue Branch Avenue (CR
687)
West 7th Avenue Branch Avenue (CR
687)
Wright Avenue
§ 8-10 PINE HILL CODE § 8-11
AO:158
Name of Street Sides
Hours/
Days Location
Blackwood/
Clementon Road
(C.R. # 534)
South All/All 200 feet east and west of
DeCou Road (C.R. #687)
Blackwood/
Clementon Road
(C.R. #534)
Both All/All 450 feet east of Little Mill
Road
Branch Avenue
(C.R. #687)
Both All/All 585 feet west of
Turnersville Road (C.R.
#688)
Branch Avenue
(C.R. #687)
Both All/All 210 feet east of Erial
Avenue (C.R. #703)
Branch Avenue
(C.R. #687)
Northerly All/All 200 feet east of Erial
Avenue (C.R. #703)
Branch Avenue
(C.R. #687)
Southerly All/All 135 feet east of Erial
Avenue (C.R. #703)
DeCou Road (C.R.
#687)
Both All/All 200 feet south of
Blackwood/Clementon
Road (C.R. #534)
Erial Avenue (C.R.
#703)
Both All/All 360 feet north of
Turnersville Road (C.R.
#688)
Erial Avenue (C.R.
#703)
Both All/All 240 feet north of Branch
Avenue (C.R. #687)
Erial Avenue (C.R.
#703)
Both All/All 170 feet south of Branch
Avenue (C.R. #687)
Fourth Avenue Southerly From 8:00
a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
when
school is in
session
From the northerly
curbline of Wright Avenue
to a point 200 feet westerly
therefrom
Third Avenue Northerly From 8:00
a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
when
school is in
session
From the southerly
curbline of Mt. Clement to
a point 400 feet westerly
therefrom
§ 8-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-11
AO:159
Name of Street Sides
Hours/
Days Location
Turnersville Road
[Ord. No.
2017-951]
Southerly All/All From the beginning of the
egress driveway of the
John H. Glenn Elementary
School, to a point 200 feet
westerly
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #703)
Both All/All 500 feet west of Erial
Avenue (C.R. #688)
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #703)
Both All/All 400 feet east of Erial
Avenue (C.R. #688)
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
Both All/All 400 feet west of Branch
Avenue (C.R. #687)
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
Both All/All 490 feet east of Branch
Avenue (C.R. #687)
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
Both All/All 490 feet east of Branch
Avenue (C.R. #687)
Wright Avenue Westerly From 8:00
a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Mon.-Fri.
when
school is in
session
From Fourth Avenue to
Fifth Avenue
§ 8-12. PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. No.
2001-688]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Sides
Time Limit
Hours Location
(RESERVED)
§ 8-13. PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING. [Ord. No.
2001-688]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
street between the specified hours and days described.
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
(RESERVED)
§ 8-11 PINE HILL CODE § 8-14
AO:160
§ 8-14. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN
STREETS.
a. Parking Prohibited Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on
Designated Borough Property.
1. No person shall park a motor vehicle between the hours of 8:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. upon any of the following owned Borough
properties except for authorized events when all motor vehicles
shall be removed within one hour of end of event:
Location Address/Block, Lot No.
Joey Green Recreational
Complex [Ord. No.
2016-946]
914 Turnerville Road Block 112.06,
Lot 5
Charles Bowen Recreational
Complex [Ord. No.
2016-946]
36 South Club Road Block 146, Lot
15
Wilz Park/Playground [Ord.
No. 2016-946]
732 W. Branch Avenue Block 4, Lot
18
Veteran's Park Land &
Parking Lot [Ord. No.
2016-946]
E. Branch Avenue Block 39, Lot 73
Tomlinson House [Ord. No.
2016-946]
834 Blackwood-Clementon Road
Block 1, Lot 9.02
Vacant Lot next to
Tomlinson House [Ord. No.
2016-946]
Blackwood-Clementon Road Block
1, Lot 9.04
Senior Center [Ord. No.
2016-946]
131 E. 12th Avenue Block 54, Lot 1
Public Works [Ord. No.
2016-946]
400 Davis Avenue Block 80, Lot 1
Borough Hall Complex
[Ord. No. 2016-946]
45 South 7th Avenue Block 72, Lot
32, 66 & 70
b. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts
thereof described. [Ord. No. 2001-688; Ord. No. 2012-894 § 1; Ord.
No. 2014-914; Ord. No. 2014-915; Ord. No. 2016-946; Ord. No.
2017-951]
§ 8-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-14
AO:161
Name of Street Sides Location
Atlantic Avenue Northerly Northerly right-of-way line of
Atlantic Avenue from the
northerly right-of-way line of
Berlin-Cross Keys Road 500
feet in a westerly direction
Beach Street Both At its termination
Blackwood-Clementon
Road (C.R. #534)
Both From Mohawk Avenue to New
Freedom Road (C.R. #691)
Branch Avenue (C.R.
#687)
Both From a point 175 feet east of
Erial Avenue to a point 75 feet
west of Erial Avenue
Branch Avenue (C.R.
#687)
Both Beginning at the point of
intersection of the
southwesterly line of Branch
Avenue with eastward
prolongation of the southerly
line of Cross Road and then
extending southeastwardly
along the southwesterly line of
Branch Avenue, a distance of
3,600 feet more or less, to a
point being in the
southwestward prolongation
of northwesterly line of
Mountain View Drive
Erial Avenue (C.R.
#703)
Westerly From Woodburn Avenue to
Ninth Avenue
Erial Avenue (C.R.
#703)
Easterly From Turnersville Road (C.R.
#688) to Sitley Avenue
Erial Road (CR 703)
[Ord. No. 2014-915]
Westerly From Turnersville Road (CR
#688) to West Evanson
Avenue
Guenther Avenue Both For its entire length from
Blackwood-Clementon Road
Lake Avenue [Ord. No.
2014-914]
Westerly From a point 300 feet
Northerly from the curbline at
the intersection of Hickstown
Road (CR 688) for a distance
of 1,075 feet to the
intersection of Forrester
Avenue
§ 8-14 PINE HILL CODE § 8-14
AO:162
§ 8-14.1. Parking Prohibited at All Times in Municipal Parks. [Ord.
No. 2012-894 § 2]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time in the municipal park areas
described.
Property Location
Charlie Bowen Recreational Area Westerly of the 4 handicapped spaces
described in Chapter 8-37.6, extending
55 feet west to the termination of the
parking area (as per sketch on file with
the Borough Clerk and New Jersey
Department of Transportation)
Name of Street Sides Location
New Freedom Road
(C.R. #691)
Southerly From Cross Keys Road (C.R.
#689) to a point 35 feet
westerly therefrom
Ninth Avenue Southerly From Erial Avenue (C.R. #703)
to Branch Avenue (C.R. #687)
Ninth Avenue Both From Erial Avenue to a point
50 feet easterly therefrom
North Drive Both From the southern termination
of North Drive to a point 25
feet towards the intersection
of North Drive and Crest Road
Park Avenue Southerly Southerly right-of-way lane of
Park Avenue approximately
1,473 feet plus or minus
Turnersville Road
[Ord. No. 2017-951]
Southerly From the beginning of the
egress driveway of the John H.
Glenn Elementary School, to a
point 200 feet westerly
Turnersville Road (C.R.
#688) (Buses Only)
Both From a point 500 feet from the
intersection of Turnersville
Road and Estates Road for a
distance of 417 feet from the
intersection of Turnersville
Road and Estates Road in the
confines of Lot 5, Block 112
Turnersville Road Southerly From a point 110 feet east of
Kearsley Road to a point 210
feet west of MacKnight Drive
§ 8-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-15
AO:163
§ 8-15. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON
CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. No. 2001-688; Ord. No. 2012-893 § 2]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day (except
Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described.
Name of Street Sides Hours/Days Location
Fourth Avenue Northerly From 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. Mon.-Fri.
when school is in
session
From the northerly
curbline of Wright
Avenue to a point 200
feet westerly
therefrom
Third Avenue Southerly From 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. Mon.-Fri.
when school is in
session
From the southerly
curbline of Mt.
Clement to a point
400 feet westerly
therefrom
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
Southerly From 7:00 a.m. to
3:00 p.m. Mon.-Fri.
From Ramblewood
Drive to Bittle Avenue
Wright Avenue Easterly From 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m. Mon.-Fri.
when school is in
session
From northerly
curbline of East
Fourth Avenue to a
point 200 feet
easterly therefrom
§ 8-16. PARKING BY PERMIT DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON
CERTAIN DAYS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
No person shall park a vehicle on streets or parts of streets as described
within this section unless an appropriate and current parking permit as
issued by the Borough of Pine Hill is displayed on said vehicle for those
streets or parts of streets as described or listed within this section.
Name of Street Location Hours Days
(RESERVED)
§ 8-17. PARKING OF CERTAIN TRUCKS, VEHICLES AND TRAILERS
PROHIBITED. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
a. No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, omnibus or
bus having registered gross weights in excess of five tons upon any
street within the Borough, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
of every day.
b. Exceptions. Nothing within this section shall be construed as
preventing vehicles of a registered gross weight of five tons from
making deliveries of merchandise or persons, or as prohibiting any
§ 8-15 PINE HILL CODE § 8-17
AO:164
§ 8-18. PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED. [Ord. No.
2001-688]
§ 8-19. ANGLE PARKING. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated for
Angle Parking at an angle so indicated.
Name of Street Sides Angle Location
(RESERVED)
§ 8-20. ROUTES FOR TRUCKS OVER FIVE TONS. [Ord. No.
2001-688]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as Routes for Vehicles Over Five Tons. All trucks
having a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in
excess of five tons shall be excluded from all streets, except from those
streets listed which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles will
be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pickup and delivery of
materials.
Name of Street Location
(RESERVED)
vehicles exceeding said registered gross weight of five tons, used by
any public utility company in connection with the construction,
installation, operation or maintenance of any public utility facilities
from parking while being used for such purposes.
c. Signs shall be posted at each entrance to the Borough indicating the
restrictions established.
a. No person shall park or store a trailer, or semitrailer, boat or boat
trailer, motor drawn camper or other motor drawn vehicle licensed or
unlicensed upon any street or portions thereof or right-of-way, within
the Borough, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of every day.
b. Exceptions. Nothing within this section shall be construed as
preventing vehicles from making deliveries of merchandise or persons,
or as prohibiting any vehicles used by any public utility company in
connection with the construction, installation, operation or
maintenance of any public utility facilities from parking while being
used for such purposes.
c. Signs shall be posted at each entrance to the Borough indicating the
restrictions established.
§ 8-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-21
AO:165
§ 8-21. VEHICLES OVER DESIGNATED WEIGHT EXCLUDED FROM
CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
Vehicles with a gross vehicle weight in excess of five tons are hereby
excluded from the streets or parts of streets described except for the pickup
and delivery of materials on such streets.
Name of Street Location
Country Club Road Entire length
East Clearview Avenue Entire length
East Cloverdale Avenue Entire length
East Woodburn Avenue Entire length
Franklin Avenue Entire length
Grand Avenue Entire length
Grandview Drive Entire length
Kayser Avenue Entire length
Madison Avenue Entire length
Ramblewood Drive Entire length
§ 8-22. ONE-WAY STREETS. [Ord. No. 2001-688; Ord. No. 2012-893
§ 3]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking Permitted
Fourth Avenue Westerly From Wright
Avenue to Erial
Road (8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.) Mon. -
Fri. when school is
in session
As permitted by §
8-15
Ninth Avenue Westerly From Erial Avenue
to Branch Avenue.
Yes
Wright Avenue Northerly From East Fifth
Avenue to East
Fourth Avenue
(8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.) Mon. - Fri.
when school is in
session
As permitted by §
8-15
§ 8-21 PINE HILL CODE § 8-23
AO:166
§ 8-23. THROUGH STREETS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs
shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
Blackwood-Clementon Road (C.R.
#534)
The entire length
Branch Avenue/DeCou Road (C.R.
#687)
The entire length
Country Club Road The entire length
Daniels Avenue The entire length
Diamond Avenue The entire length
Erial Avenue (C.R. #703) The entire length
Estates Road Turnersville Road (C.R. #688) to
MacKnight Drive
Evanson Avenue The entire length
Forrester Avenue From Branch Avenue to Cloverdale
Avenue
Fourth Avenue/Wright Avenue Erial Avenue to Kayser Avenue
Franklin Avenue The entire length
Grand Avenue The entire length
Grant Lane The entire length
Grassmur Turn The entire length
Hazel Lane The entire length
Kayser Avenue The entire length
Madison Avenue The entire length
Pine Street The entire length
Ramblewood Drive The entire length
Sitley Avenue The entire length
South Club Road The entire length
Turnersville Road (C.R. #688) The entire length
§ 8-24. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
§ 8-23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-24
AO:167
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Berkey Lane and Hazel Lane Berkey Lane
Brace Road and Grandview Drive Brace Road
Carol Drive and Little Mill Road Carol Drive
Cedar Drive and Grandview Drive Cedar Drive
Congress Drive and Eleventh Street Eleventh Street
Congress Road and Estates Road Congress Road
Cranford Road and South Club Road Cranford Road
Crest Drive and Penn Drive Penn Drive
Crest Road and North Drive Crest Road
Crest Road and South Club Road Crest Road
Eleventh Street and Daniels Avenue Daniels Avenue
Estates Court and Estates Road Estates Court
Estates Road and Richards Avenue Richards Avenue
Evanson Avenue and Spruce Lane Spruce Lane
Evanson Avenue and Walnut Lane Walnut Lane
Evanson Avenue and Chestnut Lane Chestnut Lane
First Avenue and Spruce Lane Spruce Lane
First Avenue and Chestnut Lane Chestnut Lane
First Avenue and Walnut Lane Walnut Lane
First Avenue and Lakeview Avenue First Avenue
Forrester Avenue and Cloverdale
Avenue
Forrester Avenue
Grand Avenue and Ramblewood
Drive
Grand Avenue
Grand Avenue and Franklin Avenue Grand Avenue
Greenwood Avenue and Terrace
Avenue
Greenwood Avenue
Hamilton Court and Grand Avenue Hamilton Court
Hazel Lane and Sitley Avenue Hazel Lane
Highland Avenue and Kirk Lane Highland Avenue
Highland Avenue and Sitley Avenue Highland Avenue
Hill Drive and Estates Road Estates Road
Ivy Lane and Sitley Avenue Ivy Lane
Jackson Avenue and Bittle Avenue Jackson Avenue
Kirk Lane and Hazel Lane Kirk Lane
§ 8-24 PINE HILL CODE § 8-24
AO:168
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Lakeview Avenue and Third Avenue Lakeview Avenue
MacKnight Drive and Estates Road Estates Road
Melrose Drive and Estates Road Melrose Drive
Mt. Ararat Avenue and Second
Avenue
Mt. Ararat Avenue
Mt. Ararat Avenue and Third Avenue Mt. Ararat Avenue
Oak Avenue and Buttonwood
Avenue
Oak Avenue
Oak Avenue and Grove Street Oak Avenue
Oak Avenue and Spring Street Oak Avenue
Poplar Avenue and Diamond Avenue Diamond Avenue
Ramblewood Avenue and Franklin
Avenue
Ramblewood Avenue
Ridge Run and Mountain View Drive Ridge Run
Second Avenue and Lakeview
Avenue
Second Avenue
Second Avenue and Spruce Lane Spruce Lane
Sherri Way and Little Mill Road Sherri Way
Short Drive and Grandview Drive Short Drive
Terrace Avenue and Kirk Lane Terrace Avenue
Terrace Avenue and Osbourne
Avenue
Terrace Avenue
Third Avenue and Mt. Clement
Avenue
Third Avenue (at Pine Valley access
road)
Twelfth Avenue and Estates Road Twelfth Avenue
Valley Court and Valley Drive Valley Court
Weber Drive and Grandview Drive Weber Drive
Willow Drive and Cedar Drive Willow Drive
Wilson Road and Cross Road Wilson Road
Wright Avenue and Kayser Avenue Kayser Avenue
§ 8-25. MULTI-WAY STOP INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections herein
described are designated as Multi-Way stop intersections. Stop signs shall
be installed as provided herein.
§ 8-24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-25
AO:169
Intersection Stop Signs On
(RESERVED)
§ 8-26. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Sign(s) On
(RESERVED)
§ 8-27. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
No person shall make a turn of any kind designated (left, right, all) at any
location listed and only in the manner described.
Intersection Turn Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Erial Avenue (C.R. #703)
and Branch Avenue (C.R.
#687)
Right Southbound on Erial
Avenue (C.R. #703) to
westbound on Branch
Avenue (C.R. #687)
§ 8-28. NO TURN ON RED. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
No person shall make a turn on the red signal at any location listed.
Intersection Right Turn Prohibited Hours
DeCou Road (C.R.
#687) and Blackwood-
Clementon Road (C.R.
#534)
Northbound from DeCou
Road (C.R. #687) to
eastbound Blackwood-
Clementon Road (C.R. #534)
At all times
Little Mill Road and
Blackwood-Clementon
Road (C.R. #534)
Northbound from Little Mill
Road to eastbound
Blackwood-Clementon Road
(C.R. #534)
At all times
Turnersville Road (C.R.
#688) and Erial Avenue
(C.R. #703)
Westbound from Turnersville
Road (C.R. #688) to
northbound Erial Avenue
At all times
Turnersville Road (C.R.
#688) and Erial Avenue
(C.R. #703)
Northbound from Erial
Avenue (C.R. #703) to
eastbound Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
At all times
§ 8-25 PINE HILL CODE § 8-28
AO:170
Intersection Right Turn Prohibited Hours
Turnersville Road (C.R.
#688) and Erial Avenue
(C.R. #703)
Southbound from Erial
Avenue (C.R. #703) to
westbound Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
At all times
§ 8-29. LOADING ZONES. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Time Sides Location
(RESERVED)
§ 8-30. BUS STOPS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Street Hours
a. Blackwood-Clementon Road (C.R. #534), eastbound
on the southerly side at:
1. Signal Hill Road (midblock) Beginning at a
point 190 feet east of the easterly curbline of
Signal Hill Road and extending 240 feet
easterly therefrom.
All
b. Branch Avenue (C.R. #687), eastbound on the
southerly side at:
1. Mountain View Drive (far side) Beginning at
the easterly prolongated curbline of Mt. View
Drive and extending 140 feet easterly
therefrom.
All
c. Branch Avenue (C.R. #687), westbound on the
northerly side at:
1. Mt. View Drive (far side) Beginning at the
westerly curbline of Mt. View Drive and
extending 140 feet westerly therefrom.
All
d. DeCou Road (C.R. #687), southbound on the
westerly side at:
1. Cross Road (far side) Beginning at the
southerly curbline of Cross Road and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
All
§ 8-28 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-30
AO:171
Street Hours
e. DeCou Road (C.R. #687), northbound on the
easterly side at:
1. Cross Road (far side) Beginning at the
northerly prolongated curbline of Cross Road
and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
All
f. Erial Avenue (C.R. #703), northbound on the
easterly side at:
1. Spring Street (near side) Beginning at the
southerly curbline of Spring Street and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
All
2. Cloverdale Avenue (near side) Beginning at the
southerly curbline of Cloverdale Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
All
3. Branch Avenue (near side) Beginning at the
southerly curbline of Branch Avenue and
extending 134 feet southerly therefrom.
All
4. Sixth Avenue (near side) Beginning at the
southerly curbline of Sixth Avenue and
extending 115 feet southerly therefrom.
All
5. Fourth Avenue Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Fourth Avenue and extending 105
feet southerly therefrom.
All
6. Second Avenue Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Second Avenue and extending 100
feet northerly therefrom.
All
g. Erial Avenue (C.R. #703), southbound on the
westerly side at:
1. Second Avenue (near side) Beginning at the
northerly curbline of Second Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
All
2. Fourth Avenue (far side) Beginning at the
southerly curbline of Fourth Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
All
3. Sixth Avenue (near side) Beginning at the
northerly curbline of Sixth Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
All
4. Clearview Avenue (far side) Beginning at the
northerly curbline of Clearview Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
All
5. Cloverdale Avenue (far side) Beginning at the
southerly curbline of Cloverdale Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
All
§ 8-30 PINE HILL CODE § 8-30
AO:172
Street Hours
6. Spring Street (near side) Beginning at the
southerly curbline of Spring Street and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
All
h. Turnersville Road (C.R. #688), westbound on the
northerly side:
1. Adjacent to Overbrook High School Beginning
at a point being the extended easterly side
property line to a point extending 680 feet
westerly therefrom.
7:00 a.m. - 4:00
p.m. Monday to
Friday
i. Twelfth Avenue, westbound on the northerly side:
1. Adjacent to the Senior Citizens Building
Beginning at a point 325 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Daniels Avenue and
extending 88 feet therefrom.
All
§ 8-31. TAXI STANDS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy said locations during the
times indicated.
Street Location Hours
(RESERVED)
§ 8-32. LANE USE RESERVATIONS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection or
Location Movement
Blackwood/Clementon
Road (C.R. #534) and
DeCou Road (C.R.
#687)
a. Eastbound right lane of Blackwood/
Clementon Road (C.R. #534) reserved for
right turn only
b. Westbound left lane of Blackwood/
Clementon Road (C.R. #534) reserved for
left turn only
c. Eastbound center lane of Blackwood/
Clementon Road (C.R. #534) reserved for
through traffic only
d. Westbound center lane of Blackwood/
Clementon Road (C.R. #534) reserved for
through traffic only
§ 8-30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-32
AO:173
Intersection or
Location Movement
e. Northbound left lane of DeCou Road (C.R.
#687) reserved for left turn only
f. Northbound right lane of DeCou Road
(C.R. #687) reserved for right turn only
Blackwood/Clementon
Road (C.R. #534)
Laurel Road/College
Drive (C.R. #673) and
Little Mill Road
a. Eastbound left lane of Blackwood/
Clementon Road (C.R. #534) reserved for
left turn only
b. Westbound lane of Blackwood/Clementon
Road (C.R. #534) reserved for left turn
only
c. Southbound left lane of Laurel Road/
College Drive (C.R. #673) reserved for left
turn only
d. Northbound left lane of Laurel Road/
College Drive (C.R. #673) reserved for left
turn only
Erial Avenue (C.R.
#703) and Branch
Avenue (C.R. #687)
a. Northbound left lane of Erial Avenue (C.R.
#703) reserved for left turn only
b. Southbound left lane of Erial Avenue (C.R.
#703) reserved for left turn only
c. Southbound right lane of Erial Avenue
(C.R. #703) reserved for through traffic
only
Spring Garden Street
and Blackwood/
Clementon Road (C.R.
#534)
Eastbound left lane of Blackwood/Clementon
Road (C.R. #534) reserved for left turn only
Turnersville Road (C.R.
#688) Kearsley Road
and Branch Avenue
(C.R. #687)
a. Eastbound left lane of Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688) reserved for left turn only
b. Westbound left lane of Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688) reserved for left turn only
c. Westbound center lane of Turnersville
Road (C.R. #688) reserved for through
traffic only
d. Westbound right lane of Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688) reserved for right turn only
§ 8-32 PINE HILL CODE § 8-32
AO:174
Intersection or
Location Movement
Turnersville Road (C.R.
#688) Kearsley Road
and Branch Avenue
(C.R. #687) cont'd
e. Westbound left lane of Kearsley Road
reserved for left turn only
f. Westbound center lane of Kearsley Road
reserved for through traffic only
g. Westbound right lane of Kearsley Road
reserved for right turn only
h. Eastbound left lane of Branch Avenue (C.R.
#687) reserved for left turn only
i. Eastbound center lane of Branch Avenue
(C.R. #687) reserved for through traffic
only
j. Eastbound right lane of Branch Avenue
(C.R. #687) reserved for right turn only
Turnersville Road (C.R.
#688) and Erial Avenue
(C.R. #703)
a. Eastbound left lane of Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688) reserved for left turn only
b. Eastbound right lane of Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688) reserved for through traffic
only
c. Westbound left lane of Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688) reserved for left turn only
d. Northbound left lane of Erial Avenue (C.R.
#703) reserved for left turn only
e. Southbound left lane of Erial Avenue (C.R.
#703) reserved for through traffic only
§ 8-33. SPEED LIMITS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
a. The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described below and made a part of this chapter, are hereby
established at the rate of speed indicated.
b. Regulatory and warning signs conforming to the current Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways shall be
erected and maintained to effect the above designated speed limits.
§ 8-32 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-33
AO:175
Name of
Street Direction
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Approval
Date
Blackwood-
Clementon
Road (C.R.
#534)
Both 45 Little Mill Road to
Guenther Avenue
July 11, 1973
Blackwood-
Clementon
Road (C.R.
#534)
Both 40 Mohawk Avenue
to New-Freedom
Road. (C.R. #691)
February 7,
1973
Branch Avenue/
DeCou Road
(C.R. #687)
Both 40 From Turnersville
Road (C.R. #688)
to the vicinity of
1,000 feet north of
7th Avenue.
July 16, 1973
Branch Avenue/
De Cou Road
(C.R. #687)
Both 45 From the vicinity
of 1,000 feet north
of 7th Avenue to
Cross Road.
July 16, 1973
Branch Avenue/
De Cou Road
(C.R. #687)
Both 35 From Cross Road
to Blackwood
Road (C.R. #534).
July 16, 1973
Cross Keys
Road (C.R.
#689)
Both 50 Entire length
within
municipality.
July 19, 1978
Erial-
Clementon
Road (C.R.
#703)
Both 40 From Turnersville
Road (C.R. #688)
to the vicinity of
Woodburn Avenue.
Nov. 19,
1973
Erial-
Clementon
Road (C.R.
#703)
Both 35 From the vicinity
of Woodburn
Avenue to the
northerly Pine Hill
Borough line
(Sitley Avenue).
Nov. 19,
1973
§ 8-33 PINE HILL CODE § 8-33
AO:176
§ 8-34. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS. [Ord. No. 2001-687; Ord. No.
2001-688; Ord. No. 2001-703]
The following locations are hereby designated as mid-block crosswalks.
Name of
Street Direction
Speed
Limit
(mph) Location
Approval
Date
Erial-
Clementon
Road (C.R.
#703)
Both School
Zone 25
In the vicinity of
St. Edwards
School, during
recess while
children are going
to or leaving
school, during
opening or closing
hours.
Nov. 19,
1973
Little Mill Road
(C.R. #534)
Both 25 From a point 900
feet to a point
2,000 feet south of
Black-wood-
Clementon Road
New Freedom
Road (C.R.
#691)
Both 50 Entire length. Dec. 28,
1973
Turnersville
Road (C.R.
#688)
Both 40 Entire length. Nov. 30,
1987
Turnersville
Road (C.R.
#688)
Both School
Zone 25
In the vicinity of
John Glenn
Elementary and
Overbrook Senior
High School
zones, during
recess or while
children are going
to or leaving
school, during
opening or closing
hours.
Nov. 30,
1987
§ 8-33 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-34
AO:177
Name of Street Location
Turnersville-Hickstown Road
(County Route No. 688)
940 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Branch Avenue (County
Route No. 687) and extending 10
feet easterly therefrom
Turnersville-Hickstown Road
(County Route No. 688)
At the intersection with
Ramblewood Drive
Turnersville-Hickstown Road
(County Route No. 688)
At the intersection with Grandview
Drive
§ 8-35. OLDER AND WALKING IMPAIRED PERSONS CROSSWALKS.
[Ord. No. 2001-688]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.1b, the following locations shall be established
as "Crosswalks for the Older and Walking Impaired Persons."
Name of Street Location
(RESERVED)
§ 8-36. NO PASSING ZONES. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
No Passing Zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Direction Location Sketch#/Date
Erial-Clementon
Road (C.R. #703)
Southbound Center line of
Evanson Avenue to
its point of
termination at the
northerly right-ofway
line of
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688) a
distance of 6,140
feet.
NPZ-412-A/Oct. 18,
1978
Erial-Clementon
Road (C.R. #703)
Northbound Center line of Sitley
Avenue to its point
of termination at the
northerly right-ofway
line of
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688) a
distance of 7,030
feet.
NPZ-412-A/Oct. 18,
1978
§ 8-34 PINE HILL CODE § 8-36
AO:178
Name of Street Direction Location Sketch#/Date
New Freedom
Road (C.R. #691)
Eastbound From Blackwood/
Clementon Road
(C.R. #534) to a
point 2,460 feet
easterly therefrom.
NPZ-478-C/Oct. 21,
1987
New Freedom
Road (C.R. #691)
Westbound From Blackwood/
Clementon Road
(C.R. #534) to a
point 3,360 feet
easterly therefrom.
NPZ-478-C/Oct. 21,
1987
New Freedom
Road (C.R. #691)
Eastbound From Cross Keys
Road (C.R. #689) to
a point 550 feet
westerly therefrom.
NPZ-478-C/Oct. 21,
1987
New Freedom
Road (C.R. #691)
Westbound From a point 890
feet westerly of
Cross Keys Road
(C.R. #689) to a
point 1,140 feet
westerly therefrom.
NPZ-478-C/Oct. 21,
1987
New Freedom
Road (C.R. #691)
Eastbound From a point 1,790
feet westerly of
Cross Keys Road
(C.R. #689) to a
point 810 feet
westerly therefrom.
NPZ-478-C/Oct. 21,
1987
Cross Keys Road
(C.R. #689)
Southbound From New Freedom
Road (C.R. #691) to
Franklin Avenue.
NPZ-2571-F/Jan. 16,
1991
Cross Keys Road
(C.R. #689)
Northbound From New Freedom
Road (C.R. #691) to
a point 350 feet
south of Franklin
Avenue.
NPZ-2571-F/Jan. 16,
1991
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
Both From Cross Keys
Road (C.R. #689) to
a point 690 feet
west of Branch
Avenue (C.R. #687).
NPZ-415-D/Jan. 16,
1991
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
Westbound From Buttonwood
Avenue to Erial
Avenue (C.R. #703).
NPZ-415-D/Jan. 16,
1991
§ 8-36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-36
AO:179
Name of Street Direction Location Sketch#/Date
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
Eastbound From Erial Avenue
(C.R. #703) to a
point 370 feet
easterly therefrom.
NPZ-415-D/Jan. 16,
1991
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
Eastbound From Erial Avenue
(C.R. #703) to a
point 460 feet east
of Little Mill Road.
NPZ-415-D/Jan. 16,
1991
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
Westbound From Erial Avenue
(C.R. #703) to a
point 450 feet
westerly therefrom.
NPZ-415-D/Jan. 16,
1991
Turnersville Road
(C.R. #688)
Westbound From Porter Avenue
to Ski Mt. Drive.
NPZ-415-D/Jan. 16,
1991
Blackwood/
Clementon Road
(C.R. #534)
Both From Little Mill
Road to Guenther
Avenue.
May 26, 1993
Blackwood/
Clementon Road
(C.R. #534)
Eastbound From Mohawk
Avenue to New
Freedom Road (C.R.
#691).
Feb. 19, 1993
DeCou Road/
Branch Avenue
(C.R. #687)
Both Entire length. July 19, 1993
§ 8-37. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 8-37.1. Handicapped Parking on Streets. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following street
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these spaces.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Wright Avenue
[Ord. No.
2015-928]
Northerly All 2 handicapped parking spaces
on northerly curbline of Wright
Avenue extending from
driveway of the Dr. Albert Bean
Elementary School at the start
of Wright Avenue extending 50
feet southerly
§ 8-36 PINE HILL CODE § 8-37.2
AO:180
§ 8-37.2. Handicapped Parking on Streets for Private Residences.
[Ord. No. 2001-688]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6, the following onstreet
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces in front
of private residences occupied by handicapped persons. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted in these
spaces.
a. Procedure for Handicapped Parking on Street for Private Residence;
Permit. Prior to the establishment of a restricted parking zone for a
residence occupied by a handicapped person, the handicapped
applicant shall satisfy the following criteria.
1. The handicapped person shall have first applied to the Director of
Motor Vehicles in the Department of Law and Public Safety of the
State of New Jersey and have received a special vehicle
identification card and certificate to be posted on the windshield of
the car as provided for by the revised statutes in Title 39.
2. The applicant must be a resident of the Borough of Pine Hill and
reside at the address where on-street parking is requested.
3. The handicapped person shall then submit an application in writing
for the desired parking space to the Borough Clerk's Office, who
shall present same to the Borough Council at the next regularly
scheduled meeting.
4. This applicant shall provide the following information on the
application: (1) copy of the New Jersey Identification Card, (2)
applicant's personal information, (3) the precise location for the
permit, including street name and address, and any information
regarding the availability of off-street parking at the subject
property.
5. The location of the on-street handicapped parking space must be
on a public street and off-street parking is not available.
6. Upon the approval of such request by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Pine Hill, the Borough Clerk shall provide the Chief of
Police with a Letter of Approval and the address for the parking
zone.
7. The requested on-street handicapped parking space shall be
installed in front of the applicant's residence in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.6 unless:
(a) The requested space conflicts with any parking restriction
already in place;
§ 8-37.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-37.2
AO:181
§ 8-37.3. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and
Board of Education Property. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following offstreet
parking yards and Board of Education property are designated as
(b) There is not at least twenty-two-foot frontage on a public street
in front of the applicant's residence; or
(c) The requested space is otherwise deemed unacceptable by the
Pine Hill Police Department.
In the event that at least one of the above items are found to be
present, then the requested space shall be designated by the
Pine Hill Borough Police Department as near to the applicant's
property as possible.
8. The permit issued by the Borough to the handicapped person shall
be prominently displayed within the vehicle when it is parked in the
designated area so it can be seen from the middle of the street.
Only vehicles which have such a permit properly displayed shall be
permitted to be parked in the restricted parking zone indicated on
such permit.
9. Handicapped parking spaces under this subsection shall be
designated as tow-away zones. Parking a motor vehicle in a
handicapped parking space without a special identification card
will entitle the Borough Police Department to authorize an
immediate towing of the offending vehicle.
10. A fee of $250 shall be charged for the issuance of the permit.
11. The applicant shall be required to have his or her permit annually
renewed by the Borough Police Department on the anniversary of
date of said application. An annual renewal fee of $100 shall be
assessed.
12. A holder of a Borough handicapped parking permit issued pursuant
to this subsection must notify the Borough Clerk within 30 days if
such person changes his or her residency or his or her vehicle
registration number changes or the handicapped parking space is
no longer required. Failure to notify the Borough Clerk within 30
days of any of the above items shall incur a $50 penalty to be paid
to the Borough.
b. Regulatory and Warning Signs. Signs for on-street handicapped parking
spaces shall be installed by the Borough following the approval of an
application for such a handicapped parking space. [Ord. No.
2015-931]
Street Location Permit Number
(RESERVED)
§ 8-37.2 PINE HILL CODE § 8-37.3
AO:182
handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards, plates or placards issued by the
Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of
Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these areas.
Property Number of Spaces/Location
Municipal Complex 4 spaces in the northeasterly portion of the parking
lot, adjacent to the courtyard (as per sketch on file
with the Borough Clerk and New Jersey Department
of Transportation
Pine Hill M.U.A.
Offices
2 spaces in the southwesterly portion of the parking
lot (as per sketch on file with the Borough Clerk and
New Jersey Department of Transportation
Public Works/
Construction Office
2 spaces in the southwesterly portion of the parking
lot, adjacent to the main entrance (as per sketch on
file with the Borough Clerk and New Jersey
Department of Transportation
Senior Citizens'
Building
2 spaces in the southwesterly portion of the parking
lot, adjacent to the main entrance (as per sketch on
file with the Borough Clerk and New Jersey
Department of Transportation)
§ 8-37.4. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the
Public and to Which the Public is Invited (Retail Business). [Ord.
No. 2001-688]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following offstreet
parking yards are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property Number of Location Spaces
(RESERVED)
§ 8-37.5. Handicapped Parking on All Other Private Property. [Ord.
No. 2001-688]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
§ 8-37.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-37.5
AO:183
Property Number of Location Spaces
(RESERVED)
§ 8-37.6. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parks. [Ord. No.
2001-688]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property Number of Spaces/Location
Charlie Bowen Rec.
Area
4 spaces in the northwesterly portion of the parking
lot, adjacent to the football field (as per sketch on
file with the Borough Clerk and New Jersey
Department of Transportation)
Joey Green Ballfields 1 space adjacent to the concession stand and 1
space at the westerly end of the parking lot (as per
sketch on file with the Borough Clerk and New
Jersey Department of Transportation)
Veterans Memorial
Park
2 spaces in the southwesterly portion of the parking
lot (as per sketch on file with the Borough Clerk and
New Jersey Department of Transportation)
§ 8-37.7. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[Ord. No. 2001-688]
The owners of the premises referred to in Subsections 8-37.3, 8-37.4 and
8-37.5 shall provide and install signs and pavement markings for each
parking space reserved for the use of handicapped persons, which signs and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense
to the Borough of Pine Hill. The owner shall be responsible for the repair
and restoration of same.
§ 8-37.8. Violations. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction,
be liable for a penalty of not more than $100 for the first offense or $100
minimum and/or up to 90 days community service for subsequent offenses.
The provisions of § 8-4 shall also apply to any person violating the provisions
of this section.
§ 8-37.5 PINE HILL CODE § 8-38
AO:184
§ 8-38. CONTROL FOR THE MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 8-38.1. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Property and Board of Education Property. [Ord. No.
2001-688]
In accordance with the provisions N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following municipal
and Board of Education property shall have the movement of traffic
controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall operate, or
park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
Property Regulation/Location
Municipal Complex "30 minute" time limited parking, 2 spaces in front
of the Municipal Building (as per sketch on file with
the Borough Clerk and New Jersey Department of
Transportation)
One way traffic (as per sketch on file with the
Borough Clerk and New Jersey Department of
Transportation)
"Stop" at exit from Municipal Complex onto Seventh
Avenue (as per sketch on file with the Borough
Clerk and New Jersey Department of
Transportation)
Pine Hill M.U.A.
Offices
One way traffic (as per sketch on file with the
Borough Clerk and New Jersey Department of
Transportation)
Senior Citizens
Building
One way traffic (as per sketch on file with the
Borough Clerk and New Jersey Department of
Transportation)
§ 8-38.2. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Private Property Open to the Public and to which the Public is
Invited (Retail Business). [Ord. No. 2001-688]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the regulations listed herein.
No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the following
regulations.
Property Regulation
Tom's Liquors Left turn prohibited for traffic exiting onto
Branch Avenue (C.R. #687)
§ 8-38 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-38.2
AO:185
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). The cost of signs and installations shall
be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The owner shall,
subsequent to the initial procurement and installation, maintain such signs
and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the
Borough of Pine Hill.
The penalty for a violation and conviction of this subsection shall be not
less than $50 nor more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment in the county jail
for a term not to exceed 90 days, or by a period of community service not
to exceed 90 days.
§ 8-38.3. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
All Other Private Property. [Ord. No. 2013-903; Ord. No. 2001-688]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the regulations of
Subtitle I, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below.
Property Regulation
a. Village of Little Mill
1. General Parking
(a) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided
(b) No person shall stop or stand upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other
parking regulations
Name of
Street Hours Location
All aisles and
roads
All As indicated on site plan19
(c) Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown
on the attached site plan20 and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate) in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the
handicapped parking permits by the Motor Vehicle
Commission.
19.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk.
20.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Borough Clerk.
§ 8-38.2 PINE HILL CODE § 8-38.3
AO:186
2. Through Streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed
on the near right side of each street intersecting the through street
except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Mill Stream Road Entire length
Players Lane Entire length
Gristmill Lane Entire length
Golfview Court Entire length
Forrester Avenue Entire length
3. Speed Limits. The speed limit for both directions of travel on the
following roads are as follows:
Name of Roadway M.P.H. Limits
All roads and aisles 25 Entire length
4. Tow-Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expenses.
5. Signs. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials be installed
and paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the
current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
6. Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New
Jersey Statute every person convicted of a violation of this
ordinance or any supplement thereof shall be liable for a penalty of
not more than $200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days or both. [Ord. No. 2006-786 § I, II]
b. Bromley Estates Condominium Association.
1. Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey shall
become applicable to the Bromley Estates Condominium
Association, Phases I & II, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:5-1 and to the
private road identified as Ski Mountain Drive.
2. Appropriate speed limit signs shall be erected and maintained on
this private roadway of Bromley Estates Condominium Association,
Phases I & II, said costs to be borne by the Condominium
Association.
c. Property: Mason Run Condominium Association. Regulation A: [Added
11-4-2019 Ord. No. 2019-982]
§ 8-38.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-38.3
AO:187
1. General parking.
(a) All vehicles shall park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
(b) No person shall stop or stand upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described below, except in areas covered by other
parking regulations. A map describing the streets and roads
within the Mason Run Community are identified on the parking
layout plan on file in the Borough Clerk's office and
incorporated by reference herein.
(c) Handicap parking. All handicap parking shall be 12 feet wide
as required by law in appropriate designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicap parking permits by
the Motor Vehicle Commission. Reserve parking and penalty
signs shall be posted at all handicap parking spaces.
(d) The general parking regulations shall apply to all roads
identified on the parking layout plan at all times and all hours.
2. Through streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be installed
as indicated on the filed parking layout plan except where yield
signs may be provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Tomlinson Avenue Entire length within Mason Run
Montgomery Avenue Entire length within Mason Run
Mason Run Road Entire length within Mason Run
Meadow Road Entire length within Mason Run
Kenwood Drive Entire length within Mason Run
Glenwood Drive Entire length within Mason Run
Community Circle West Entire length within Mason Run
Community Circle East Entire length within Mason Run
3. Speed limits. The enforcement of Title 39 shall not apply to speed
limits within the Mason Run Townhome Community due to speed
bumps being located on various streets within the community.
4. Tow-away zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in
any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the
vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
5. Signs. All signs posted or other necessary materials to be installed
shall be paid for by Mason Run Condominium Association and not
by the Borough of Pine Hill. All signage shall conform to the current
§ 8-38.3 PINE HILL CODE § 8-38.3
AO:188
§ 8-38.4. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic in
Municipal Parks. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the regulations of
Subtitle I, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below.
Property Regulation
Charlie Bowen Recreation Area "Stop" at exit driveway from Charlie
Bowen Recreation Area onto South
Club Road.
Charlie Bowen Recreation Area "Parking Prohibited" at all times
along entrance and exit drive.
§ 8-38.5. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[Ord. No. 2001-688]
The owners of the premises referred to in Subsections 8-38.2 and 8-38.3
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings as required, which
signage and markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices. The cost for the procurement and installation of
signs and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the owner
of said property. The owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in good condition
at no cost or expense to the Borough of Pine Hill. The owner shall be
responsible for the repair and restoration or replacement of same.
§ 8-39. TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS. [Ord. No. 2001-688]
manual and uniform traffic control devices pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
6. Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New
Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this
subsection or any supplement thereof shall be liable for a penalty of
not more than $250 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days, or both.
a. Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection
of those streets described in the following schedule.
b. The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle I
of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, and shall conform to
the design and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the
Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
§ 8-38.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-39
AO:189
Chapter 9
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 9-1. FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
§ 9-1.1. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code.
That a certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office
of the borough Clerk of the Borough of Pine Hill, County of Camden and
State of New Jersey being marked and designated as "The BOCA Basic Fire
Prevention Code Fifth Edition, 1981" as published by Building Officials and
Code Administrators International Inc. including Appendix A and Appendix
B therein, is hereby adopted as the Fire Prevention Code of the Borough
of Pine Hill, County of Camden and State of New Jersey, for the control
of buildings and structures as herein provided, and each of all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the BOCA Basic
Fire Prevention Code, Fifth Edition, 1981 are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part thereof, as if fully set out in this section; except that
Section F-102.1, Enforcement Officer, is adopted as set forth in this section.
The BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code Edition as published including
Appendix A and Appendix B therein should be automatically amended to
comply with the current edition as published and updated by the Building
Officials and Code Administrators International Inc. in order to stay current
with the Uniform Fire Code.
Intersection LTS Number
Blackwood-Clementon Road (C.R. #534) and
New Freedom Road (C.R. #691).
LTS 2882
Blackwood-Clementon Road (C.R. #534) and
DeCou Road (C.R. #687).
LTS 373A
Blackwood-Clementon Road (C.R. #534) Laurel
Road/College Drive (C.R. #673) and Little Mill
Road.
LTS 142B
Cross Keys Road (C.R. #689) and New Freedom
Road (C.R. #691).
LTS 3358
Cross Keys Road (C.R. #689) and Turnersville
Road (C.R. #688).
LTS 3357
Erial Avenue (C.R. #703) and Branch Avenue
(C.R. #687).
LTS 1876A
Turnersville Road (C.R. #688) Kearsley Road and
Branch Avenue (C.R. #687).
LTS 3473A
Turnersville Road (C.R. #688) and Erial Avenue
(C.R. #703).
LTS 3450
§ 8-39 PINE HILL CODE § 9-1.1
AO:190
The International Fire Code Edition as published should be automatically
amended to comply with the current Edition as published and updated by
the Building Officials and Code Administrators International Inc. in order to
stay current with the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 9-1.2. Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances to conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 9-1.3. Savings Clause.
That nothing in this section or in the BOCA Basic Prevention Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any
court, or any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of
action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as
cited in subsection 9-1.2 of this section, nor shall any just or legal right or
remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this section.
§ 9-1.4. Enforcement Officer.
Section F-102.1, Enforcement Officer is deleted from the BOCA Code as
adopted herein, and the following language is adopted in its stead:
§ 9-1.5. Fire Control Measures And Regulations.
a. There is hereby created the position of fire inspector of the Borough of
Pine Hill.
b. The fire inspector shall be appointed by the governing body for a term
of three years.
c. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the fire inspector to enforce the
provisions of this Fire Prevention Code of the Borough of Pine Hill. The
fire inspector is the designated enforcement officer of the BOCA Code
and is referred to therein as the fire official,
d. The fire inspector shall notify the County Fire Marshal of every fire or
explosion occurring within the borough that is of a suspicious nature.
a. The fire inspector or duly authorized representative, as may be in
charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the
protection of life and/or property, is empowered to direct such
operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected
or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or situations
or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance
of their duty. The fire official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object
from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed
from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or
interfere with the operations of the fire department. The fire inspector
may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from
hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do
§ 9-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.5
AO:191
so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so
by the fire inspector.
b. It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire
to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of
travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to
interfere with, attempt to interfere, conspire to interfere with, obstruct
or hamper any fire department operation.
c. A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order
or direction of the fire inspector or to interfere with the compliance
attempts of another individual.
d. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose
of the fire department when laid down on any street, alley-way, private
drive or any other vehicular roadway without the consent of the fire
official in command of said operation.
e. Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are
defined and authorized under the laws of the State of New Jersey.
f. Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible
and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately
drive the same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the righthand
edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection,
and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized
emergency vehicle or vehicles shall have passed, unless otherwise
directed by the fire inspector or a police officer.
g. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on
official business, to follow closer than 300 feet from any fire apparatus
traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive any vehicle within the
block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to
a fire alarm.
h. A person shall not without proper authorization from the fire inspector
in charge of said fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach
himself to, climb upon or into, board or swing upon any fire department
emergency vehicle whether the same is in motion or at rest, or sound
the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or to
manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with
any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any
equipment or protective clothing, or a part of, any fire department
emergency vehicle.
i. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt, or
conspire to damage or deface any fire department emergency vehicle at
any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire
department personnel while performing departmental duties.
j. The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in this subsection, shall
not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights on or disobey
§ 9-1.5 PINE HILL CODE § 9-1.5
AO:192
any existing traffic regulation, except when said vehicle is responding
to an emergency call or when responding to, but upon returning from
a fire. Tactical strategies such as, but not restricted to, "move-ups" do
not constitute an emergency call. The driver of any emergency vehicle
may:
1. Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations;
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
3. Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as the action does not
endanger life or property;
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions;
5. The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds
audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be
reasonably necessary, and when the vehicle is equipped with at
least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
such vehicle.
k. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or
restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection
for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire
hydrants and fire department connections that are located on public or
private streets and access lanes, or on private property.
If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation,
obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the fire inspector
shall proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the performance
of necessary work shall be paid from the treasury on certificate of
the fire inspector and with the approval of the borough council; and
the borough shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such
costs.
l. A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of
the fire department for fire suppression purposes unless such person
first secures a permit for such use from the fire inspector and the water
company having jurisdiction. This subsection shall not apply to the use
of such hydrants by a person employed by, and authorized to make such
use by, the water company having jurisdiction.
m. The fire inspector shall recommend to the council the location or
relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and the placement or
replacement of inadequate water mains located upon public property
and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and distribution
§ 9-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1.5
AO:193
§ 9-1.6. Permit Fees.
The fees for any permit required under the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention
Code shall be $25, said sum to be paid to the borough Clerk of the Borough
of Pine Hill. In case of any nonprofit corporation, application shall be made,
however, no fee shall be charged.
§ 9-1.7. Penalties.
Any person, entity, firm, corporation or other group that is found guilty of
violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine as
stated in Chapter 3, section 3-8.
§ 9-2. LOCAL ENFORCEMENT OF THE UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
§ 9-2.1. Local Enforcement.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-202 the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be
locally enforced in the Borough of Pine Hill.
pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from service
until approved by the fire inspector.
n. A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb
any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained
under the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code except for the purpose
of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging, or
making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire inspector.
Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted it shall be
replaced or re-installed as soon as the purpose for which it was
removed has been accomplished. Defective and non-approved fire
appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by
the fire inspector.
o. A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of
fire extinguisher which is not approved by the fire inspector, or which is
not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the
requirements of the fire inspector. The requirements of this subsection
shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged
equipment for junk when said units are permanently disfigured or
marked with a permanent sign identifying the units as junk.
p. A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place, or maintain any
bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any
other type of obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of
the borough. The word "street" as used in the ordinance, shall mean any
roadway accessible to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not
limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets
and highways within the boundaries of the borough.
§ 9-1.5 PINE HILL CODE § 9-2.2
AO:194
§ 9-2.2. Agency Designation.
The local enforcing agency of the Borough of Pine Hill shall be the Pine
Hill Fire District Number One. The subsidiary unit within the Pine Hill
Fire District Number One designated to enforce the minimum fire safety
standards shall be known as "The Pine Hill Fire District Number One,
Bureau of Fire Safety."
§ 9-2.3. Duties.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Borough of Pine
Hill, other than owner occupied one and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 9-2.4. Life Hazard Uses.
The local enforcing agency shall carry out the periodic inspections of life
hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the
Commissioner of community affairs.
§ 9-2.5. Organization.
The Pine Hill Fire District Number One, Bureau of Fire Safety shall be under
the direct supervision and control of an appointed "fire official," who shall
report directly to the Commissioners of the Pine Hill Fire District Number
One.
§ 9-2.6. Appointments, Terms Of Office, Removal.
The Commissioners of the Pine Hill Fire District Number One shall be
responsible for appointing and removing personnel of the Pine Hill Fire
District Number One, Bureau of Fire Safety.
§ 9-2.7. Board Of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the right
to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Camden County.
§ 9-2.8. Permits.
The permit fee shall be as specified in the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 9-2.9. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this section are to the extent of such inconsistency hereby
repealed.
§ 9-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.10
AO:195
§ 9-2.10. Effective Date.
This section shall be effective upon passage and publication as required by
law with enforcement commencing January 1, 1986.
§ 9-2.11. Additional Required Inspections And Fees.
In addition to the inspections and fees for life hazard uses, the following
additional inspections and fees shall be required:
a. The fire official will register all non-life hazard structures and premises
within the Township, except single family and two-family dwellings
occupied by the holder of title to the property and dwelling units within
two family and multifamily dwellings.
b. Inspection fees for non-life hazard structures and premises shall be:
1. Residential Building:
Time of inspection, once every 12 months, except individual
dwelling units: time of inspection, once every four years.
2. Residential Use Group:
Includes buildings with dwelling units not listed as high-hazard by
the New Jersey Bureau of Fire Safety, except one or two family
owner occupied units.
Individual dwelling units Fee
1 to 3 units $35
4 to 10 units $75
11 to 20 units $100
21 to 40 units $125
For each additional 20 units or less $25
3. Mercantile or Business Use Group:
Mercantile or business use group includes all buildings not listed
as high-hazard by the New Jersey Bureau of Fire Safety.
Fee
Mercantile or business units with or without
attached dwelling units not in excess of 3,000
square feet
$50
4. Factory or Storage Buildings:
Includes all buildings not listed as high-hazard by the New Jersey
Bureau of Fire Safety.
§ 9-2.10 PINE HILL CODE § 9-2.11
AO:196
Fee
Factory or storage buildings not in excess of 3,000
square feet
$50
5. All Use Groups Not Listed As High-Hazard by the New Jersey
Department of Fire Safety:
Fee
Buildings in excess of 3,000 square feet but not
exceeding 9,000 square feet
$75
Buildings in excess of 9,000 square feet but not
exceeding 15,000 square feet
$125
Buildings in excess of 15,000 square feet but not
exceeding 50,000 square feet
$175
Buildings in excess of 15,000 square feet but not
exceeding 100,000 square feet
$225
Buildings in excess of 100,000 square feet but not
exceeding 200,000 square feet
$400
Buildings in excess of 200,000 square feet but not
exceeding 300,000 square feet
$600
For each additional 100,000 square feet or part
thereof
$200
Each floor or story shall be calculated as separate areas for total
building calculations.
6. Miscellaneous Fees:
Fees
Certificate for fire code status $15
Any structure requiring inspection not covered under either the
life-hazard fee schedule or the non-life hazard fee schedule $25
c. The following structures or premises, if classified as non-life hazard,
although not exempt from registration or inspection, shall be exempt
from paying an inspection fee as pursuant to the act. These structures
and premises are: municipal owned buildings, fire houses and public
schools.
d. The application fee(s) for a certificate of smoke detector and carbon
monoxide alarm compliance (CSDCMAC) shall be as specified by
5:70-2.9(d) of the State of New Jersey Uniform Fire Code and this fee
section should be automatically amended to comply with the State of
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code Fees.
§ 9-2.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-2.11
AO:197
Chapter 9A
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS; PAYMENT OF MUNICIPAL LIENS
§ 9A-1. PAYMENT OF CLAIMS; FIRE INSURANCE COMPANY
OBLIGATORS.
§ 9A-2. INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.
The borough council of the borough may, by resolution, enter into an
agreement with the owner of any fire damaged property situated in the
borough to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or other municipal
liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the redemption of
a tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 7
of Title 54 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, if the borough council is
satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or improve
the fire damaged property.
e. After two inspections that result in failure an additional $35 will be
charged for the third inspection.
f. Section 5:70-2.9(c) Class I permit fee: From $42 to $52.
a. No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey shall pay to a claimant any claim in excess of
$2,500 for fire damages on any real property located within the
Borough of Pine Hill pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or
renewed after the adoption of this chapter and the filing of this
ordinance with the State Commission of Insurance, until such time as:
1. All taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges
due and payable appearing on the official certificate of search for
municipal liens pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 shall have been paid
either by the owner of such real property or by the insurance
company; or
2. The municipality submits to the insurance company a copy of a
resolution adopted pursuant to section 9A-2 of this chapter.
b. In the event an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge,
other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of real property
pursuant to R.S. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75% of
the full amount of lien or charge being contested pending termination
of all proceedings, at which time such moneys and all interest accruing
thereon at a rate paid on interest bearing accounts in banking
institutions or savings and loan associations in the State of New Jersey,
shall be disbursed in accordance with a final order or judgment of the
court.
§ 9-2.11 PINE HILL CODE § 9A-2
AO:198
In the event of such resolution, a certified copy of said resolution shall be
sent to the insurance company authorizing the insurance company to make
full payment of the claim to the insured.
§ 9A-3. PAYMENT TO MORTGAGEE.
§ 9A-4. AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION OF OFFICIAL
CERTIFICATE OF SEARCH.
The official certificate of search may from time to time, be altered, by
the bonded official responsible for preparing such certificates, in order to
cancel any error or omissions or to add any municipal liens or related
charges due and payable subsequent to the preparation of the official
certificate.
§ 9A-5. FILING OF CHAPTER WITH COMMISSIONER OF
INSURANCE.
Upon adoption of this chapter, a certified copy shall be filed by the Clerk of
the borough with the State Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to Section
2 of P.L. 1978, Chapter 184.
§ 9A-6. OTHER PROVISIONS.
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 9A-1 of this chapter, an
insurance company may pay proceeds of a fire insurance policy to a
mortgagee of fire damaged real property where the fire insurance
policy, at the time of the loss, listed the mortgagee as a named insured;
provided said payment may not be in an amount which exceeds that due
and payable to the mortgagee under the mortgagee contract.
b. Any claim on behalf of the borough made in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and P.L. 1978, C. 184 shall be paramount to
any other claims on the proceeds of the fire insurance policy, except of
the claim of a holder of a mortgage on the fire damaged property, where
the fire insurance policy at the time of the loss listed the mortgagee, as
a named insured, in which event the claim of the mortgagee to the
proceeds shall be paramount to the municipal lien only to the extent of
the amount due and payable to the mortgagee under the mortgage
contract.
a. All other powers conveyed and reserved to the borough by N.J.S.A.
17:36-8 through N.J.S.A. 17:36-13 as now or herein-after amended not
specifically set forth in this chapter are hereby incorporated by
reference and enacted by the Borough of Pine Hill.
b. Any provisions of this chapter inconsistent with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 17:36-8 through N.J.S.A. 17:36-13, as now or hereafter
amended, are hereby modified or repealed to the extent of such
inconsistencies, but all other parts of this chapter shall remain in full
force and effect.
§ 9A-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9A-6
AO:199
Chapter 10
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 10-1. UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING AGENCY.
Section 10-1 was readopted in entirety by Ord. No. 2018-970. Prior history
includes Ord. Nos. 292, 387, 91-500, 92-510, 92-518, 94-553, 95-577,
95-597, 2000-685, 2005-761, 2012-883, 2012-885.
§ 10-1.1. Enforcing Agency.
a. There is hereby established within the Borough of Pine Hill a State
Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency to be known as the
"department of construction code inspection and enforcement",
(hereinafter referred to as the "department") consisting of a Borough
Construction Official, building subcode official, plumbing subcode
official, electrical subcode official, fire protection subcode official and
such other subcode officials for such additional subcodes as the
Commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs, State of New
Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction
Code.
b. The position of Borough Construction Official is hereby created, whose
duty it is to be the chief administrator of the department. The Borough
Construction Official shall be qualified in at least one of the subcodes
referred to in Subsection a. The Borough Construction Official shall
undertake any duties and shall possess all powers delegated to
municipal Construction Officials, pursuant to the Act and any
regulations thereunder promulgated by the New Jersey Department of
Community Affairs. The Borough Construction Official shall establish
the day to day operating routines of the department and shall
coordinate the activities of all subcode officials. In addition to the
administrative functions, the Borough Construction Official may make
advisory subcode technical interpretations where he or she has been
qualified in that subcode, as specified in Subsection c below. However,
each subcode official shall have exclusive decision-making authority
with respect to the technical provisions of the particular subcode for
which he has been appointed the subcode official.
c. Each official position in Subsections a or b above shall be filled by a
person qualified and licensed for such position under the Act, and under
any regulations promulgated thereunder by the State Department of
Community Affairs, pursuant N.J.A.C. 5:23-5. More than one such
official position may be held by the same person, provided that such
person is qualified and licensed as aforesaid to hold each such position.
Furthermore, should the Borough Council deem it appropriate and
necessary, an on-site inspection agency may be retained, by Borough
contract, in lieu of any particular subcode official, pursuant to N.J.A.C.
§ 9A-6 PINE HILL CODE § 10-1.1
AO:200
5:23. Whenever the Borough contracts with private on-site inspection
agency for any subcode, it shall appoint a Borough official to coordinate
enforcement activities.
d. The Pine Hill Borough Council shall be solely responsible for appointing
the Borough Construction Official and any necessary subcode officials.
The Borough Council may also establish any other ancillary, support, or
secretarial positions within the department as the Council may deem
necessary to effectuate the provisions of the Act. The Borough Council
shall be solely responsible for appointing persons to fill any ancillary,
support, or secretarial positions within the department.
e. Personnel hired or transferred into the department on a full or parttime
basis, for purposes of the administration of the Act and regulations
promulgated thereunder, shall be hired or transferred by resolution of
the Borough Council.
f. The Borough shall provide the Borough Construction Official, each
subcode official and any appointed inspector with personal
identification which shall be validated by the Borough. The
identification shall include the words: "Borough of Pine Hill", as well as
the name, title and photograph of the individuals.
g. The Borough Construction Official and any necessary subcode officials
shall be appointed for a term of four years and shall, upon appointment
to a second consecutive term or on or after the commencement of a fifth
consecutive year of service, be granted tenure and shall not be removed
from office except for just cause after a fair and impartial hearing.
h. The public shall have the right to do business with the department at
one location, that being the Borough Offices, 48 W. 7th Avenue, Pine
Hill, New Jersey, 08021. This location shall contain a central permit
office under the direction and supervision of the Borough Construction
Official. The central permit office shall receive applications for
construction permits and plan review within the Borough of Pine Hill,
and shall issue permits and certificates of occupancy, shall collect fees,
penalties and fines, and shall issue notices and orders. The office shall
be open during normal business hours at times to be determined by the
Borough. These times shall be conspicuously posted and shall be
comparable with the amount of construction activity in the Borough.
The times shall not be changed except for emergency, unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
i. The Borough Construction Official and the subcode officials shall be
available for consultation and discussion during normal business hours
at scheduled times to be determined by the Borough Construction
Official. All inspections shall occur between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on
business days or while construction is taking place, or in the case of
emergency, or with the permission of the owner or his representatives.
j. The Borough Construction Official, assisted by the subcode officials and
any necessary Borough employees, shall maintain a central file system,
§ 10-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.1
AO:201
§ 10-1.2. Appeals.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Pine Hill hereby designates the
Camden County Construction Board of Appeals as the local entity to hear all
appeals from any final decision made by the department or by an official of
the department.
§ 10-1.3. Building Construction Permit And Subcode Fees.
by block and lot, for each property in the Borough for which a permit
has been issued or requested or for which an action has been taken by
the department.
k. On or before February 10th of each year, the Borough Construction
Official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials (and in
consultation with the Borough Finance Officer), prepare and submit to
the Borough Council a report detailing the receipts and expenditures of
the department. The report shall also indicate the Borough
Construction Official's recommendations for changes in the
department's fee schedule, based upon the operating expense of the
department. This report shall be structured in accordance with
guidelines and regulations promulgated by the New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs, as specified in N.J.A.C. 5-23 et seq. The report
shall be used by the Borough Council to enact any changes to the
department fee schedule which the Borough Council may deem
appropriate.
l. Not later than 30 days after the appointment or hiring of the Borough
Construction Official, or each necessary subcode official, the Borough
Clerk shall file with the State Department of Community Affairs a list
containing the names and certification numbers of the Borough
Construction Official and each subcode official.
a. Prior to construction, renovation, repairs, re-roofing or alteration of any
building or structure, the owner, or his agent, shall submit an
application to the department in writing, including signed and sealed
drawings and specifications, if required by the department. The
application shall be accompanied by the payment of all appropriate fees
as required by this subsection.
b. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of all subcode fees
applicable to the structure and shall be paid before the permit is issued.
c. New construction permit fees shall be based upon the volume in cubic
feet of the proposed structure. The fee shall also depend upon the Use
Group applicable to the structure. The Use Group shall be determined
according to the use categories established by regulations of New
Jersey Department of Community Affairs. The volume shall be
computed in accordance with the regulations promulgated under the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code. The building subcode new
construction permit fees shall be as follows:
§ 10-1.1 PINE HILL CODE § 10-1.3
AO:202
1. All Use Groups (except commercial farm buildings) shall be $0.034
per cubic foot of volume minimum fee of $200. For new
construction and additions, and $100 minimum for roof only
structures.
2. Farm use buildings exclusively used for storage of food or grain or
for the sheltering of livestock: $0.015 per cubic foot of volume. The
maximum fee per structure in this category shall be $1,143.
3. Large open storage structures $0.020 per cubic feet over 100,000
square feet.
d. The building subcode fee for renovations, alterations, re-roofing, residing
and/or repairs to existing structures shall be based upon the
estimated cost of the work. Fees shall be charged as follows:
1. Estimated cost $30 per $1,000.
e. The building subcode fee for additions to existing structures shall be
based upon volume, as determined in Subsection c. The fee shall be
$0.034 per cubic foot of building or structure volume.
f. For combinations of renovations and additions: the total fee shall be the
sum of the fees computed separately as renovations and additions.
g. The minimum building subcode fee for any construction in Subsections
c to e shall be $75.
h. The fee for new fences over six feet and fences for pool barriers, shall
be $0.25 per linear foot with a minimum fee of $45.
i. For all permits which depend upon estimated cost data for their fee
calculation, the applicant shall submit to the department accurate cost
data provided by an architect or engineer, by a recognized estimating
firm, by a building contractor, or by the homeowner. The department
shall then review the same for acceptability. The department shall make
the final decision in determining the correct estimated cost.
j. Above ground swimming pool permit fees are $75.
k. In-ground swimming pool permit fees are $150.
l. Decks: residential decks will be charged a set fee for each deck based
on size:
Under 100 square feet: $75.
One hundred one to 200 square feet: $100.
Two hundred one to 300 square feet: $150.
Three hundred one and over: $200.
Use Groups other than R-3 and R-5 shall be charged by estimated cost
with minimum fees no less than the R-3 and R-5 fees based size.
§ 10-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.3
AO:203
§ 10-1.4. Plumbing Subcode Fees.
Plumbing subcode fees are hereby established as follows:
§ 10-1.4A. Mechanical Subcode Fees.
For new installations and replacement of mechanical equipment in R3, R4
and R5 shall be $75 for the first appliance and $15 for each additional
appliance excluding new construction.
§ 10-1.5. Electrical Subcode Fees.
Electrical subcode fees are to be based upon the number of electrical
fixtures and devices to be installed. The fee shall be a unit rate per fixture
or device, as follows:
m. Solar: Solar fees shall be charged by the estimated cost per Subsection
d with a $200 minimum fee for one and two-family dwellings, and $400
minimum fee for all other use groups.
a. The permit fee for all of the following fixtures or appliances connected
to the structure's plumbing system shall be $13 each:
Sinks, urinals, water closets, bidets, bathtubs, shower stalls, laundry
tubs, hose bibs, floor drains, drinking fountains, water coolers, noncommercial
dishwashers, garbage disposals, clothes washers, hot
water heaters, indirect connections, or any similar miscellaneous
devices not specifically herein mentioned.
b. The permit fee for all of the following special devices shall be $82 each:
Active solar systems, interceptors, backflow preventers, fuel oil piping,
gas piping/gas service entrance, grease traps, commercial dishwashers,
hot water boilers, oil separators, refrigeration units, sewer pumps,
water and/or sewer utility connection, steam boilers, water-cooled air
condition units.
c. (Reserved)
d. The minimum fee for all plumbing subcode fees is $75.
a. Lighting outlets, switching outlets, receptacle outlets, and fluorescent
fixtures, motors or devices:
1. One through 50 outlets or fixtures: $50.
2. Each additional 25 such outlets or fixtures, or fraction thereof: $10.
b. Electrical devices, including generators and transformers (Note: For
the purpose of computing these fees all motors except plug-in
appliances shall be counted, including control equipment generators,
transformers and all cooking or other devices consuming or generating
electrical current):
§ 10-1.3 PINE HILL CODE § 10-1.5
AO:204
1. One kilowatt to 10 kilowatts: $13.
2. Over 10 kilowatts to 45 kilowatts: $58.
3. Over 45 kilowatts to 112.5 kilowatts: $116 each.
4. Over 112.5 kilowatts: $576 each.
c. Electrical motors (Note: For the purpose of computing these fees all
motors except plug-in appliances shall be counted, including control
equipment generators, transformers and all cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electrical current):
1. Over one horsepower to 10 horsepower: $13 each.
2. Over 10 horsepower to 50 horsepower: $58 each.
3. Over 50 horsepower to 100 horsepower: $116 each.
4. Over 100 horsepower: $576 each.
d. Service panels/service entrance/subpanels (Note: For the purpose of
computing these fees, all motors except plug-in appliances shall be
counted, including control equipment, generators, transformers and all
cooking or other devices consuming or generating electrical current):
1. Zero to 200 amps: $58 each.
2. Over 200 to 1,000 amps: $116 each.
3. Over 1,000 amps: $576 each.
e. Swimming pools and related structures:
1. In-ground and above-ground pools:
(a) Outlets/bonding: $50 each.
(b) Motors (over one horsepower): $9 each.
(c) Minimum fee: $75.
2. Spas, hot tubs, hydromassage bath tubs, fountains, or therapeutic
pools, each: $25.
f. Protective signaling systems excluding smoke alarms:
1. First 20 signaling devices or fraction thereof: $25.
2. Each additional five devices or fraction thereof: $8.
g. Electric baseboard heaters:
1. First floor: $12.
2. Each additional floor: $8.
§ 10-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.5
AO:205
§ 10-1.6. Fire Subcode Fees.
The fire subcode fees include the costs of subcode inspection and shall be
as follows:
h. Additional fees to be assessed:
1. A flat fee for all bonding shall be $25.
2. A flat fee for single and multiple station smoke or heat detectors
and fire, burglar or security systems in any one- or two-family
dwelling shall be a flat fee of $29 per dwelling unit. (N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.20(c)2iii(7)).
i. The minimum fee for an electrical subcode permit is $75.
a. The fee for flammable/combustible liquid tank installation or removal
shall be $100 per tank.
b. Fireplaces: $50 each.
c. Woodburning stoves: $50 each.
d. Radiant heaters (gas, infrared, etc.):
1. First unit: $58.
2. Each other unit: $7.
e. Fire protection system standpipes, per riser, each: $289.
f. Fire sprinkler systems:
1. One to 25 heads: $85.
2. Each additional 25 heads: $35.
g. Each special fire suppression system (foam, carbon dioxide,
halogenated, dry chemical): $116. (Kitchen hood systems).
h. Fire alarm devices, per dwelling unit (includes smoke detectors, heat
detectors, alarm bells and lights, pull stations, exit lights, emergency
lights and other similar devices).
1. From one to 25 devices or fraction thereof: $60.
2. Each additional 25 devices or fraction thereof: $35.
i. Crematoriums or incinerators, each: $460.
j. Kitchen exhaust systems: $50.
k. The fee for each gas or oil-fired appliance which is not connected to the
plumbing system shall be $58.
l. Minimum inspection/fire code plan review fee: $75.
§ 10-1.5 PINE HILL CODE § 10-1.7
AO:206
§ 10-1.7. Demolition, Relocation, Sign Construction And
Miscellaneous Fees.
§ 10-1.8. (Reserved)
§ 10-1.9. Plan Review Fees.
§ 10-1.10. Certificates Of Occupancy And Fees.
a. The fee for a building demolition or removal permit shall be $60 for a
structure of less than 1,000 square feet in area and less than 30 feet in
height, or for a one- or two-family dwelling (Use Group R-3 of the
building subcode). The fee for structures over 1,000 square feet, and
structures in all other use groups, shall be $100.
b. The fee for a permit for the relocation of a building or structure from
one lot to another or to a new location on the same lot shall be $12 per
$1,000 of the sum of the estimated costs for moving, excluding work
done on site and for placement in the completed condition in the new
location.
c. The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be $4 per square foot for
wall signs and $5 per square foot for ground signs of the surface area of
the sign, provided that the minimum fee shall be $75. In case of doublefaced
signs, the area of the surface of only one side of the sign shall be
used for the purposes of the fee computation.
a. The fee for plan review shall be 15% of the construction permit fee and
shall be paid to the department at the time of submission of the
application. The amount of this fee shall be deducted from the amount
of the fee due for a construction permit when the permit is issued. The
plan review fee is not refundable.
b. For projects which do not require plan review for all subcodes, the fee
shall be the appropriate percentage of the subcode fees which are
applicable.
c. Fee for Review of Revisions or Amendments. An additional fee of $57 an
hour for review of any amendments or revisions to a plan that has
already been released. (N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20(b)(4)).
a. Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
APPLICANT — Shall mean any person who is required by this
subsection to obtain a certificate of occupancy and pursuant to this
subsection submits a request for an inspection of a dwelling unit.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean any structure or building and any
part thereof, whether furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied or
intended to be occupied, arranged or designed to be occupied for
sleeping, dwelling or working purposes by one or more persons.
§ 10-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.10
AO:207
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person or persons in actual possession
of and living in the dwelling unit.
OWNER — Shall mean any person or persons who own, purport to own
or are properly authorized to exercise powers of or for an owner of
property used as a dwelling unit.
PERSON — Shall mean and include any natural person or persons, firm,
partnership, corporation or association or any combination thereof.
RENT — Shall mean and include the leasing, rental or other granting
of occupancy for any period of time where title to the dwelling unit
is not transferred to the actual occupant at the time such occupancy
commences.
SALE — Shall mean and include any conveyance or transfer of title,
whether voluntary or involuntary, of real estate.
b. Certificate required.
1. No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall sell, rent, lease,
suffer or allow any person or persons, firms, partnerships or
corporations to live in or inhabit as a tenant or lessee any house,
apartment or other structure, including a mobile home and
modular unit, unless said person, firm, partnership or corporation
shall first obtain from the Borough of Pine Hill an occupancy permit
or continued certificate of occupancy in accordance with this
chapter.
2. No person, group of persons, associations, partnerships or
corporations, or any combination thereof, who own, manage,
conduct or operate a dwelling unit shall sell, rent, lease, sublet or
permit the same to be occupied or rented nor shall any person,
group of persons, association, partnerships or corporations, or any
combination thereof, purchasing or acquiring in any manner
occupancy of dwelling units permit the same to be occupied,
without first securing from the Construction Official a certificate of
occupancy or a continued certificate of occupancy for said dwelling
unit.
3. No certificate of occupancy or continued certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for a dwelling unit unless the condition of the same
complies with all of the statutes of the State of New Jersey, the
rules and regulations issued thereunder, the ordinances of the
Borough of Pine Hill now in existence or hereinafter enacted
pertaining to building, plumbing, electrical, zoning, health, safety,
fire and minimum housing standards, including but not limited to
the 2000 International Building Code NJ Edition, 2000
International Building Code NJ Edition One and Two Family
Dwellings, the 2002 Edition of the National Electrical Code, the
2000 Edition of The National Standard Plumbing Code, 2000
Edition of The International Property Maintenance Code and the
1998 Edition of the American National Standard, Accessible and
§ 10-1.10 PINE HILL CODE § 10-1.10
AO:208
Usable Buildings and Facilities and any other codes, rules and
regulations established by the State of New Jersey and the Borough
of Pine Hill.
4. In the event that there is a conflict in the provisions of the codes of
the Borough of Pine Hill and the code, rules and regulations of the
State of New Jersey, the higher standards for the promotion and
protection of the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Borough shall prevail.
5. The Construction Official, and/or his assistants, deputies and/or the
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Pine Hill shall be the
persons who have the duty to enforce this chapter or parts of this
chapter.
6. The Construction Official, and/or his deputies, assistants and/or the
Code Enforcement Officer shall have such powers as may be
necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter or
parts of this chapter, including but not limited to the following
enumerated powers:
(a) To investigate the dwelling conditions of the Borough of Pine
Hill in order to determine which houses, apartments or
structures, including mobile homes and modular units, are
unfit for human habitation.
(b) To enter into the lands and premises at reasonable times for
the purpose of making housing inspections incidental to his
duties.
(c) To delegate any of his functions and powers to persons
designated by the Borough Council of the Borough of Pine Hill
who are licensed to administer the Uniform Construction Code
or the Code Enforcement Officer.
(d) Upon application of a property owner, to make an inspection of
said house, apartment or other structure for which there has
been an application for an occupancy permit or continued
certificate of occupancy within five working days from the
receipt of such application and the payment of the proper fees.
7. The Construction Official, and/or his assistants, deputies or the
code enforcement official shall make a report promptly after such
inspection and advise the applicant of any violations of the codes,
statutes and ordinances governing said premises in the Borough of
Pine Hill.
8. Violations of the foregoing statutes, codes, ordinances, rules and
regulations, or noncompliance therewith, shall be grounds for
denial of an occupancy permit or a continued certificate of
occupancy.
§ 10-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.10
AO:209
9. Any individual, person, group of persons, associations, partnership
or corporations, or any combination thereof, violating any of the
terms of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine not in excess of $500 or imprisonment for a term not in excess
of 90 days, or both.
10. The fees to be charged for issuance of a certificate of occupancy
shall be as follows:
(a) Final certificate of occupancy $85.
(b) Change of use certificate of occupancy $150.
(c) Continued certificate of occupancy $150.
(d) The fee for the issuance and the renewal of a temporary
certificate of occupancy $50.
All applications for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or
continued certificate of occupancy as well as any applications
for reinspection of property for the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy or continued certificate of occupancy shall be
accompanied by the fee stated herein.
11. An application for a certificate of occupancy or continued
certificate of occupancy shall be valid for six months from the date
the application is filed. In the event that a certificate of occupancy
or continued certificate of occupancy is not issued within six
months of the date that an application for said certificate is filed,
the application shall be deemed null and void and of no effect. In
the event that a certificate of occupancy or continued certificate of
occupancy is requested after the six-month period, the persons
requesting same shall be required to file a new application and to
pay such fees as shall be required by the Borough of Pine Hill Code.
12. Upon the inspection of any dwelling unit, the construction code
official, in his discretion, may cause to be issued a temporary
certificate of compliance conditioned upon the applicant's
removing any conditions which violates the standards set forth in
the Borough of Pine Hill's Codes within a reasonable period of time
not to exceed 30 days from the issuance of said certificate.
Upon correction of the violations by an applicant who has received
a temporary certificate of compliance, the construction code official
shall issue a permanent certificate of occupancy, provided that the
applicant has paid all appropriate fees.
No temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued where the
conditions to be abated render the property uninhabitable or pose
a threat to the health, safety and welfare of a potential occupant.
13. (a) Every person who lets to another for occupancy as of the date
of the adoption of this subsection any dwelling unit shall
§ 10-1.10 PINE HILL CODE § 10-1.10
AO:210
§ 10-1.11. Surcharge Fees.
A fee for state training for alterations based on the cost of construction
shall be charged per cubic foot per volume of new buildings and additions.
Volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The fee for
all other construction shall be charged per value of construction.
§ 10-1.11.1. Administration Fee.
An administration fee shall be charged in the amount of 15%.
§ 10-1.12. Disposition Of Fees.
register the unit with the Borough of Pine Hill, who shall
maintain a registry thereof. Registration forms shall be
provided by the Borough and shall include the following
information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner.
(2) The address of the dwelling unit.
(3) The term of existing or anticipated leases.
(b) The registration shall not have to be renewed as long as the
dwelling unit shall continue to be used by the same owner as a
rental dwelling. When the owner shall no longer let the
premises to another for occupancy, the owner shall notify the
Borough of Pine Hill of such fact in writing.
(c) Upon sale or conveyance of ownership of any such dwelling
unit, the new owner shall, within 10 days after receipt of the
deed, notify the Borough of Pine Hill in writing of the change in
ownership.
(d) All owners to whom this subsection applies shall register in
accordance with this section within 30 days of the date of the
adoption hereof.
(e) In the event that the Borough has reason to believe that a
property owner is not in compliance with this article as a result
of the owner's failure to register in accordance with the above
provisions, then the Borough, through the construction code
officer or such other delegated agent, code enforcement
official, employee or servant of the municipality, shall have the
right to apply to the municipal court judge for a search warrant
to enter upon the premises which is suspected to be in
violation of this subsection in order to ascertain whether or
not, in fact, the property is being rented and has not been
registered in accordance with this subsection.
§ 10-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.12
AO:211
§ 10-1.13. Compliance And Penalties For Violations.
a. All construction, inspection and permit fees shall be paid to the
Borough of Pine Hill through the Borough Construction Official's office,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-15.
b. In the event that particular circumstances warrant the retention of onsite
inspection services by the Borough of Pine Hill, the Borough shall
be responsible for making payment to the designated on-site inspection
agency pursuant to a contract entered into for said services, in
accordance with the New Jersey local public bidding laws. The
applicant who required said on-site inspection services shall be
required to pay all necessary fees to the Borough of Pine Hill in
accordance with the fee schedules established herein.
a. Any person or corporation, including an officer, director or employee of
a corporation, who:
1. Violates any of the provisions of this section;
2. Constructs a structure or building in violation of a condition of a
building permit;
3. Fails to comply with any order issued by the Borough Construction
Official or any subcode official;
4. Makes a false or misleading written statement or omits any
required information or statement in any application or request for
approval to the department;
5. Knowingly sells or offers for retail sale any item, device or material,
the regular and intended use of which would violate any provision
of the State Uniform Construction Code;
Shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $250.
Paragraph a5 of this subsection does not prohibit the retail sale or
offering for retail sale of any item, device or material which has
more than one regular and intended use, if one of those uses does
not violate the code, provided that the item, device or material is
not publicly advertised or promoted by the seller or manufacturer
as suitable for a use that would violate any provisions of the code.
b. Anyone who knowingly refuses entry or access to an inspector or
official lawfully authorized to inspect any premises, building or
structure subject to this section or who unreasonably interferes with
such an inspector shall be subject to a fine of not more than $250.
c. With respect to Subsection a3 of this subsection, a person shall be
guilty of a separate offense for each day that he fails to comply with a
stop construction order validly issued by the department and for each
week that he fails to comply with any other order validly issued by the
department. With respect to Subsections a1 and a4 of this subsection, a
§ 10-1.12 PINE HILL CODE § 10-1.13
AO:212
§ 10-1.14. Asbestos Abatement.
Fees for any asbestos abatement project shall be as follows:
§ 10-1.15. Lead Hazard Abatement.
§ 10-1.16. Handicap Ramps.
§ 10-1.17. Application for Variation.
§ 10-2. UNFIT DWELLINGS.
§ 10-2.1. Findings.
The Mayor and Council has declared and determined that there exist in the
Borough, buildings which are unfit for human habitation or occupancy or
use, due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents,
or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitation facilities, or due
person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each violation of this
section and for each false or misleading written statement or omission
of required information or statement made in any application or request
for approval to the department. With respect to Subsection a2 of this
subsection, a person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each
violation of the conditions of a construction permit.
a. An administrative fee of $140 for each construction permit issued for an
asbestos hazard abatement project;
b. An administrative fee of $28 for each certificate of occupancy issued
following the successful completion of an asbestos hazard abatement
project;
c. The authorization and reauthorization fees for the asbestos safety
control monitor as delineated in N.J.A.C. 5:23-8.11.
a. The fee for a permit for lead hazard abatement work shall be $140.
b. The fee for a lead abatement clearance certificate shall be $28.
a. Fees are waived for the installation of handicap ramps only on
residential properties.
a. Application for variation in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10:
Type Fee
Class I $594
Class II and Class III $120
Resubmission, Class I $229
Resubmission, Class II and Class III $65
§ 10-1.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.1
AO:213
to any condition rendering such building or buildings, or part thereof,
unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous, or detrimental to the health or safety or
otherwise inimical to the welfare of the Borough residents; the resolution
having been adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey.
§ 10-2.2. Unfit Dwellings Prohibited.
No owner or party having any interest in any building which is, or may
become, dangerous to human life, safety or health, or dangerous to adjacent
property, or which would be likely to extend conflagration, shall permit the
same to remain in the Borough.
§ 10-2.3. Definitions.
As used in this section:
§ 10-2.4. Public Officer.
The Chairman of the public safety committee and any officer listed in
subsection 10-1.1, or any Borough official designated by Council is hereby
designated as the public officer to exercise the powers prescribed by this
section.
§ 10-2.5. Complaint; Notice.
Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer of a public authority or by
at least five residents of the Borough charging that any building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to the public
officer, on his own motion, that any building is unfit for human habitation
or occupancy or use, the public officer shall, if his preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the
a. PUBLIC OFFICER - Shall mean the officer, board or body who is
authorized by ordinances to exercise the powers prescribed by this
section.
b. PUBLIC AUTHORITY - Shall mean any housing authority or any officer
who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of this
Borough, county or state relating to health, fire, building regulations, or
to other activities, concerning buildings in the Borough.
c. OWNER - Shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple.
d. PARTIES IN INTEREST - Shall mean all individuals, associations, and
corporations who have interests of record in a building and any who are
in actual possession thereof.
e. BUILDING - Shall mean any building, or structure, or part thereof,
whether used for human habitation or otherwise, and includes any
outhouses, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed
therewith.
§ 10-2.1 PINE HILL CODE § 10-2.5
AO:214
owner of the parties in interest in such building, a complaint stating the
charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing shall be held
before the public officer, or his designated agent, at a place therein fixed not
less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint;
that the owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of
evidence prevailing in the courts shall not be controlling in hearings before
the public officer.
§ 10-2.6. Determination Of Unfitness.
If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the
building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or occupancy
or use, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order:
§ 10-2.7. Failure To Comply With Order.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the public
officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved or to be
vacated and closed. The public officer may cause to be posted on the main
entrance of any building so closed a placard with the following words: "This
building is unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use; the use of this
building is prohibited and unlawful".
§ 10-2.8. Removal Or Demolition Of Building.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the public officer may cause such building to be removed or
demolished.
The amount of such cost of such repairs, alterations or improvements, or
vacating and closing or removal or demolition shall be a municipal lien
against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. A detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs shall be filed with the Borough Tax Assessor
or other custodian of the records of tax liens, and a copy of the detailed
statement shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner by registered mail. If
a. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order or, at the option of the owner, to vacate or have the
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order; and
b. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in
the order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
§ 10-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-2.8
AO:215
the building is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall sell the
materials of such building and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against
the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be
deposited in the Superior Court by the public officer, shall be secured in
such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed
according to the order or judgment of the court to the persons found to
be entitled thereto by final order or judgment of the court; provided, that
nothing in this subsection shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the Borough to define and declare nuisances or to cause their
removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or
party in interest may, within 60 days from the date of the filing of the lien
certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest
the reasonableness of the amount of the accuracy of the costs set forth in
the Borough lien certificate.
§ 10-2.9. Conditions Determining Unfitness.
The public officer may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use if he finds that conditions exist in such
building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents or such Borough, such conditions may include the following
(without limiting the generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing
the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate
ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation, disrepair, structural
defects, uncleanliness; such ordinance may provide additional standards
to guide the public officer, or his agents, in determining the fitness of a
building for human habitation or occupancy or use.
§ 10-2.10. Service Of Complaints Or Orders.
Complaints or orders issued by a public officer shall be served upon persons
either personally or by registered mail, but if the where-abouts of such
persons is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public
officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the public officer shall
make an affidavit to that effect, then the serving of such complaint or order
upon such persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for
two successive weeks in a newspaper printed and published in the Borough,
or, in the absence of such newspaper, in one printed and published in the
county and circulating in the Borough in which the buildings are located. A
copy of such complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises affected by the complaint or order shall be duly recorded or
lodged for record with the county recording officer of the county in which
the building is located.
§ 10-2.11. Power Of Public Officer.
The public officer may exercise such powers as may be necessary or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this
section including the following powers in addition to those herein granted:
§ 10-2.8 PINE HILL CODE § 10-2.11
AO:216
§ 10-2.12. Adoption of the New Jersey State Housing Code. [Ord.
No. 2018-969]
§ 10-3. (RESERVED)21
§ 10-4. BUILDING NUMBERING AND ADDRESSES.
§ 10-4.1. Definitions.
REAL PROPERTY — Shall mean any type of real estate including
commercial or residential, improved or unimproved lots, single family
homes, multiple dwellings, and property held in any manner, including fee
simple, condominium or cooperative forms of ownership.
STREET ADDRESS — Shall mean the address at which the person actually
resides, and shall include a street name or rural delivery route in addition
to any postal office box number which may be included.
a. To investigate the building conditions in the Borough in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use;
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations;
provided, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause
the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
d. To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as
he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section; and
e. To delegate any of his functions and powers to such officers and agents
as he may designate.
a. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 and N.J.A.C. 5:28-1, the
New Jersey State Housing Code is hereby accepted, adopted and
established as the standard to be used as a Guide in determining the
fitness of a building for human habitation, occupancy or use.
b. Copies on File. A copy of the New Jersey State Housing Code has been
placed on file in the Office of the Borough Clerk and is available to all
persons desiring to use and examine the same. Said New Jersey State
Housing Code is hereby adopted in its entirety.
21.Editor's Note: Former § 10-3, Rent Review, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance No. 92-517, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 99-670.
Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 227, 281 and
0-85-411.
§ 10-2.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-4.2
AO:217
§ 10-4.2. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to require clear display of numbers which
have been authorized and assigned to all houses, buildings or other
structures which have frontage on any street in the Borough of Pine Hill in
order to assist the general public and emergency services, both public and
private, in identifying the property in case of emergency.
§ 10-4.3. Applicability.
All dwelling houses, stores, buildings or other structures erected or to
be erected within the Borough of Pine Hill shall display house numbers
assigned by the Tax Assessor, or other town designee, as provided herein.
§ 10-4.4. Responsibility For Placement.
The owner, occupant or lessee of each and every house, store or other
building which now fronts or may front upon any public or private street
within the Borough of Pine Hill shall, at his own expense, within 90 days
after the adoption of this section, cause the assigned number of such house
or building to be permanently and conspicuously placed in accordance with
the specifications set forth herein.
§ 10-4.5. Specifications.
a. House or building numbers shall be:
1. In Arabic numerals or letters.
2. A minimum height of three inches.
3. Mounted in a secure fashion on the front of the building so as to be
clearly visible from the road, if possible.
4. Of a contrasting color to the background and arranged in such a
manner so as to be clearly legible from the street.
5. At least 30 inches above ground level and so placed that trees,
shrubs and other obstructions do not block the line of sight of the
numbers from the street upon which the building fronts.
b. If the structure is not visible from the street or road on which it is
located, and no mail box is beside the driveway leading to the structure,
a sign or number post shall be erected which will allow the numbers to
be displayed either vertically from the top down or horizontally.
c. Remove any different number which might be mistaken for or confused
with the number assigned to said structure by the issuing authority.
d. In cases where the principal building or structure is occupied by more
than one building or structure is occupied by more than one business or
family dwelling unit, each separate front entrance shall display a
separate number. Where suite or lot numbers are assigned, the suite or
§ 10-4.2 PINE HILL CODE § 10-4.5
AO:218
§ 10-4.6. Assignment Of Numbers.
House numbers shall be assigned by the Tax Assessor, or other Borough
designee. Every owner, occupant or lessee of a building constructed or to
be constructed in the town shall apply to the construction code official for
an authorized number.
§ 10-4.7. Registration Required.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.53 any owner of real property situated within
the Borough of Pine Hill is required to register with the municipal Clerk the
street address of his residence whenever that owner does not reside at his
property, in the case of residential premises, or does not operate a business
at the property, in the case of commercial property.
§ 10-4.8. Enforcement.
Upon the failure of an owner, occupant or lessee to ascertain and affix upon
any building to which this section applies the assigned number within three
months after the final adoption and publication, the Borough may enforce
the provisions herein.
§ 10-4.9. Violations And Penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.
§ 10-5. CONSTRUCTION OF FENCES AND WALLS.
§ 10-5.1. Definitions.
As used in this section.
§ 10-5.2. General Regulations.
lot number shall also be displayed in the same manner as the house
number.
e. Mail boxes shall be marked with the house number.
a. FENCE - Shall mean a protective or confining barrier of posts, wire,
netting, spikes, cables, canvas or cloth.
b. WALL - Shall mean an upright structure of wood, stone, metal, shrubs,
trees or bushes.
a. No fence or wall shall be constructed without first obtaining a building
permit from the Borough Building Inspector.
b. No fence or wall shall be constructed or erected so as to encroach upon
a public right-of-way or easement.
§ 10-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-5.2
AO:219
§ 10-5.3. Height Permitted For Fences.
§ 10-5.4. Prohibited Materials.
No fence or wall shall be constructed or erected with the following
materials; barbed wire, poultry netting, metal spikes, canvas, cloth,
guardrail, cables, electrified materials, collapsible or expandable materials
or logs, railroad ties and telephone poles with a diameter of over six inches.
§ 10-5.5. Exceptions Permitted.
§ 10-5.6. Enforcement.
The regulations of this section shall be enforced by the Borough Building
Inspector as follows:
c. No fence or wall shall be constructed or erected so as to interfere with
the natural drainage of existing topography or as to block or interfere
with surface water drainage.
d. Every fence or wall shall be maintained in a safe and upright condition.
a. No fence or wall shall be constructed or erected along the front or side
yard property lines in a residential district except as follows:
1. All walls and all closed weaved or closed picket fences shall not
exceed three feet in height.
2. Open weaved or chain-link type fences shall not exceed four feet in
height.
a. The regulations contained herein shall not be construed to interfere or
regulate fences or walls necessary to the public welfare erected by a
governmental agency or as required by the laws of the county, State or
federal government.
b. The regulations contained herein shall not be construed to amend
section 14-9 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Borough of Pine
Hill pertaining to fencing around swimming pools.
c. The regulations contained herein shall not be construed to restrict the
construction or erection of a retaining wall which shall be constructed
in accordance with all other regulations of the Borough.
a. If he determines that any fence or wall is in violation of any of these
regulations, he shall notify the owner in writing to correct the unlawful
condition within 30 days.
b. If the unlawful condition is not corrected within 30 days of the notice to
owner, the Building Inspector shall file a complaint in the Pine Hill
Municipal Court pursuant to the penalties provision of this Ordinance.
§ 10-5.2 PINE HILL CODE § 10-5.7
AO:220
§ 10-5.7. Nonconforming Fences.
§ 10-6. LICENSES.
§ 10-6.1. License Required; Exemption For Homeowner Performing
Work.
Any person other than property owners of the Borough performing work on
their own property, shall be required to secure a license from the Borough
for any work to be performed in the Borough which requires a building
permit.
§ 10-6.2. Term Of License.
Each license issued shall be effective for the calendar year in which it is
issued, expiring December 31 at midnight of each year. No license shall be
in effect for more than one calendar year.
§ 10-6.3. Issuing Authority.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to issue all licenses.
§ 10-6.4. Revocation Of License.
The Building Inspector shall at any time during the life of a license or
licenses have the authority to revoke the license for any violation of the
building code, as amended or supplemented, or for any other valid reason,
in the opinion of the Building Inspector, which may be beneficial to the
citizenry of the Borough.
§ 10-6.5. Investigation Of Applicant.
The Building Inspector shall have the right to withhold the issuance of any
license pending investigation of the applicant, should such an investigation
be warranted in the opinion of the Building Inspector.
§ 10-6.6. Appeal To Borough Council.
Any persons holding a license or making application for a license which is
revoked or refused may appeal to the Borough Council.
a. Fences in existence on May 19, 1975 may be continued but not
extended. This provision shall not apply to the regulation prohibiting
unsafe fences.
b. No building permit is required to repair or replace a conforming fence
unless the fence is to be extended in height or length, then a building
permit shall be required.
c. A building permit shall be required to replace any nonconforming
fences.
§ 10-5.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-6.7
AO:221
§ 10-6.7. License Required Prior To Application For Building
Permit.
Any person who obtains a license, other than the exceptions named within
this subsection, may apply for a building permit covering the work to be
performed within the Borough.
§ 10-6.8. Fee.
The fee for each license shall be $25.
§ 10-6.9. Violations.
Any person violating any provisions of section 10-6 shall be subject to the
penalties as set forth in § 21 of the Building Code of the Borough, as
amended and supplemented, to which this section is an amendment.
§ 10-7. SIDEWALK AND CURBING; BUILDING LOT TO ABUT
SUITABLY IMPROVED STREET.
§ 10-7.1. Required.
All buildings, except out-buildings requiring a building permit for new
construction shall henceforth install sidewalk and curbing along the county
or local thoroughfare contiguous to the property upon which the building is
being constructed. The landowner or builder, or both shall be responsible
for the costs of the installation of all requirements such as sidewalks, curbs,
driveways, etc., as outlined in this chapter.
All landowners or contractors installing or replacing existing sidewalk,
curbing, driveways, etc., along the county or local thoroughfare contiguous
to any property within the Borough shall comply with all the requirements
as outlined in this chapter.
§ 10-7.2. Request For Waiver.
In the event that a landowner or builder shall feel that the installation of
sidewalks or curbs is not needed or proper, he may make application in
writing to the Borough Council for a waiver of such requirements. Such
request must be filed in writing prior to the issuance of a building permit
and must be accompanied by an escrow deposit or fee of $200 to be filed
with the Borough Clerk.
The Borough Council upon the recommendations of the Borough Engineer
shall determine whether or not the waiver request shall be granted or
denied. The waiver request may only be granted in cases where the
installation of sidewalks and/or curbs is not in the best interests of the
Borough and/or the surrounding residents because such installation would
not conform to the character of the street or surrounding properties; or
installation would create an unsound engineering condition in the area.
§ 10-6.7 PINE HILL CODE § 10-7.3
AO:222
§ 10-7.3. Notification.
The Borough Clerk shall notify the building subcode official of Council's
decision with respect to the waiver request in writing within 30 days of their
decision. In no event is a building permit to be issued until a written grant of
waiver of sidewalks and of curbs is received by the building subcode official
in such cases where said waiver has been requested.
§ 10-7.4. Lot To Abut Street.
Whenever sidewalk and curbing are required under the provisions of this
section, and before any building permit shall be issued, the abutting county
or local street shall have been certified to be suitably improved by the
Borough Engineer or head of the highway department, or such suitable
improvement shall have been assured by means of a performance
guarantee, in accordance with standards and specifications for road
improvements approved by the governing body, as adequate in respect to
the public health, safety and general welfare of the special circumstances
of the particular street.
§ 10-7.5. Compliance With Borough Engineer's Requirements.
Construction, installation, location, grade and all specifications shall be in
accordance with the requirements as set forth by the Borough Engineer. All
building permits which require the installation of sidewalks and/or curbs
shall also require that such installation be staked out by the Borough
Engineer and the actual construction be subject to periodic inspection
and approval of the Borough Engineer or his designee, which may be the
Borough Road Superintendent or other qualified person.
§ 10-7.6. Escrow Deposit For Professional Fees.
An escrow deposit of $800 to be used by the Borough of Pine Hill for any
costs incurred by it for engineering stakeouts, inspections or related items
concerning the installation of curbs or sidewalks shall be filed with the
Borough Clerk before the Borough Engineer will perform.
§ 10-7.7. Excess Escrow Funds.
All excess escrow funds shall be returned to the applicant after all actual
costs have been deducted.
§ 10-7.8. Insufficient Escrow Funds.
In the event the costs exceed the $300, the Borough must be reimbursed
for any additional fees charged prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for said property.
§ 10-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.9
AO:223
§ 10-7.9. Certificate Of Occupancy.
The certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy shall not
be issued until all sidewalk and curbing improvements are completed and
approved as satisfied and the county or local street has been certified to be
suitably improved as set forth above; together with all funds for professional
fees on file with the Borough of Pine Hill being sufficient to cover all costs.
§ 10-7.10. Permit Fees.
A permit fee shall be charged by the Borough Clerk for the issuance of
a sidewalk, curbing, driveway, etc. permit, for installation or replacement
of sidewalk, curbing, driveway, etc., which shall be in addition to all other
fees for permits or charges relative to any proposed construction work. The
permit fee shall be $50.
§ 10-7A. SIDEWALKS.
§ 10-7A.1. Responsibility to Remove Snow and Ice.
§ 10-7A.2. Throwing or Placing of Snow or Ice Upon Streets.
§ 10-7A.3. Snow Removal and De-Icing on Brick and Concrete
Pavers.
Snow and ice shall be removed from brick and concrete pavers with normal
hand equipment or motorized vehicles. When shoveling, use poly material
shovels. Snowplow blades shall be equipped with a rubber edge and set
a. The owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or tenants of
premises abutting or bordering upon any street in the Borough shall
remove all snow and ice from the abutting sidewalks of such streets or,
in the case of ice which may be so frozen as to make removal
impracticable, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered with sand,
salt or other suitable materials within 12 hours of daylight after the
same shall fall or be formed thereon.
b. In case the building is occupied by more than one family or business
unit, then the tenant or occupant of the first floor or story thereof is
hereby required to remove all snow and ice from such portion of the
sidewalks or, in the case of ice which is impracticable to remove, cover
the same with sand, salt or other suitable materials within 12 hours of
daylight after the same shall be formed or fall thereon.
a. No person, firm or corporation not the owner, tenant or occupant of any
premises abutting on any street shall throw, place or deposit any snow
or ice into or upon any street in the Borough, it being the intent and
purpose of this provision to prohibit all persons from throwing, casting,
placing or depositing snow and ice, which accumulated within the
private property belonging to said person, upon the sidewalks or streets
of the Borough.
§ 10-7.9 PINE HILL CODE § 10-7A.3
AO:224
at 1/4 inch above the pavement. Do not use snow chains on the tires
of any plow vehicles. Do not use sharp objects to chop ice on bricks.
If possible, rotary brushes and snow blowers are preferred. Do not use
rock salt (sodium chloride or calcium chloride) for snow and ice removal
on brick/concrete pavers; only use sand or cinders for traction control in
conjunction with non-sodium de-icers.
§ 10-7A.4. Brick and Concrete Paver Maintenance.
The owner or owners, occupant or occupants, tenant or tenants of premises
or business unit or units abutting or bordering upon any street in the
Borough where brick and concrete pavers have been installed shall use
the following basic maintenance: Concrete pavers require no special
maintenance as natural weathering keeps most concrete paving systems
clean and beautiful. Pressure washers are not to be used on flexible base
applications, as the pressure washer tends to remove joint sand which
compromises interlock. A stiff application brush and a normal pressured
garden hose may be used. For specific cleaning situations like oil stains or
spills, use only commercial cleaners generally available at masonry supply
outlets. When using any type of cleaner, always test on a small hidden
portion of the pavement. Wet pavement thoroughly before cleaning and
rinse after with clean water. Do not use muriatic acid on pavers.
§ 10-7A.5. Violations and Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or to
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 90 days in the
discretion of the court, and each day's continuance of the violation shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation.
§ 10-8. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.22
§ 10-8.1. Adoption Of Property Maintenance Code. [Ord. No.
93-541; Ord. No. 2000-685; Ord. No. 2013-899; amended
12-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-983]
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
municipal Clerk of the Borough of Pine Hill, being marked and designated
as the 2018 Edition of the International Property Maintenance Code as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the
Property Maintenance Code of the Borough of Pine Hill, in the State of New
Jersey, for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms
of said Property Maintenance Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and
made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in Subsection 10-8.2 of
this section.
22.Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include Ordinance No. 92-513.
§ 10-7A.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-8.2
AO:225
§ 10-8.2. Inconsistent Ordinances Repealed. [Ord. No. 93-541; Ord.
No. 2000-685; Ord. No. 2013-899; amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-983]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this section are
hereby repealed as to such inconsistency only.
§ 10-8.3. Additions, Insertions And Changes. [Ord. No. 93-541; Ord.
No. 2000-685; Ord. No. 2013-899; amended 12-16-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-98323]
The following sections are hereby revised:
Section 101.1 Insert: Borough of Pine Hill
Section 103.5 Insert: Fees: Intentionally left blank
Section 304.14 Insert: Insect Screens: Dates: From May 1st to October 1st
Section 602.3 Insert: Heat Supply: Dates: From November 1st to April 1st
Section 602.4 Insert: Occupied Work Space: Dates: From November 1st to
April 1st
§ 10-8.4. Saving Clause. [Ord. No. 93-541; Ord. No. 2000-685]
Nothing in this section or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed as cited in Subsection 10-8.2 of this section; nor shall any just or
legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this
section.
§ 10-8.5. Penalties, Violations. [Ord. No. 2000-685; Ord. No.
2003-719]
a. Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for the owner of a property situated
within the Borough to fail to comply with the Property Maintenance
Code of the Borough.
b. Notice. Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough, his/her
agent or other representative of the Borough shall determine that a
property is in violation of the Property Maintenance Code, written
notice of the violation(s) shall be provided in the manner set forth in
Subsection c herein.
c. Service of Notice.
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that the section numbers cited below have been
revised to reflect the appropriate section numbers of the 2018 Edition of the International
Property Maintenance Code, a copy of which is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 10-8.2 PINE HILL CODE § 10-8.5
AO:226
§ 10-9. COLLECTION OF TAXES AS A CONDITION OF ISSUANCE OF
BUILDING PERMIT.
§ 10-9.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 94-566]
It is the legislative intent of the Borough Council of the Borough of Pine Hill
to adopt an ordinance instructing the Construction Official to collect taxes
as a prior condition of the issuance of a building permit on a given building
lot as a condition of the issuance of a building permit pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55-D-39(e).
§ 10-9.2. Payment Of Unpaid Taxes Required. [Ord. No. 94-566]
Within the time frames as provided by law for the effective date of this
section, it shall be required by the Construction Official to require that the
owner of any building lot upon which any application for a commercial or
residential building permit is sought that collection in full to date of unpaid
1. The notice described in Subsection b. shall be sent by regular mail
to the owner of the property at his/her/its last known address as
kept on file in the office of the collector of taxes for the Borough.
2. Notice shall be considered to have been provided to the property
owner upon a showing that the regular mailing was not returned to
the Borough.
d. Corrective Measures.
1. In the event that the owner fails to correct the violation(s) to the
satisfaction of the office of code enforcement for the Borough or
otherwise respond in the matter set forth in this chapter after
notice has been provided, the Borough may correct or cause the
violation(s) to be corrected.
2. In the event that the Borough is required to act in accordance with
Subsection d1, the office of code enforcement for the Borough shall
certify the cost of corrections to the Borough Council.
e. Examination by Borough Council. Upon such certification to the
Borough Council of the cost to correct the violations, the Borough
Council shall examine the certification and, if found correct and
reasonable, the cost shall be charged to the owner and against the
property by resolution.
f. Lien on Property. Upon the passage of the resolution by the Borough
Council as set forth in Subsection e above, the assessment so charged
shall become a lien on the property and shall be added to and become a
part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the property, the
same to bear interest at the same rate as allowed for unpaid taxes, and
shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as unpaid taxes.
§ 10-8.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-9.2
AO:227
real estate taxes be required as a condition of the issuance of any building
permit on any given lot.
§ 10-9.3. Proof Of Payment Prior To Issuance. [Ord. No. 94-566]
The Construction Official of the Borough of Pine Hill shall require proof of
payment of all unpaid real estate taxes by the applicant prior to the issuance
of any building permit.
§ 10-10. TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING PLAN FOR ISSUANCE OF
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.
§ 10-10.1. Review Of Application. [Ord. No. 94-568]
All applicants for construction permits shall have the application reviewed
by the municipal Construction Official and/or municipal consulting engineer
to determine whether a topography and grading plan is required to be
filed as part of the approval process by the Borough for the issuance
of a construction permit. The factors to be considered in making this
determination are set forth in Schedule "A" attached hereto.24
§ 10-10.2. Notification Of Requirements And Amounts. [Ord. No.
94-568]
In the event a topography and grading plan is required to be filed as part
of the application process, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the
section requirements and of the amount of escrow fees to be deposited with
the Borough for inspections and plan review.
§ 10-10.3. Escrow Fee. [Ord. No. 94-568]
The escrow fee for a site inspection shall be $150. The escrow fee for review
of topography and grading plan and final site inspection shall be $325.
These escrow fees shall be maintained by the Borough land use office in the
same manner as land use and development fees.
§ 10-10.4. Plan Requirements. [Ord. No. 94-568]
When a topography and grading plan is required, it shall be prepared to
include the following information:
a. Outbounds and topographic survey prepared by a land surveyor,
licensed in the State of New Jersey, including the depiction of any
existing or proposed easements. The topography shall include contours
at one foot intervals and spot elevations at all property corners, low or
high points and other distinct topographic features.
b. All zoning setback lines and proposed building setbacks shall be shown
on the plan.
24.Editor's Note: Schedule A, referred to herein, may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk, attached to Ordinance No. 94-568.
§ 10-9.2 PINE HILL CODE § 10-10.4
AO:228
§ 10-11. TRASH DISPOSAL FACILITIES AT CONSTRUCTION SITES.
§ 10-11.1. Required As Condition Of Issuance Of Building Permit.
[Ord. No. 97-628]
The Construction Official of the Borough of Pine Hill shall require as a
condition of issuance of any building permit in the Borough of Pine Hill,
the placement on the actual construction premises, and not on the public
streets or adjacent properties, rubbish or trash collection containers known
commonly as dumpsters, sufficient to hold and remove all construction
waste during the construction activity. Said container shall be emptied on
a frequency necessary that the construction waste and debris shall not
accumulate on the exterior thereof. The Construction Official is hereby
authorized to waive this requirement in any instance where subject
construction shall generate less than one cubic yard of waste.
§ 10-11.2. Applicability. [Ord. No. 97-628]
This section shall be applicable to any building permit issued after the
effective date of this section.
§ 10-11.3. Penalty. [Ord. No. 97-628]
The penalty for violation of this section shall be $100 per violation. Each
day said violation exists shall be considered to be a separate violation. In
addition to the penalties provided in this section, the construction code
official shall be empowered to take such other action as may be available to
him under the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, the BOCA Code or
under any such other law or ordinance as may apply.
c. Location of all existing improvements and/or utilities and all proposed
improvements consisting of, but not limited to, accessory buildings,
curbs, sidewalks, driveways, patios, decks, pools, fences and utility
service lines shall be shown on the plan.
d. Proposed building basement and floor elevations, proposed contour
lines at one foot intervals and proposed spot elevations shall be shown
at building corners, proposed swale, curb, sidewalk, and driveways.
e. When curb and sidewalk is proposed along a street, the grading plan
shall also include spot elevations along the center line, edge of paving,
proposed gutter line and top of curb and sidewalk at intervals no
greater than 50 feet. A profile depicting these elevations and proposed
design shall be included with the grading plan.
f. The grading plan shall be prepared to avoid an adverse impact on all
adjoining or adjacent properties.
g. All proposed grading plans shall be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey.
§ 10-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-12
AO:229
§ 10-12. (RESERVED)25
§ 10-13. PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETRO-FITTING.
§ 10-13.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-858]
The purpose of this section is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Borough of Pine Hill so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 10-13.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-858]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Pine Hill or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater. NOTE: In municipalities with combined sewer
systems, add the following: "MS4s do not include combined sewer systems,
which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at
all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other
sources."
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet,
curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
25.Editor's Note: Regulations concerning rental properties as codified in subsections 10-12.1
through 10-12.18 were amended in entirety by Ord. Nos. 2016-937 and 2016-941 and may
be found at §§ 10-22 through 10-24.
§ 10-12 PINE HILL CODE § 10-13.3
AO:230
§ 10-13.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2010-858]
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
§ 10-13.4. Design Standard.
Storm drain inlets identified in Subsection 10-13.3 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this Subsection, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
Subsection 10-13.4c below.
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Subsection 10-13.4
below prior to the completion of the project.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate:
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven square inches, or is no greater than 0.5
inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of combination
inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates, trench grates,
and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground
surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open
channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
§ 10-13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-13.4
AO:231
§ 10-13.5. Enforcement.
This section shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 10-13.6. Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,200 for each storm drain inlet that
is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
§ 10-14. REFUSE CONTAINERS/DUMPSTERS.
§ 10-14.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Pine Hill and/or the
waters of the state so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
c. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space four and 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting facilities);
or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 10-13.4 PINE HILL CODE § 10-14.2
AO:232
§ 10-14.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, ords used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Borough of
Pine Hill or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater. NOTE: In municipalities with combined sewer
systems, add the following: "MS4s do not include combined sewer systems,
which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at
all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other
sources."
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Shall mean any waste container that a person
controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 10-14.3. Prohibited Conduct.
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 10-14.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. #2010-859, SIV]
§ 10-14.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-14.4
AO:233
§ 10-14.5. Enforcement. [Ord. #2010-859, SV]
This section shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 10-14.6. Penalties. [Ord. #2010-859, SVI]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,200.
§ 10-15. through § 10-19. (RESERVED)
§ 10-20. VACANT AND ABANDONED PROPERTY, REGISTRATION
OF; MAINTENANCE.
§ 10-20.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-935; Ord. No. 2017-953]
MUNICIPAL OFFICER — Shall mean the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer or such official that may be designated to act for the Code
Enforcement Officer.
OWNER — Shall include the title holder, any agent of the title holder having
authority to act with respect to a vacant property, any foreclosing entity
that has filed a notice with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to the provisions
C.46:1OB-51 (P.L. 2008, c. 127, Sec. 17 as amended by P.L. 2009, c. 296),
or any other entity determined by the Borough to have authority to act with
respect to the property.
VACANT PROPERTY — Shall mean any building used or to be used as a
residence or a commercial use not legally occupied or which substantially
all lawful construction operations or residential or commercial occupancy
has ceased, and which is in such condition that it cannot legally be occupied
without repair or rehabilitation, including but not limited to any property
meeting the definition of abandoned property in N.J.S.A. 55:19-80; provided,
however, that any property where all building systems are in working order,
where the building and grounds are maintained in good order, or where the
building is in a habitable condition and where the building is being actively
marketed by its owner for sale or rental, shall not be deemed a vacant
property for purposes of this section.[Ord. No. 2017-953]
a. Permitted temporary demolition containers
b. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers)
c. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers
d. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit
e. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup)
§ 10-14.4 PINE HILL CODE § 10-20.2
AO:234
§ 10-20.2. Registration of Vacant Property; Requirements. [Ord. No.
2015-935; Ord. No. 2017-953]
Effective December 15, 2015, the owner of any vacant property as defined
herein shall, within 30 calendar days after the building becomes vacant
property or within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of the vacant
property, whichever is later; or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice
from the municipality, file a registration statement for such vacant property
with the Borough Clerk on forms provided by the Borough for such
purposes. Any failure to provide notice by the municipality shall not
constitute grounds for failing to register the property.
a. Each property having a separate block and lot number as designated in
official records of the municipality shall be registered separately.
b. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of a person 21
years or older, designated by the owner or owners as the authorized
agent for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process
in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on
behalf of such owner or owners in connection with the enforcement of
any applicable code.
c. The registration statement shall include the name, street address,
telephone number, and email address (if applicable) of the firm and the
actual name(s) of the firm's individual principal(s) responsible for
maintaining the property. The individual or representative of the firm
responsible for maintaining the property shall be available by telephone
or in person on a twenty-four-hour per day, seven-day per week basis.
The two entities may be the same or different persons. Both entities
shown on the statement must maintain offices in the State of New
Jersey or reside within the State of New Jersey.
d. The registration shall remain valid for a six-month time period from the
date of registration. The owner shall be required to renew the
registration semi-annually every six months as long as the building
remains a vacant property and shall pay a registration or renewal fee in
the amount prescribed in Subsection 10-20.5 of this section for each
vacant property registered. [Ord. No. 2017-953]
e. The annual renewal shall be completed by January 1st each year. The
initial registration fee shall be pro-rated for registration statements
received less than 10 months prior to that date.
f. The owner shall notify the Borough Clerk within 30 calendar days of any
change in the registration information by filing an amended registration
statement on a form provided by the Borough Clerk for such purpose.
g. The registration statement shall be deemed prima facie proof of the
statements therein contained in any administrative enforcement
proceeding or court proceeding instituted by the Borough against the
owner or owners of the building.
§ 10-20.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-20.2
AO:235
§ 10-20.3. Access to Vacant Properties. [Ord. No. 2015-935]
The owner of any vacant property registered under this section shall
provide access to the Borough to conduct exterior and interior inspections
of the building to determine compliance with municipal codes upon
reasonable notice to the property owner or the designated agent. Such
inspections shall be carried out on weekdays during the hours between 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m. or at such other time as may be mutually agreed upon
between the owner and the Borough.
§ 10-20.4. Designation of Responsible Owner or Agent. [Ord. No.
2015-935]
h. Any owner of vacant property who plans to restore the property to
productive use and occupancy during the twelve-month period
following the date of the initial registration of the property shall file a
detailed statement and shall be exempt from payment of the
registration fee, but shall comply with all other provisions of this
section. In the event that the property has not been restored to
productive use and occupancy at the end of the twelve-month period,
the owner shall be liable for any fee waived. The municipal officer may
extend the waiver of the registration fee for not more than one
additional year in response to a written request by the property owner
where the municipal officer finds that compelling conditions outside the
owner's control made it impossible for the owner to restore the
property within the initial twelve-month period.
i. Where the owner is an entity experienced in rehabilitation or
redevelopment of vacant properties, and where the property subject to
this section is being held for a project of rehabilitation or
redevelopment consistent with municipal plans and ordinances, and
where by virtue of financing, market or other conditions that project
may require more than one year for realization, the municipal officer
may extend the waiver of the registration fee on an annual basis
without limitation upon written request by the owner as long as the
municipal officer finds that the owner is making reasonable progress
toward completion of the project. The owner shall provide municipal
officer with such documentation, which may include plans, financing
applications, applications for land use approval or other evidence of
progress.
a. An owner who meets the requirements of this section with respect to
the location of his or her residence or workplace in the State of New
Jersey may designate him or herself as agent or as the individual
responsible for maintaining the property.
b. By designating an authorized agent under the provisions of this section,
the owner consents to receive any and all notices of code violations
concerning the registered vacant property and all process in any court
proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding brought to
§ 10-20.2 PINE HILL CODE § 10-20.4
AO:236
§ 10-20.5. Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. 2015-935; Ord. No. 2017-953]
The semi-annual renewal shall be completed every six months. The
registration fee for each building shall be $600 for the initial registration
and for each subsequent renewal.
At least 80% of the fee income shall be used to carry out the purpose of this
section with respect to vacant properties including, but not limited to, code
enforcement, abatement of nuisance conditions and other activities related
to rehabilitation and enforcement.
§ 10-20.6. Maintenance Requirements of Owners of Vacant
Property. [Ord. No. 2015-935]
The owner of any building that has become vacant property and any person
maintaining or operating or collecting rent for any such building that has
become vacant shall within 30 days of the inception of any vacancy:
enforce code provisions concerning the registered building by service
of the notice or process on the authorized agent. Any owner who has
designated an authorized agent under the provisions of this section
shall be deemed to consent to the continuation of the agent's
designation for the purposes of this section until the owner notifies the
Borough in writing of a change of authorized agent or until the owner
files a new annual registration statement.
c. Any owner who fails to register vacant property under the provisions of
this section shall be deemed to consent to receive, by posting on the
building in plain view, and by service of notice at the last known address
of the owner of the property on record within the Borough by regular
and certified mail, any and all notices of code violations and all process
in an administrative proceeding brought to enforce code provisions
concerning the building.
a. Enclose and secure the building against unauthorized entry as provided
in the applicable provisions of the Borough Code, or as set forth in the
rules and regulations supplementing those codes; and
b. Post a sign affixed to the building indicating the name, address and
telephone number of the owner, the owner's authorized agent for the
purpose of service of process (if designated pursuant to Subsection
10-20.2b of this section), and the person responsible for the day-to-day
supervision and management of the building, if such person is different
from the owner holding title or authorized agent. The sign shall be of a
size and placed in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest
public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer, but shall be no smaller
than eight inches by 10 inches; and
c. Secure the building from unauthorized entry and maintain the sign until
the building is again legally occupied or demolished or until repair or
rehabilitation of the building is complete; and
§ 10-20.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-20.6
AO:237
§ 10-20.7. Violations. [Ord. No. 2015-935]
§ 10-21. DEFAULTED MORTGAGE PROPERTIES.
§ 10-21.1. Public Nuisance Declared. [Ord. No. 2017-953]
All registrable property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, the
abatement of which pursuant to the police power is hereby declared to be
d. Ensure that the exterior grounds of the structure, including yards,
fences, sidewalks, walkways, rights-of-way, alleys, retaining walls,
attached or unattached accessory structures and driveways, are wellmaintained
and free from trash, debris, loose litter, and grass and weed
growth; and
e. Continue to maintain the structure in a secure and closed condition,
keep the grounds in a clean and well-maintained condition, and ensure
that the sign is visible and intact until the building is again occupied,
demolished, or until repair and/or rehabilitation of the building is
complete.
f. The owner of any vacant property shall acquire or otherwise maintain
liability insurance, in an amount of not less than $300,000 for buildings
designed primarily for one to four unit residential use and not less than
$1,000,000 for any other buildings, including, but not limited to,
buildings designed for multifamily, manufacturing, storage or
commercial uses, covering any damage to any person or any property
caused by any physical condition of or in the building. Any insurance
policy acquired or renewed after the building has become vacant shall
provide for written notice to the municipal officer within 30 days of any
lapse, cancellation or change in coverage. The owner shall attach
evidence of the insurance to the owner's registration statement. Any
registration statement submitted that does not include such evidence
shall not be deemed to be valid.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this section or of the rules and
regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $500 and not
more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed under
this section shall be recoverable from the owner and shall constitute a
lien on the property.
b. For purposes of this section, failure to file a registration statement
within 30 calendar days after a building becomes vacant property or
within 30 calendar days after assuming ownership of a vacant property,
whichever is later, or within 10 calendar days of receipt of notice by the
municipality, and failure to provide correct information on the
registration statement, or failure to comply with the provisions of such
provisions contained herein shall be deemed to be violations of this
section.
§ 10-20.6 PINE HILL CODE § 10-21.1
AO:238
necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Borough
of Pine Hill.
§ 10-21.2. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2017-953]
The requirements of this section shall be considered cumulative to and
not superseding or subordinate to any other law or provision regarding
the registration of vacant, deteriorated and/or abandoned property, it being
the express intent of the Borough that the requirements of this section
shall be a further remedy available to the Borough in addition to any other
applicable laws relating to same.
§ 10-21.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-953]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated notwithstanding any meaning to the contrary elsewhere in this
chapter:
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY AND/OR ACCESSIBLE STRUCTURE — Shall
mean a property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate,
fence, wall, etc., or a structure that is unsecured and/or breached in such a
way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.
APPLICABLE LAWS — Shall mean the Code of the Borough of Pine Hill,
as it may be amended from time to time, and any and all ordinances and/
or resolutions adopted by the Borough which govern property maintenance
and are not codified therein, together with all other laws, rules and
regulations of the County of Camden and/or State of New Jersey applicable
to construction, maintenance and/or use of real property, including but not
limited to State and/or County Construction, Building and Fire Codes.
ARM'S LENGTH TRANSACTION — Shall mean the sale of real property to
an independent third-party purchaser, who is unrelated to the transferor, for
fair market value as determined by an independent appraiser not hired or
retained by the transferor.
DEFAULT — Shall mean the event, action and/or inaction, and the
continuing situation arising therefrom, where a mortgagor, owner and/or
borrower has not complied with any one or more terms of the mortgage
encumbering the mortgagor's property as said property is identified in the
mortgage, has not paid current all real property taxes and/or applicable
municipal charges, or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of a
loan or other agreement wherein the borrower has used the borrower's real
property as collateral therefor. For the purpose of this definition, the term
"mortgage" shall also mean and/or refer to the promissory note executed
with the mortgage and/or such other valid written evidence of the debt as
recognized by law.
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Shall mean property located within the
Borough of Pine Hill upon which is found any one or more of the following
conditions:
§ 10-21.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-21.3
AO:239
ENFORCING OFFICER — Shall mean any Police Officer, Construction Code
Official, Zoning Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Inspector or
Building Inspector or other person authorized by the Borough and/or the
State of New Jersey to enforce the applicable laws.
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY — Shall mean as used in this section, any
condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would
lead a reasonable person to believe that a property is vacant, including but
not limited to overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due utility notices
and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash junk or debris;
abandoned vehicles, auto parts or automotive materials; the absence of
furnishings and/or personal items consistent with habitation or occupancy;
the presence of an unsanitary, stagnant swimming pool; the accumulation
of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; statements by neighbors,
passersby, delivery agents or government agents as to suspected vacancy;
or the presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings in
violation of applicable laws.
FORECLOSURE — Shall mean the legal process by which a mortgagee or
other creditor terminates a property owner's ownership of and/or equitable
right of redemption in real property in order to obtain legal and equitable
title to the real property which was pledged as security for a debt. This
definition shall include, but is not limited to, public notice of default,
recording of a lis pendens, filing of a foreclosure complaint in the Superior
Court of New Jersey, delivery and recording of a deed-in-lieu of foreclosure,
sale of the real property to the foreclosing mortgagee or creditor, entry of
a judgment of foreclosure and/or all other processes, activities and actions,
by whatever name, associated with the foreclosure process. For purposes
of this section, the foreclosure process shall not be deemed concluded
until the property that is obtained by the mortgagee, creditor and/or their
designee by deed or judgment of foreclosure or any other means is sold to a
non-related bona fide third-party purchaser in an arm's-length transaction.
LOCAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — Shall mean a property
management company located within 20 driving miles of any municipal
border of the Borough or a non-local property manager approved by the
Properties that have broken or severely damaged windows, doors, walls
or roofs which create hazardous conditions and/or encourage
trespassing; or
a.
Properties whose maintenance is not in conformance with the
maintenance of other neighboring properties; or
b.
Properties cited under the property maintenance provisions of the Pine
Hill Borough Code and/or as a public nuisance pursuant to applicable
laws; or
c.
Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare because
the properties or improvements thereon are so dilapidated,
deteriorated and/or so violative of basic property maintenance
requirements that they violate minimum health and safety standards.
d.
§ 10-21.3 PINE HILL CODE § 10-21.3
AO:240
Borough Administrator upon the Administrator's review and consideration
of reasonably reliable credentials.
MORTGAGEE — Shall mean the creditor identified in the mortgage
documents as the lender and/or financing institution which lent money to
a property owner thereunder and encumbered the property owner's real
property as collateral therefor, including but not limited to any trustees,
mortgage service companies, and/or any agent, servant, or employee
thereof, and/or any successor in interest or assignee of the said mortgagee's
rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement, which
assignment and/or transfer was made, in part, for the purpose of
substituting one mortgagee for another.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, firm, corporation or their legal entity
who, individually or jointly with one or more others, holds the legal or
beneficial title to any real property located within the Borough.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — Shall mean a property manager,
property maintenance company or similar entity responsible for the
maintenance and security of registrable property and who has the authority
to make decisions concerning maintenance of said property and/or the
abatement of nuisance conditions at the property, including without
limitation the authority to make expenditures in connection therewith.
REAL PROPERTY — Shall mean any improved residential or commercial
land located within the Borough limits, together with the buildings, fixtures,
equipment and leasehold improvements thereon and/or affixed thereto, or
any part or portion thereof, which is identified by a property parcel and/
or tax identification numbering system. For purposes of this section, all
developed lots are considered improved land.
REGISTRABLE PROPERTY — Shall mean any and all real property located
within the Borough, whether vacant or occupied, that satisfies any one or
more of the following criteria: (i) is encumbered by a mortgage in default,
(ii) is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by a mortgagee or other
creditor, (iii) is subject to an application for a judgment of foreclosure by a
mortgagee or other creditor, (iv) is pending and/or scheduled for tax sale
for unpaid property taxes and/or other municipal charges, (v) has been
the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the
beneficiary of a mortgagee or other creditor involved in the foreclosure and/
or (vi) was transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure to the mortgagee
or other foreclosing creditor. The designation of a "defaulted mortgage/
foreclosure property" as "registrable" shall remain in place until such time
as the property is sold to an unrelated bona fide third-party purchaser in an
arm's-length transaction or the foreclosure action has been dismissed and
any default on the mortgage and/or delinquencies in unpaid property taxes
or other municipal charges has been cured.
RENTAL PROPERTY — Shall mean a property that contains a single-family
rental dwelling unit or multifamily rental dwelling units for use by
residential tenants, including but not limited to mobile homes, mobile home
spaces, townhomes, condominium unit(s) and/or apartments. A rental
dwelling unit includes property that is provided to an individual or entity
§ 10-21.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-21.3
AO:241
for residential purposes upon payment of rent or any other consideration in
lieu of rent, regardless of the nature of the relationship between lessor and
lessee.
SEMI-ANNUAL REGISTRATION — Shall mean the six-month period of
registration commencing from the date of the first action that required
registration, as determined by the Borough and/or its designee, and
including every subsequent six-month registration period thereafter. The
date of the initial registration may be different than the date of the first
action that required registration.
TRANSFEREE — Shall mean the person, mortgagee, trustee and/or entity
to which legal title of real property is transferred as a result of a judgment
of foreclosure, sheriff's sale after foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure,
non-arm's length sale or transfer and/or any other type of non-arm's-length
transaction.
UNAUTHORIZED PERSON — Shall mean any person who does not have the
permission of the property owner and/or property management company,
as the case may be, to use, reside in, live in or otherwise occupy, on a
temporary or permanent basis, any real property.
VACANT — Shall mean as used in this section, any parcel of land situated
within the Borough that contains any building or structure that is not
lawfully occupied or inhabited by human beings, as evidenced by the
conditions set forth in the definition of "evidence of vacancy" above, and/
or which is occupied without a valid, unexpired certificate of occupancy or
other written authorization for occupancy as may be required by applicable
laws.
§ 10-21.4. Establishment of a Registry. [Ord. No. 2017-953]
a. Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
the Borough shall perform an inspection of the property to determine
vacancy or occupancy immediately upon default by the mortgagor. The
mortgagee shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property
with the Registrar on designated forms or in such other manner as
directed, and shall indicate thereon whether the property is vacant or
occupied. A separate registration is required for each property, whether
it is found to be vacant or occupied.
b. Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name, direct
mailing address, a direct contact name, including the direct dial
telephone number and direct e-mail address thereof, and a valid
telephone number and e-mail address for the mortgagee and the
mortgagee's servicer, if any, as well as the name and twenty-four-hour
contact telephone/cellular phone number of the local property
management company responsible for the property.
c. Mortgagees who have existing registrable property on the effective
date of this section have 30 calendar days from the effective date hereof
to register the property as required herein and to indicate whether the
§ 10-21.3 PINE HILL CODE § 10-21.4
AO:242
property is vacant or occupied. A separate registration is required for
each property, whether it is vacant or occupied.
d. If the mortgage on the registrable property is sold or transferred, other
than via an arm's-length transaction, the new mortgagee and/or
transferee shall be subject to all of the requirements of this section and,
within five business days of such sale or transfer, the new Mortgagee
shall register the property as required herein.
e. If a mortgagee who obtains title to a registrable property as a result of a
foreclosure process subsequently sells or transfers the property, other
than via an arm's-length transaction, the said transferee shall be
subject to all the requirements of this section and, within five business
days of the transfer, the transferee shall register the property as
required herein.
f. As long as the property constitutes a registrable property as defined
herein it shall be the responsibility of the registered mortgagee,
independently or by and through a local property management
company to inspect the property monthly. If an inspection shows a
change in the property's occupancy status the mortgagee shall, within
10 days of that inspection, update the occupancy status of the property
with the Registrar.
g. Every property registration required by this section shall be
accompanied by a non-refundable semi-annual registration fee in the
amount of $600. Notwithstanding anything else herein to the contrary,
every semi-annual registration shall terminate upon the sale or other
transfer of a registrable property such that the purchaser and/or
transferee thereof, other than an unrelated third-party purchaser in an
arm's-length transaction, shall pay a new semi-annual registration fee
at the time of the new purchaser/transferee's registration of the
registrable property as otherwise required in this section. Any previous
unpaid semi-annual registration fees are the responsibility of the new
mortgagee or transferee and are due and payable with the initial
registration filed by same.
h. All registration fees must be paid directly by and/or from the
mortgagee, transferee or other non-arm's-length purchaser of a
registrable property and cannot be paid by a third-party on behalf
thereof without the express written consent of the Borough.
i. Properties subject to this section shall remain subject hereto, including
without limitation the semi-annual registration requirement,
inspection, security and maintenance standards of this section, for as
long as the property meets the definition of a registrable property.
j. Until the mortgage or lien on a property registered under this section is
satisfied or legally discharged, the mortgagee's intent to no longer
pursue foreclosure as evidenced by any action in further thereof,
including without limitation the filing of a dismissal of lis pendens, entry
of a court order vacating a final judgment of foreclosure and/or the
§ 10-21.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-21.4
AO:243
§ 10-21.5. Maintenance Requirements. [Ord. No. 2017-953]
Each and every property registered pursuant to the requirements of this
section shall be maintained by the mortgagee to the following standards
and/or conditions:
dismissal or withdrawal of pending foreclosure proceedings, whether
voluntary or otherwise, shall not exempt any mortgagee from the
obligation to comply with all of the requirements of this section for
any period of time during which a property meets the definition of a
registrable property.
k. Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the date such change occurs.
l. Failure of the mortgagee to properly register a registrable property, or
to fail to modify the registration as required herein to reflect a change
of circumstances, shall be deemed a violation of this section and the
mortgagee shall be subject to enforcement hereunder, including any
monetary penalties set forth in of this section.
m. Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and/or determination
that any property is in violation of this section, the Borough may take
any and all necessary action to ensure compliance with the applicable
laws and may place a lien on the property for the cost of any work
performed to bring the property into compliance with all applicable
laws.
a. The property shall be kept free of weeds, overgrown brush, dead
vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of
newspaper circulars, flyers, notices (except those required by Federal,
State or local laws and/or court orders), discarded personal items,
including but not limited to furniture, clothing and large or small
appliances, printed material or any other items that give the
appearance that the property is vacant.
b. The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings
which shall be removed or painted over with an exterior grade paint
that matches the color of the exterior of the structure.
c. The front, side, and rear yards of the property, including landscaping,
shall be maintained in accordance with all applicable laws.
d. The mortgagee shall perform yard maintenance, including but not
limited to property and appropriate maintenance of grass, ground
coverings, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings so as to prevent
overgrowth thereof, including removal of all such trimmings, together
with maintenance of decorative rock or bark, artificial turf/sod and/or
such other items of hardscape designed specifically for residential
installation. Any overgrowth of weeds, grass, ground coverings, bushes,
shrubs, hedges and/or similar plantings and/or any accumulation of
§ 10-21.4 PINE HILL CODE § 10-21.5
AO:244
§ 10-21.6. Security Requirements. [Ord. No. 2017-953]
All registrable properties shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not
to be accessible to unauthorized persons, in accordance with the following
minimum standards:
§ 10-21.7. Inspections for Violations. [Ord. No. 2017-953]
Compliance with the registration, maintenance and security requirements
of this section does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent thereof from
any other obligations set forth in any applicable laws which may apply to
the property and/or govern the use thereof.
§ 10-21.8. Additional Authority. [Ord. No. 2017-953]
gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material shall not be
considered proper yard maintenance as required hereunder.
e. The mortgagee shall perform standard and/or routine year-round
maintenance including, but not limited to, maintaining, repairing and
winterizing existing irrigation systems, pools and spas. Pools and spas
shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear of pollutants
and debris and complies with all applicable Department of Health
regulations and any other applicable laws.
f. The mortgagee shall further comply with any property maintenance
requirements set forth in all other applicable laws.
a. A secure manner shall include, but not be limited to the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that
may allow any unauthorized person to access the interior of the
property or structure. Broken windows, doors, gates and other
openings of such size that may allow any unauthorized person to access
the interior of the property or structure must be repaired. Broken
windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the window.
b. If a property is registrable, and the property has become vacant or
deteriorated, a local property manager shall be designated by the
mortgagee or owner to perform the work necessary to bring the
property into compliance with all applicable laws, and the property
manager must perform regular inspections to verify continued
compliance with the requirements of this section and any other
applicable codes.
a. Regardless of whether a registrable property has been properly
registered as required in this section, if the enforcing officer has reason
to believe that a registrable property is posing a serious threat to the
public health, safety and welfare, the enforcing officer may temporarily
secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee or owner, and/or
may issue such Notices of Violation and/or Summonses as may be
§ 10-21.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-21.8
AO:245
§ 10-21.9. Opposing, Obstructing Enforcement Officer; Penalty.
[Ord. No. 2017-953]
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any enforcing officer in the discharge
of his/her duties as provided in this section shall be punishable as provided
by the applicable laws which action shall be cognizable in the Municipal
Court of the Borough or such other Court of competent jurisdiction as may
be applicable.
§ 10-21.10. Immunity of Enforcement Officer. [Ord. No. 2017-953]
Every enforcing officer and such other persons authorized by the Borough
to implement and/or enforce the provisions of this section shall be immune
from prosecution, whether civil or criminal, for his/her reasonable, good
faith entry upon real property while in the discharge of the duties imposed
by this section.
§ 10-21.11. Enforcement and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-953]
necessary to ensure the conditions of the property are addressed as
soon as possible.
b. In addition to any other powers, the enforcing officer may implement
additional maintenance and/or security measures, including but not
limited to securing any and all doors, windows or other openings,
employment of an on-site security guard and/or other similar measures
as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the
property.
c. If the enforcing officer finds that the condition of a registrable property
is posing a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then
the Borough, upon notice to the mortgagee and/or owner, may abate the
violations and charge the costs of such abatement to the mortgagee
and/or owner.
d. If the mortgagee or owner does not reimburse the Borough for the cost
of temporarily securing the property and/or the costs associated with
any abatement undertaken by the Borough as permitted herein, within
30 days of the date the Borough sent the mortgagee or owner the
invoice therefor, then the Borough may assess a lien against the
property in the manner provided by applicable laws for such costs,
along with the Borough's administrative costs associated with same. In
addition to filing a lien, the Borough can pursue reimbursement from
the mortgagee or owner and/or seek and enforce such other penalties
as may be contemplated herein.
a. Violations.
It shall be a violation of this section and shall be unlawful for any
mortgagee and/or owner to:
1. Fail to register a registrable property;
§ 10-21.8 PINE HILL CODE § 10-21.11
AO:246
§ 10-22. REGISTRATION AND INSPECTION OF RENTAL PROPERTY.
2. Fail to properly maintain and/or secure any registrable property in
accordance with the requirements of this section; or
3. Maintain any registrable property in a manner which results in a
violation of any other applicable laws.
b. Enforcement.
The requirements of this section may be enforced as follows:
1. By an action for injunctive relief, civil penalties, or both, through a
court of competent jurisdiction;
2. By revocation or temporary suspension of necessary permits and/or
certificates of occupancy and/or licenses related to occupancy and/
or use of real property;
3. By the nuisance abatement process and/or property maintenance
enforcement process established in the Code of the Borough of
Pine Hill;
4. By issuance of a citation or Notice of Violation in accordance with
any applicable laws; and
5. By any other process as may be permitted by law or in equity.
c. All such remedies cognizable in and/or subject to the jurisdiction of the
Pine Hill Borough Municipal Court shall be subject to a fine of up to
$1,000 for each offense.
d. Separate Offenses. Each violation of this section shall constitute a
separate offense for each day that such violation continues or reoccurs.
Each condition which exists in violation of this section is a separate
violation.
e. Use of one enforcement process or theory shall not preclude the
Borough from seeking the same, different, or additional relief through
other enforcement methods provided for herein at any time in the
present or future.
f. Persons Responsible For Violations. The owner, mortgagee, trustee or
servicer as those terms are defined in this section, and their duly
authorized officers, employees or agents employed in connection
therewith who have assisted in the commission of a violation or failed to
perform such actions as are required herein, shall be liable for and/or
subject to being found guilty of such violation.
§ 10-21.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-22.1
AO:247
§ 10-22.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-937; Ord. No. 2016-941 § 1]
Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following
words or phrases, when used in this section, shall have the following
meaning:
AGENT — Shall mean the individual or individuals designated by the owner
as the person(s) authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon
the owner by this section. The term does not necessarily mean a licensed
real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey, as those terms
are defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may include a licensed
real estate broker or salesman of the State of New Jersey, if such person
designated by the owner as his agent is so licensed.
APARTMENT OR DWELLING — Shall mean any apartment, cottage,
bungalow, any room or rooms in a house or other dwelling unit, consisting
of one or more rooms occupying all or part of a floor or floors in a building,
whether designed with or without housekeeping facilities for dwelling
purposes and notwithstanding whether the apartment be designed for
residence, for office or the operation of any industry or business or for any
other type of independent use. Each dwelling unit shall contain no more
than one kitchen or cooking facility.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean any room or rooms or suite or apartment,
whether furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied or intended, arranged
or designed to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling purposes by one or
more persons, including but not limited to the owner thereof or any of his
servants, agents or employees, and shall include all privileges, services,
furnishings, furniture, equipment, facilities and improvement connected
with use or occupancy thereof. Each dwelling unit shall contain no more
than one kitchen or cooking facility.
LIFE SAFETY INSPECTION ITEMS — Shall constitute the following: smoke
detectors, lint, mold, heater mechanical malfunctions, roach and/or insect
infestation, carbon monoxide detectors, chain locks, tripping hazards, hot
water pressure valves, automatic door closures, Romex connectors,
electrical receptacles, electrical hazards, railing, exhaust flu pipes, dryer
exhaust pipes, and stoves, if applicable and/or required under applicable
building/construction codes. Exterior life Safety Inspection items shall
include trip hazards on steps, sidewalks, and/or sink holes on the property,
railings, building identification numbers and/or letters, electrical hazards,
environmental hazards and/or spills, broken windows, dead or dying trees,
and roofs.
LOCAL HOUSING INSPECTOR — Shall mean Borough official authorized to
conduct inspections pursuant to §§ 10-22 and 10-23.
OWNER — Shall mean any person or group of persons, firm, corporation
or officer thereof, partnership, association or trust who owns, operates,
exercises control over, or is in charge of a rental facility. This includes a
condominium association which any rental facility exists.
§ 10-22.1 PINE HILL CODE § 10-22.1
AO:248
OWNER-OCCUPIED — Shall mean a portion of a rental facility, dwelling,
commercial unit or dwelling unit shall be considered owner-occupied if the
owner makes his primary residence therein. A person may have only one
primary residence in the Borough.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, trust or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
REGISTRATION — Shall mean the certificate issued to the owner/agent by
the Borough Clerk or his/her designee attesting that the rental unit has
been properly registered in accordance with §§ 10-22 and 10-23.
RENT OR RENTED — Shall mean occupied by any person or persons
other than the owner, regardless of whether there is a written or oral
agreement and regardless of whether the owner receives consideration for
the occupancy.
RENTAL FACILITY — Shall mean every building, group of buildings or
condominiums or a portion thereof consisting of more than two dwelling
units, kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where
living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for
pay or other consideration for one or more individuals.
RENTAL UNIT — Shall mean a dwelling unit which is used, occupied or
offered for occupancy by lease, rent or otherwise, to persons other than
the owner. Rental unit shall not include that portion of a rental facility,
dwelling, commercial unit or dwelling unit that is owner-occupied. For
purposes of this section 10-22, any dwelling unit where the dwelling unit is
occupied by a person or persons other than the owner, even if rent or other
consideration is not being charged or collected, shall be considered a rental
unit.
TENANCY — Shall mean occupancy of the unit by one or more tenants.
TENANT — Shall mean occupant in a unit other than the owner.
§ 10-22.2. Registration. [Ord. No. 2016-937]
All rental units and rental facilities shall hereafter be registered with the
Borough Clerk or designee of the Borough of Pine Hill, or such other person
as designated by the Borough Council, in writing, on forms which shall be
provided for that purpose, and which shall be obtained from the Borough
Clerk or designee. Such registration shall occur on an annual basis, as
provided herein. No rental unit shall hereafter be rented unless the rental
unit is registered in accordance with §§ 10-22 and/or 10-23.
Owners of two family residential property in which one unit is owner
occupied, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.5, shall not be
required to register if (a) the property has been certified to be free of leadbased
paint; (b) the property was constructed during or after 1978; and
(c) the property is a seasonal rental unit which is rented for less than six
months duration each year.
§ 10-22.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-22.3
AO:249
§ 10-22.3. Registration: Time Period. [Ord. No. 2016-937; Ord. No.
2016-941 § 2]
Each rental unit shall be registered annually. The registration shall occur on
or before April 1, of each year. For new rental units that come into existence
after April 1 of each year, the initial registration shall occur before the
creation of the first tenancy in any new rental unit or newly constructed
or reconstructed building. Each rental unit shall be re-registered with each
change in occupancy.
§ 10-22.4. Registration Forms; Filing; Contents. [Ord. No.
2016-937]
Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of N.J.S.A.
46:8-28, all rental units and rental facilities shall be registered, as provided
herein. Every owner shall file with the Borough Clerk or such other person
as designated by the Borough Council, a registration form for each unit
contained within a building or structure, and for each rental facility which
shall include the following information:
a. The name and address of the record owner or owners of the premises
and the record owner or owners of the rental unit, if not the same
persons. In the case of a partnership, the name and addresses of all
general partners shall be provided, together with the telephone
numbers for each of such individuals, where such individual may be
reached both during the day and evening hours.
b. If the address of any record owner is not located in Pine Hill or in
Camden County the name and address of a person who resides in
Camden County and who is authorized to accept notices from the
Borough or a tenant and to issue receipts therefrom and to accept
service of process on behalf of the record owner shall be provided.
c. The name, phone number and address of the agent of the premises, if
any.
d. The name and address, including the dwelling unit number of the
superintendent, janitor, custodian or other individual, employed by the
owner or agent to provide regular maintenance service, if any.
e. The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent or the owner, if domiciled in
Camden County, who may be reached or contacted at any time in the
event of an emergency affecting the premises or any unit of dwelling
space therein, including such emergencies, as the future of any
essential service or system and who has the authority to make
emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair thereto or
expenditure in connection therewith.
f. The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on the
premises.
§ 10-22.3 PINE HILL CODE § 10-22.4
AO:250
§ 10-22.5. Registration Form; Indexing and Filing; Public
Inspection. [Ord. No. 2016-937]
Upon receipt of a completed registration form complying with the
requirements of Subsection 10-22.4 above, the Borough Clerk or designee
shall index and file the registration forms. In doing so, the Borough Clerk
or designee shall follow the mandates of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1, as amended and
supplemented, so that the filing of the registration form will simultaneously
satisfy the registration requirements of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 to the extent that
it applies to the property being registered, and will also satisfy the
registration requirements of §§ 10-22 and/or 10-23. The owner shall post the
certificate of inspection in a conspicuous place on the premises of the rental
unit.
§ 10-22.6. Registration Form; Amendments; Filing. [Ord. No.
2016-937]
Every person required to file a registration form pursuant to § 10-22 shall
file an amended registration form within 20 days after any change in the
information required to be included thereon. No fee shall be required for
the filing of an amendment, except where the ownership of the premises is
changed.
§ 10-22.7. Periodic Inspections. [Ord. No. 2016-937; Ord. No.
2016-941 § 1]
g. If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the heat
in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer servicing the
building and the grade of fuel oil used.
h. The address of the rental unit. If the rental unit is located in a building
with more than one dwelling unit, the address of the building, the
number of dwelling units within the building, and the portion of the
building to be used as a rental unit shall also be provided.
i. As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number and
dimensions of sleeping rooms contained in the rental unit. In order to
satisfy the requirement of this provision, an owner shall submit a floor
plan, drawn appropriately to scale, indicating the use and dimensions of
each room covered by the registration, which shall become part of the
application and which shall be attached to the registration form when
filed with the Borough Clerk or designee.
j. Proof of a satisfactory inspection in accordance with Subsection
10-22.7 below.
k. Such other information as may be prescribed by the Borough of Pine
Hill.
l. The proposed number of occupants for the rental unit.
§ 10-22.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-22.7
AO:251
a. Each rental unit and rental facility shall be inspected at least once every
year. Each rental unit shall be inspected before every initial occupancy,
change in occupancy and/or change in the number of occupants, and
the owner shall be required to obtain a certificate of inspection in
accordance with this section before any occupancy shall be permitted.
b. Such inspections shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the Borough of Pine Hill and
inspections made by persons or an agency other than the duly
authorized and appointed person, persons or agency of the Borough of
Pine Hill shall not be used as a valid substitute.
c. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining zoning
ordinance compliance, and to the extent applicable, compliance with §§
10-22 and/or 10-23, the Borough's Property Maintenance Code, the
Uniform Construction Code, Housing Code and/or Building Code.
Inspections will be done on all interior, exterior, grounds, roads and
driveways of all rental properties to ensure public health, safety and
welfare of all occupants and the general public. Inspections will be for
enforcement of the Borough's Property Maintenance Code, the Uniform
Construction Code, Department of Health Regulations. In addition to
the above, the owner of a rental unit shall comply with the following:
1. All carpeting, where provided or installed by the owner, shall be
kept in good repair, properly attached to the floor surface which it
is covering, and shall be steamed cleaned or cleaned by other
means acceptable to the local housing inspector, prior to occupancy
by tenants or a change in tenants. Carpeting which is worn,
damaged or becomes a trip hazard shall be properly repaired or
replaced.
2. All appliances which are provided or installed by the owner,
including but not limited to, stoves, ovens, refrigerators, washers,
dryers, freezers, and light fixtures, shall be maintained in proper
working order at all times, and promptly repaired or replaced
whenever necessary.
Where the inspection of the rental unit results in a satisfactory
inspection, the inspector shall issue a certificate of inspection for
the rental unit. The certificate of inspection shall state the
maximum number of occupants for the rental unit, as determined
by the inspection.
d. Unsatisfactory Inspection. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental
unit does not result in a satisfactory inspection. A certificate of
inspection shall not issue and the owner of the property or his agent
shall not lease or rent such property, nor shall any tenant occupy the
property, until the necessary corrections have been made to bring the
property and rental unit into compliance with the applicable code, and
the property is thereafter subsequently inspected and registered. In the
event that the property is occupied when such conditions are
§ 10-22.7 PINE HILL CODE § 10-22.7
AO:252
§ 10-22.8. Access for Inspections; Repairs. [Ord. No. 2016-937; Ord.
No. 2016-941 § 1]
discovered, all such corrections shall be made within 30 days, unless
the nature of the deficiency and the applicable law upon which the
inspection is made mandates a shorter time for repairs, in which event
the shorter time shall govern. In the event that the conditions are not
corrected within the thirty-day time period, or sooner where required,
the owner shall be deemed in violation of this section, and, every day
that the violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation, subject to the penalty provisions of §§ 10-22 through 10-24.
The owner, however, shall be permitted to apply for an extension of time
to make repairs or corrections so as to comply with this section, for
good cause shown. Where the applicable law upon which the inspection
is made mandates that the property be vacated, the owner or its agent
shall cause the rental unit to be vacated and any such failure to do
so shall be a violation of §§ 10-22 and/or 10-23. Where applicable, the
Relocation and Assistance Act shall apply to any removal of a tenant
due to a violation of §§ 10-22 and/or 10-23. However, any such costs
incurred by the Borough shall be reimbursed by the owner within 30
days of receipt of a documented invoice indicating the amount paid by
the Borough.
e. Multiple Inspections: It is the intent of §§ 10-22 through 10-24 that each
rental unit be inspected at least once a year but not necessarily more
than once a year. In those instances where a unit is inspected for a
reason other than the annual inspection under §§ 10-22 through 10-24
that inspection shall count as the annual inspection under §§ 10-22
through 10-24 provided the same is permitted by the Administrative
Code of the State of New Jersey. The owner shall be responsible for
providing proof to the Borough Housing Inspector that said
inspection(s) was made and for obtaining written confirmation from the
Borough that said inspection(s) satisfies the requirements of §§ 10-22
through 10-24.
a. The inspection officers are hereby authorized to make inspections to
determine the condition of rental facilities and rental units in order that
they may promote the purposes of this section to safeguard the health,
safety and welfare of the occupants of rental facilities, rental units and
of the general public. For the purposes of making such inspections, the
inspecting officers are hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey
rental facilities and rental units at all reasonable times. The owner or
occupant of every rental facility and rental unit shall give the inspecting
officer free access to the rental facility and rental unit at all reasonable
times, for the purpose of such inspections, examinations and surveys.
b. Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental facility and rental unit
access to any part of such rental facility and rental unit at all reasonable
times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations, as are
§ 10-22.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-22.8
AO:253
§ 10-22.9. Prohibitions on Occupancy. [Ord. No. 2016-937]
§ 10-22.10. Registration Form. [Ord. No. 2016-937]
A registration form shall be required for each rental unit, even if more than
one rental unit is contained in the property. In the event that a registered
property is sold, assigned or transferred during the year, an amended
registration form is required to be filed in accordance with Subsection
10-22.6.
§ 10-22.11. Fees. [Ord. No. 2016-937]
At the time of the filing of the registration form, the owner or agent of the
owner must pay a fee in accordance with the following:
necessary, to effect compliance with the provisions of this section or any
lawful order issued pursuant thereto.
c. Complaints. Within 10 days of receipt of a complaint alleging a reported
violation of this section, an inspecting officer shall conduct an
inspection as hereinbefore provided.
d. In the event that the owner and/or occupant of a unit subject to
inspection under §§ 10-22 and 10-23 refuses access to an inspection
officer that officer shall make application to the Pine Hill Municipal
Court, with notice to the objector, for an administrative search warrant
which the Court will issue if the Court concludes that the reason for the
proposed inspection is the enforcement of §§ 10-22 and 10-23.
a. No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit, nor shall the owner
permit occupancy of any rental unit within the Borough of Pine Hill
which is not registered in accordance with this section.
b. No owner, agent, broker or person shall purchase, sell, rent, lease or
use in such a manner as to result, permit or allow any person(s) to
occupy or live in, as occupant, tenant or otherwise, any dwelling unit or
rental unit or other structure, unless a certificate of occupancy shall
first have been obtained.
c. A landlord/owner who places a tenant in a rental unit which is not
registered and who does so in good faith and without knowledge of the
requirement that such rental unit must be registered and who is
supplied a written warning advising of the requirements of this section,
shall have a period of three business days to cause the rental unit to be
registered in accordance with this section or, failing to do so, shall
vacate said premises or otherwise be subject to the penalty provisions
herein.
a. An annual registration fee, which includes the annual inspection fee, as
follows:
1. $50 per rental unit.
§ 10-22.8 PINE HILL CODE § 10-22.11
AO:254
§ 10-22.12. Providing Registration Form to Occupants and Tenants.
[Ord. No. 2016-937]
Every owner shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit
with a copy of the registration form required by this section. This particular
provision shall not apply to any hotel, motel or guesthouse registered with
the State of New Jersey, pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act, as
defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3. This provision may be complied with by posting
a copy of the registration certificate in a conspicuous place within the rental
unit(s).
§ 10-22.13. Maximum Number of Occupants; Posting Standards.
[Ord. No. 2016-937]
b. An amended registration fee as follows:
1. $25 per unit.
c. A reinspection fee as follows:
1. $25 per unit.
d. Late Charges:
For any fee paid more than 30 days after its due date there shall be a
late fee of $20.
e. If the owner of the property is a senior citizen who resides in a unit of
the property and rents out the remaining unit(s) and who would
otherwise qualify for the State Property Tax Deduction pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.41, then the fees shall be 1/2 of the stated amounts.
f. The fees assessed are for the cost of administering, inspecting and
enforcing the requirements of §§ 10-22 through 10-24.
a. The maximum number of occupants shall be posted in each rental unit.
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, agent, tenant
or registered tenant, to allow a greater number of persons than the
posted maximum number of occupants to sleep in or occupy overnight
the rental unit for a period exceeding 29 days. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §§ 10-22 through
10-24. For purposes of this subsection the term "person" is intended to
mean owner, tenant or guest of the rental unit.
b. Nuisance Prohibited. No rental unit or rental facility shall be used,
operated or maintained in a manner which shall result in any
unreasonable disturbance or disruption to the surrounding properties
and property owners or of the public in general, such that it shall
constitute a nuisance, as defined in the ordinances of the Borough of
Pine Hill.
c. Compliance With Other Laws. The maintenance of all rental units and
rental facilities and the conduct engaged in upon the premises by
§ 10-22.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-22.13
AO:255
§ 10-23. LANDLORD RESPONSIBILITY; REVOCATION OF
REGISTRATION; PROCEDURE.
§ 10-23.1. Responsibilities of Landlords and Owners. [Ord. No.
2016-937]
§ 10-23.2. Revocation of Registration; Procedure. [Ord. No.
2016-937]
occupants and their guests shall at all times be in full compliance with
all applicable ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Pine Hill,
and with all applicable state and federal laws.
a. Any landlord and/or owner of leased property located within the
Borough of Pine Hill shall be responsible for any activities, actions,
events and conduct of any person and/or animal which occur in, on or
about said premises or property.
b. The landlord/owner of any such property located within the Borough of
Pine Hill shall be responsible and liable for the conduct and actions of
any tenant, invitee, guest or any other person who is in, on or about the
premises and/or property with the permission, either express or
implied, of the landlord, owner, tenant, guest or invitee.
a. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, any owner may be
subject to the revocation or suspension of the registration issued
hereunder upon the happening of one or more of the following:
1. Conviction of a violation of §§ 10-22 and/or 10-23 in the Municipal
Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction.
2. Determination of a violation of §§ 10-22 and/or 10-23 at a hearing
held pursuant to Subsection b herein.
3. Continuing, after notice, to rent the unit or units to a tenant or
tenants who are convicted of a violation of the Noise and/or
Nuisance Ordinances of the Borough on more than one occasion.
4. Continuing, after notice, to permit the rental unit to be occupied by
more than the maximum number of occupants as defined in §§
10-22 and 10-23.
5. Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property in which the
rental unit(s) is a part in an uninhabitable and/or dangerous
condition likely to result in injury to person or property.
6. Failing to pursue eviction of lessee or tenant for Good Cause as
defined by N.J.S.A. 18-61.1g which includes a tenant or lessee who:
(a) Has continued to be, after written notice to cease, so
disorderly as to destroy the peace and quiet of the occupants
or other tenants residing in said house or neighborhood; or
§ 10-22.13 PINE HILL CODE § 10-23.2
AO:256
(b) Has willfully or by reason of gross negligence caused or
allowed destruction, damage or injury to the premises; or
(c) Has continued, after written notice to cease, to substantially
violate or breach any of the landlord's rules and regulations
governing said premises which have been accepted by tenant
or made a part of the lease at the beginning of a lease term; or
(d) Has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense, or if a
juvenile, has been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act
which committed by an adult would constitute an offense under
the Comprehensive Drug Reform Act of 1987 (N.J.S.A. 2C;35-1
et seq.) involving the use, possession, manufacture, dispensing
or distribution of a controlled dangerous substance, controlled
dangerous substance analog or drug paraphernalia within the
meaning of that act within or upon the leased premises or the
building or complex of buildings and land appurtenant thereto
and has not in connection with his sentence for that offense
either (1) successfully completed or (2) been admitted to and
continued upon probation while completing, a drug
rehabilitation program pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-14; or, being
the tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly
harbors or harbored therein a person who has been so
convicted or has so pleaded, or otherwise permits or permitted
such a person to occupy those premises for residential
purposes, whether continuously or intermittently; or
(e) Has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has
been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which if
committed by an adult would constitute an offense under
N.J.S.A. 20:12-1 or N.J.S.A. 2C: 12-3 involving assault, or
terroristic threats against the landlord, a member of the
landlord's family or an employee of the landlord; or, being the
tenant or lessee of such leased premises, knowingly harbors or
harbored therein a person who has been so convicted or has so
pleaded, or otherwise permits or permitted such a person to
occupy those premises for residential purposes, whether
continuously or intermittently; or
(f) Has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to, or if a juvenile, has
been adjudicated delinquent on the basis of an act which if
committed by an adult would constitute an offense under
N.J.S.A. 2C;20-1 involving theft of property from the landlord,
the leased premises or other tenants residing in the same
building or complex; or, being the tenant or lessee of such
leased premises, knowingly harbors or harbored therein a
person who has been so convicted or has so pleaded, or
otherwise permits or permitted such a person to occupy those
premises for residential purposes, whether continuously or
intermittently; or
§ 10-23.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-23.2
AO:257
7. False or misleading information given or provided in connection
with the registration application or renewal; or
8. Failure to correct violations in the time period prescribed; or
9. Failure to permit lawful inspections; or
10. Failure to pay any fee herein provided for; or
11. Violation of the provisions of this section or any other ordinance or
law pertaining to the use of the property.
b. Procedure; Written Complaint; Notice; Hearing.
1. A complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of the
registration may be filed by any one or more of the following:
Director of Public Safety, Chief of Police, Construction Code
Official, Local Housing Inspector, Zoning Enforcement Officer or
any other person or office authorized to file such complaint. Such
complaint shall be in writing and filed with the Borough Clerk or
designee. The complaint shall be specific and shall be sufficient to
apprise the registrant of the charges, so as to permit the registrant
to present a defense. The individual(s) filing the complaint may do
so on the basis of information and belief, and need not rely on
personal information.
2. Upon the filing of such written complaint, the Borough Clerk or
designee shall immediately inform the Borough Council, and a date
for a hearing shall be scheduled, which shall not be sooner than 10
nor more than 30 days thereafter. The Borough Clerk or designee
shall forward a copy of the complaint and a notice, as to the date of
the hearing, to the licensee and the agent, if any, at the address
indicated on the registration form. Service upon the agent shall be
sufficient.
3. The hearing required by this subsection shall be held before the
Borough governing body, unless, in its discretion, the Borough
determines that the matter should be heard by a Hearing Officer,
who shall be appointed by the Borough governing body. If the
matter is referred to a Hearing Officer, such officer shall transmit
his findings of fact and conclusions of law to the Borough governing
body within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The Borough
governing body shall then review the matter and may accept, reject
or modify the recommendations of the Hearing Officer based on the
record before such Hearing Officer. In the event that the matter is
not referred to a Hearing Officer and is heard by the Borough
governing body, then it shall render a decision within 30 days of the
conclusion of the hearing. Following the hearing, a decision shall
be rendered dismissing the complaint, revoking or suspending the
registration, or determining that the registration shall not be
renewed or reissued for one or more subsequent license years.
§ 10-23.2 PINE HILL CODE § 10-23.2
AO:258
§ 10-23.3. Notice of Violation; Subsequent Violations. [Ord. No.
2016-937]
§ 10-24. VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2016-937]
Any person who violates any provision of §§ 10-22 and/or 10-23 shall, upon
conviction in the Municipal Court of the Borough of Pine Hill, or such other
court having jurisdiction, be liable to a fine not exceeding $300, for a first
offense, a fine of not less than $400 nor more than $1,000 for a second
or subsequent offense, or imprisonment, for a term not exceeding 30 days,
or both. Each day that a violation occurs shall be deemed a separate and
distinct violation, subject to the penalty provisions of this section. Each
separate rental unit that fails to conform to §§ 10-22 and/or 10-23 shall
be deemed a separate and distinct violation for each day that the violation
occurs within the particular rental unit.
4. A stenographic transcript may be made of the hearing. All
witnesses shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of
evidence shall not apply, and the evidential rules and burden of
proof shall be that which generally controls administrative
hearings.
5. The Borough Solicitor or his designee shall appear and prosecute
on behalf of the complainant in all hearings conducted pursuant to
this section.
c. Defenses. It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension or other disciplinary action involving a rental registration
that the owner has taken appropriate action and has made a good faith
effort to abate the conditions or circumstances giving rise to the
revocation proceeding, including but not limited to the institution of
legal action against the tenant(s), occupant(s) or guests for recovery of
the premises, or eviction of the tenant(s) or other enforcement action.
The burden of proving such defense shall be on the owner.
a. Upon the occurrence of any violation of this section, the landlord or
owner of the property shall be put on notice by receiving written
notification of said violation from the person so designated by the
Borough Council to forward said notice. Said notice shall generally
inform the landlord and/or owner of the nature of the violation and the
date upon which said violation occurred. Said notice shall also state
that any subsequent violation of this section may result in said landlord
and/or owner being cited and otherwise charged with a violation of said
section, which may result in a hearing on said violation pursuant to
Subsection 10-23.2.
b. If any violation of this section occurs subsequent to written notification
being sent to said landlord and/or owner in accordance with the above
provisions, then said landlord and/or owner shall be cited for violation
of this section and noticed for a hearing pursuant to § 10-23.2.
§ 10-23.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-24
AO:259
Chapter 11
STREET OPENINGS AND EXCAVATIONS
§ 11-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 11-1.1. Definitions and Terms. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. I]
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Shall mean any person who makes application for a permit.
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Pine Hill in the County of Camden,
State of New Jersey.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — Shall mean the person duly appointed Borough
Engineer, his authorized deputy, representative or inspector.
BOROUGH SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — Shall mean the
person duly appointed Borough Superintendent of Public Works or any
person authorized to act as his or her representative.
COAPPLICANT — Shall mean person doing the road opening work on behalf
of the applicant and who is jointly and severally responsible and liable along
with the applicant, for compliance with all terms and conditions of the
chapter and any penalty or claim filed by the Borough as a result of any
violation of the chapter.
EMERGENCY — Shall mean any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence,
the existence of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons
or properties.26
IMPROVED ROAD — Shall mean any road surfaced with pavement such as
asphalt, concrete, bituminous concrete, brick, or similar pavement and any
road having concrete base.
PERMITTEE — Shall mean any person who has been issued a permit and is
obligated to fulfill all the terms of this chapter.
PERSON — Shall mean any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
utility, corporation or authority created pursuant to statute, who is directly
responsible for work being performed under the Utility Opening Permit
Application. Whenever used in any section prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations shall mean the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY — Shall mean excavation for a single-family
dwelling, duplex or common driveway, which serves two single family
residences
26.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 118, 290, O-85-410, O-87-456,
2005-773, 2006-791.
§ 10-24 PINE HILL CODE § 11-1.1
AO:260
STREET — Shall mean a public street, public easement, public right-ofway,
public highway, public alley, public way or public road accepted or
maintained by the Borough and any State or County road over which the
Borough may have acquired jurisdiction by agreement.
UNIMPROVED ROAD — Shall mean any cinder, dirt, or gravel road without
oil treatment and all other roads under the jurisdiction of the Borough of
Pine Hill.
§ 11-2. REGULATIONS FOR PERMITS.
§ 11-2.1. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. II]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, break into, excavate or open any
street (improved or unimproved) of the Borough without first securing a
permit from the Borough Clerk as required herein.
§ 11-2.2. Adherence to Terms of Permit. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. II]
No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any work in
any amount or quantity greater than that specified in the permit, except
that upon the approval of the Borough Superintendent of Public Works or
designee, additional work may be done under the provisions of the permit in
any amount not greater than 10% of the amount specified in the permit. Any
deposit deposited in connection with the original permit shall be deemed to
cover any such additional work as may be approved pursuant to this section
within the limit mentioned herein.
§ 11-2.3. Commencement of Work. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. II]
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence with 45 days after
the issuance of the permit thereof. If not so commenced, the permit shall
be automatically terminated. Permits thus terminated may be renewed upon
the payment of an additional permit fee as originally required.
a. A road opening permit is required when any of the following occur:
1. Excavation, including the digging, displacing, undermining,
opening, boring, tunneling, auguring, or in any manner breaking up
any street or area within the Borough right-of-way.
2. Excavation in/or under the surface of any street, installation of any
street improvements, construction, removal or alteration of any
improvements which are located within the right-of-way.
3. The placement or deposition within the right-of-way of mulch,
stone, dense graded aggregate or excavated material which
obstructs the intended flow of stormwater.
4. Any other action which interferes or disturbs the surface of the
streets or improvements within the Borough right-of-way.
§ 11-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-2.4
AO:261
§ 11-2.4. Notice Requirements. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. II]
A minimum of 24 hours' notice to the Borough Superintendent of Public
Works shall be given prior to the commencement of work except in cases of
emergency as provided in Section 11-8.
Five days' notice is required for openings which require traffic detours.
§ 11-2.5. Work Hours. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. II]
No openings shall be done on weekends, Borough holidays, or outside
the normal working hours of 7:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. without the written
permission of the Borough Superintendent of Public Works or designee
unless in case of emergency. Failure to provide notice as required under
subsection 11-2.4 may result in revocation of the permit and issuance of a
stop-work order. If special conditions require work on the weekend, night,
or Borough holidays, the permittee shall obtain written approval of the
Borough Superintendent of Public Works or designee for all overtime costs
incurred for inspection of work.
§ 11-2.6. Time of Year. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. II]
With the exception of an emergency, no permits will be issued for road
openings between December 15 and March 15th or where conditions exist
due to severe weather, freeze, frost, etc. without written permission from
the Borough Superintendent of Public Works or designee.
§ 11-2.7. Permits Nontransferable. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. II]
Permits are not transferable from one person to another and the work shall
not be made in any place other than the location specifically designated in
the permit.
§ 11-2.8. Expiration of Permits. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. II]
Every permit shall expire at the end of the period of time which shall be
set out in the permit. If the permittee shall be unable to complete the work
within the specified time, he shall, prior to expiration of the permit, present
in writing to the Clerk a request for an extension of time, setting forth
therein the reasons for the requested extension. If such an extension is
necessary, and not contrary to the public interest, the permittee may be
granted additional time by the Borough Clerk for the completion of the work
upon recommendation of such extension by the Borough Engineer.
§ 11-2.9. State and County Highways. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. II]
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable in those instances
where the highway is maintained by the State of New Jersey or by the
County of Camden, except in such cases where the Borough may have
special arrangements with the State or County.
§ 11-2.4 PINE HILL CODE § 11-2.10
AO:262
§ 11-2.10. Revocation of Permit. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. II]
§ 11-3. APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
a. Any permit may be revoked by the Borough Council, after notice to the
permittee, for:
1. Violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
chapter.
2. Violation of any provision of any other applicable ordinance or law
relating to the work.
3. Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering the lives or properties of
others.
b. Written notice of any such violation or condition shall be served upon
the permittee or his agent engaged in the work. The notice shall contain
a brief statement of the grounds relied upon for revoking the permit.
Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the
permittee or by certified or registered United States mail addressed to
the permittee.
c. A permittee may be granted a period of 48 hours from the date of the
notice to correct the violation and to proceed with the diligent
prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said permit is
revoked.
d. When any permit has been revoked and the work authorized by the
permit has not been completed, the Borough shall cause such work to
be done as may be necessary to restore the street or part thereof to as
good a condition as before the opening was made. All expenses incurred
therein by the Borough shall be recovered from the deposit the
permittee has deposited with the Borough.
e. If the permittee fails to restore the surface of the street to its original
and proper condition upon the expiration of the time fixed by such
permit or shall otherwise have failed to complete the excavation work
covered by such permit, the Borough shall have the right to complete all
work, and things necessary to restore the street. The permittee shall be
liable for the actual cost thereof and such cost in addition for
engineering, legal and administrative expenses. The Borough shall have
a cause of action for all fees, expenses and amounts paid out and due it
for such work and shall apply in payment of the amount due it any funds
of the permittee deposited as herein provided and the Borough shall
also enforce its rights under the permittee's surety bond provided
pursuant to this chapter.
§ 11-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3.1
AO:263
§ 11-3.1. Duties and Responsibilities of Applicants. [Ord. No.
2015-933 Art. III]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of each applicant to:
a. Make a written application for such permit with the Borough Clerk on
such forms as the Borough shall prescribe. No work shall commence
until the Borough Superintendent of Public Works or designee has
approved the application and plan and the applicant has paid and
provided all fees, deposits and certificates required by this chapter. The
Clerk shall issue a permit within 14 days after receipt of the Borough
Superintendent of Public Works' approval of the permit application and
all required fees, deposits and certificates from the applicant.
b. Include, in the application, information stating the kind, character and
purpose of the proposed excavation or opening and such other
information as may be reasonably required to fulfill the requirements of
this chapter.
c. Furnish in triplicate a scaled plan showing the location of the work to
be performed under said permit. If approved by the Borough
Superintendent of Public Works or designee, one copy of such plan shall
be returned to the applicant at the time the permit is granted.
d. Obtain a permit for each and every opening.
e. Agree to save the Borough, its officers, employees and agents harmless
from any and all costs, damages and liabilities which may accrue or be
claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under said permit.
The acceptance of any permit under this chapter shall constitute such
an agreement by the applicant whether the same is expressed or not.
f. Pay a permit and engineering review fee and security deposit in
accordance with the requirements of Section 11-5 herein.
g. Furnish a certificate of insurance as required by Section 11-6 of this
chapter, or, in the case of a public utility or authority, furnish a selfinsurer
certificate issued by the Security Responsibility Bureau of the
Motor Vehicle Commission, Department of Law and Public Safety for
the State of New Jersey.
h. Keep the original copy of the permit and an approved copy of the plan in
the possession of the party or parties actually doing the work, and when
required, exhibit same to the Borough Public Works Superintendent or
designee, duly authorized inspectors, or in the instances of county or
state highways, to the respective inspectors of these authorities.
i. Agree to perform the work under said permit in accordance with the
regulations established under Section 11-4 herein and such further
conditions as may be imposed by the Borough Public Works
Superintendent or designee.
§ 11-3.1 PINE HILL CODE § 11-3.1
AO:264
§ 11-4. REGULATIONS FOR OPENINGS.
§ 11-4.1. Traffic Control. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. IV]
j. If it is determined by the Borough Superintendent of Public Works or
designee that it is necessary, provide a video or photograph of the
proposed opening and surrounding areas to protect the Borough and
adjoining property owners from damages during construction.
a. The permittee shall take appropriate measures to assure that during
the performance of the excavation work both vehicular and pedestrian
traffic as applicable, shall be maintained as nearly normal as
practicable. The permittee shall plan and carry out this work to provide
for the safe and convenient passage of such traffic and to cause as little
inconvenience as possible to the occupants of adjoining properties. The
permittee shall notify the owners and apartment tenant of adjoining
properties in writing, at least 48 hours prior to the time he proposes to
begin any work which will interfere with their normal passage and must
provide the Borough with proof of such notice. No Borough roadways
will be closed without review and written approval by the Borough
Public Works Superintendent or designee.
b. The permittee shall open no greater part of a roadway or pedestrian
way than shall be reasonably necessary as determined by the Borough
Public Works Superintendent or designee.
c. The permittee shall provide, erect, and maintain all necessary
barricades, suitable and sufficient lights, danger signals, signs and
other traffic control devices in accordance with Section 110, of New
Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction, latest edition and any amendments thereto
and in accordance with any direction of the Borough Public Works
Superintendent or designee and shall take all necessary precautions for
the protection of the work and safety of the public. Highways closed to
traffic shall be protected by effective barricades, and obstructions shall
be illuminated during hours of darkness. Barricades must have a
twenty-four-hour accessible phone number stenciled on the barrel or
barricade. Specified warning signs shall be provided to properly control
and direct traffic. The permittee shall erect warning signs at a
reasonable distance ahead of any place where operations may interfere
with the use of the road by traffic. All barricades, warning signs, lights
and other protective devices shall conform to the U.S. Department of
Transportation MUTCD and any amendments thereto. The use of
flagmen is encouraged on all construction and may be deemed
mandatory by the Borough Public Works Superintendent or designee. If
the use of flagmen is deemed necessary, all cost for same shall be the
responsibility by the permittee. Use of two flagmen shall be deemed
mandatory if one lane of traffic is to be closed. All flagmen must have
orange safety vest, shall use STOP/SLOW paddles and shall be trained
in proper traffic control procedures. Off-duty police officers shall be
§ 11-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.1
AO:265
§ 11-4.2. Construction Requirements. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. IV]
The Borough Superintendent of Public Works or designee is hereby
authorized and directed to promulgate such written instructions as may be
necessary for the construction of the street opening. Such instructions shall
include but shall not be limited to:
employed for traffic control where required by either the local Police
Chief or by the Borough Public Works Superintendent or Designee or
Borough Engineer.
d. In the event that it will become necessary to close off any street to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the permittee shall provide a detailed
detour plan to the Borough Public Works Superintendent or designee
and appropriate County authority for their approval. This plan shall be
prepared by a New Jersey licensed professional engineer and shall be
submitted at the time of application.
The permittee shall notify the Borough Public Works Superintendent or
designee, in writing, at least five working days in advance of putting
the detour in effect. It shall be the contractor's responsibility to notify
the appropriate police department, rescue squads, Board of Education,
Municipal Administrator and Clerk and public transportation at least
seven working days before closure and show proof of that notification.
The permittee shall be responsible for the repair and maintenance
of such detours, the regulation and direction of traffic thereon, and
signing. Uniformed traffic control personnel wearing safety vest and
using paddles for traffic control shall be provided at selected locations
on all detours as determined by the Police Department. The cost of all
work with such detours shall be borne by the permittee. The applicant,
at the discretion of the Borough Public Works Superintendent or
designee may be required to employ uniformed police to act as traffic
directors. If other than uniformed police are utilized, the personnel
directing traffic must have within their employ, a person certified by
New Jersey Department of Transportation in traffic control if allowable
by the Borough.
e. The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to
interfere with access to emergency facilities, (i.e. fire stations, police
stations, hospitals, etc.) and fire hydrants. Materials and obstruction
shall not be placed within 25 feet of fire hydrants or as directed by the
Fire Marshal. Passageways leading to fire escapes, fire equipment and
emergency access ways shall be kept free of obstruction.
a. Limitations on the size of an opening.
b. Restrictions for the protection of existing subsurface installations,
monuments and drainage systems.
c. Requirements for the storage and removal of excavated materials.
d. Provisions for safety precautions to be taken by the permittee.
§ 11-4.1 PINE HILL CODE § 11-4.2
AO:266
§ 11-4.3. Final Paving. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. IV; Ord. No.
2016-943]
e. Restrictions as to the periods of day when the work may be performed.
f. Requirements for backfilling, inspection and final paving cross section
for openings.
g. Requirements for utilization of trenchless technology wherever possible
on all piping, trenches and hook ups 15 inches in diameter or less.
h. Requirements that all non-ferrous material contain a wire or detection
device to accurately determine the location after installation.
a. Final paving is to comply with the requirements in the New Jersey
Department of Transportation (NJDOT) Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction 2001, as amended by the latest
addendum of the NJDOT, herein referred to as NJDOT Standard
Specifications. A lesser specification may be allowed after review by the
Borough Superintendent of Public Works.
b. Surface Restoration:
1. No permittee shall commence restoration on any street foundation
or surface until the Borough Superintendent of Public Works or
designee has determined that settlement of the subsurface is
complete and the area properly prepared for restoration.
2. The street surface shall be permanently restored as to extend 12
inches beyond the excavation on all sides. The permanent
restoration shall consist of a minimum of eight inches of bituminous
stabilized base course and two inches of FABC-1 surface course
applied with appropriate tack coat to adjacent pavement surface or
a pavement cross section consistent to the existing pavement
section.
3. At the discretion of the Borough's Superintendent of Public Works
or designee, the surface restoration shall extend the whole width of
the travel lane.
4. For road openings down the center of the cartway, surface
restoration shall extend across the full width of the paved road
(both travel lanes).
5. The permittee is responsible for the full restoration of the roadway
surface, including re-striping, installation of raised pavement
markings, speed humps and signage.
6. Any concrete sidewalks disturbed, damaged or disrupted during
the excavation or trench opening shall be replaced with concrete
sidewalk conforming to all applicable standards of the Borough of
Pine Hill.
§ 11-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.3
AO:267
§ 11-4.4. Temporary Paving. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. IV]
Upon notice to the Borough Superintendent of Public Works or designee,
and under his inspection, the permittee shall immediately, after completing
the work, refill, properly tamp and restore the excavation or opening with
a temporary paving cover as follows: 10 inches of compacted gravel (Type
5A) in all areas and two inches of approved bituminous temporary patch
material (cold patch) in paved cartways. The temporary paving cover shall
7. Where concrete curbing and/or gutters are disturbed, damaged or
removed, curbing and gutters of the exact configuration as the
existing shall be constructed. Concrete shall be Portland cement
concrete, air-entrained, conforming to the NJDOT Standard
Specifications for Class B concrete and shall have a minimum
compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square inch after 28
days.
8. All topsoiled, seeded or otherwise unpaved areas disturbed in the
course of the work shall be topsoiled with a minimum thickness of
not less than four inches of loam-type topsoil. Fertilizer, lime and
other soil conditioners needed to promote the proper growth of
grass shall be incorporated and thoroughly worked into the topsoil.
Seed or sod of species suitable for growth in the location and
environment, and conforming to the requirements of the NJDOT
Standard Specifications, shall be placed in all unpaved areas.
9. All gravel shoulder areas disturbed during excavation or trench
opening shall be restored and graded to provide and maintain the
proper flow of drainage and to provide adequate lateral support of
the abutting pavement structure. The gravel material shall be soil
aggregate, Type I-6, conforming to the requirements of NJDOT
Standard Specifications Section 901. The soil aggregate or gravel
shall be a minimum thickness of not less than eight inches
compacted thickness.
10. All concrete drive aprons disturbed during the course of excavation
or trench opening shall be replaced in accordance with all
applicable standards for concrete drive aprons, as set forth in
Chapter 23, Land Use, Article IX, and shall be constructed of
Portland cement concrete, air-entrained, Class B concrete, having a
twenty-eight-day compressive strength of 4,000 pounds per square
inch and a minimum concrete thickness of six inches.
11. In the event of the failure to restore the street opening properly
within a reasonable time after the opening has been made or to
maintain the restored street properly for a period of two years from
the date of the aforesaid certificate of proper restoration, the
Borough may, upon three days' notice to the person receiving the
permit, undertake the restoration or maintenance work and have
immediate recourse to the deposit to be compensated for all
reasonable expenses to perform the necessary work.
§ 11-4.3 PINE HILL CODE § 11-4.4
AO:268
be left in place and maintained by the applicant for a minimum of 120 days
and a maximum of 180 days, after which the temporary paving cover and
required portion of compacted gravel shall be removed and replaced with
the final paving required by the Borough Superintendent of Public Works or
designee.
§ 11-4.5. Additional Regulations. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. IV]
§ 11-4.6. Safety Protection. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. IV; Ord. No.
2016-943]
a. Unless written permission is obtained from the Borough
Superintendent of Public Works or designee, no permittee shall be
allowed permission to cut, break into, excavate or open a street for a
greater distance than 300 feet at one time or keep the same open for a
period longer than one week. During the entire period the street is
being cut, broken into, excavated or opened by the permittee, there
shall be provided by the permittee a space at street level of at least 12
feet in width for the purposes of allowing vehicles free and unimpeded
use of the same. In no event shall a permit be valid for a period of time
in excess of 135 days after its issuance without the written approval of
the Borough Superintendent of Public Works or designee.
b. All cuts, breaks, excavations and openings shall conform in size to the
application on which the permit is based and shall be performed in
neat, even and rectangular sections. All excavations to a depth of six
feet or more shall be shored and braced or provided with an acceptable
shield to support the walls of the trench for the protection of workmen
and to prevent the unintentional widening of the trench unless
otherwise permitted by the Borough Superintendent of Public Works or
designee.
c. All permittees shall keep the area of their work clear of dirt and debris
at all times and shall carry away and dispose of all excess dirt, debris
and other material resulting from their work.
d. At the discretion of the Borough Superintendent of Public Works, the
Road Opening Permit applications and associated inspections may be
reviewed and approved by the Borough Engineer. In this case the term
Borough Superintendent of Public Works or designee is
interchangeable with the Borough Engineer throughout this chapter.
a. It shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant to conduct, install and
maintain all work permitted by or subject to this chapter in a manner
which ensures the continuing safety and protection of the public.
1. All openings must be backfilled immediately and temporarily paved
the same day as the opening is made. Additionally, all traffic
markings (crosswalks, center lines, berm lines, etc.) must be
restored in kind in a manner satisfactory to the Borough Public
Works Superintendent or designee and in accordance with the
§ 11-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.6
AO:269
MUTCD immediately upon final restoration. Final restoration must
be performed within the time periods described in the permit.
2. If the nature of the work requires leaving an excavation unfinished
overnight or for an extended period of time, the permittee shall
notify the Borough Public Works Superintendent or designee at
least five days in advance of construction. Alternatively, in case of
an emergency, in writing, the permittee shall notify the Borough
Public Works Superintendent or designee by phone using the
following number 783-4900, which should be followed up by a
notification to the Borough within 24 hours of such telephone call.
Permittee shall place safety barriers with appropriate lighting
around the unfinished excavation area. The barriers and lighting
devices shall conform to the specifications set forth in the U.S.
Department of Transportation MUTCD and any amendments
thereto, Part VI; additionally, that the permittee must place his
name and phone number where he can be reached at all times on
these barriers. He shall also notify the Borough in writing of the
condition of the unfinished excavation and furnish the above with
his name and phone number where he can be reached at all times.
3. Any portions of work areas not closed to traffic shall be brought to
the existing grade with at least six inches of approved paving
materials bituminous stabilized base, mix 1-2, applied over a sixinch
subbase of dense graded aggregate. All lifts must be
mechanically compacted and continuously maintained until final
restoration is performed.
4. The permittee shall construct and maintain adequate and safe
crossing over excavations and across highways under improvement
to accommodate vehicular and/or pedestrian crossings. The
applicant shall submit all plans, design calculations, and
specifications to Borough at the time application is made.
5. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to secure information
regarding buried utilities, by contacting the New Jersey One Call
Service and to undertake such measures as may be required to
ensure the safety and protections of underground utilities within
the work area.
6. Permittee and contractor shall comply with the OSHA trench
sheeting regulations and all other OSHA regulations, and with any
other applicable laws, in the performance of the work.
7. No construction activity shall begin on any day until all traffic
control devices are in place.
8. Temporary restoration must be smooth with no ruts or bumps. All
temporary pavement over openings must be rolled or mechanically
tamped the same day as the opening is made. Hand raking of
temporary pavement is prohibited.
§ 11-4.6 PINE HILL CODE § 11-5
AO:270
§ 11-5. DEPOSITS AND FEES.
§ 11-5.1. Fees and Guarantee Requirements. [Ord. No. 2015-933
Art. V]
a. Fees. A permit fee shall be charged by the Borough for the issuance of a
permit, which shall be in addition to all other fees for permits or
charges relative to any proposed construction work. A permit fee
should be in the form of a check or money order. No cash will be
accepted. The permit fee shall be in an amount varying with the size of
the road opening. Municipal and County utilities authorities are subject
to all restoration, insurance, and performance and maintenance bond
provisions of this chapter whether or not they are also subject to
payment of permit fees. Permit fees shall be fixed as follows:
1. Utility/Commercial Application Fee $100
2. Access
Private use $50
Private closing $50
Structure relocation $50
Utility Pole, beacon & lights $50
Residence & Business Comb. $150
Monitoring wells $200
(Each curbline opening)
Commercial access $500
Commercial development
With widening $1,250
Soil borings:
1-5 $100
6-10 $200
Each additional over 10 $25
3. Road Openings within Right-of-Way
(Sidewalk, Grass Area, Shoulder or Travel
Way).
Single- Not to exceed 16 square feet $125
Multiple- Over 16 square feet $250
But not to exceed 200 square feet
Each additional 200 square feet or part
thereof $75
Manhole, vault, metering pit, Inlet $125
Test Pit under 16 square feet $125
§ 11-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-5.1
AO:271
§ 11-5.2. Guarantee Requirements. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. V; Ord.
No. 2016-943]
Test Pit over 16 square feet $200
Direct burial cable
(Fiber Optic additional application) $750
Up to 1,500 feet $250
From 1,501 feet to 2,000 feet $325
For every 1,000 feet thereafter $60
Handicap ramp w/curb & 8 LF sidewalk
Jack/boring up to 100 feet $200
Each additional 50 feet $50
4. Curb/Gutter Installation.
0 foot to 100 feet $80
101 feet to 500 feet $200
From 501 feet to 1,000 feet $300
For every 500 feet thereafter $30
5. Sidewalk Installation.
Nonresidential: Every 16 linear feet $75
Single family residential (not developer):
Every foot
$1
All fees for ADA pedestrian ramps in the
Borough ROW are waived. A permit is still
required
NOTE: Permit fees will be doubled for work within roads that are
under moratorium, but have been approved for opening by the
Borough. Operating without a permit will result in a $1,000 fine and
permit fees will be doubled.
a. Surety. Contractors shall be required to post a surety, in a form
acceptable to Borough Counsel. The surety shall include a performance
guarantee that the road opening will be properly closed and the road,
street or highway over the opened road will be satisfactorily
reconstructed. The surety shall also include a maintenance guarantee,
which shall ensure that the road as reconstructed will remain in good
condition after the work has been accepted. The performance
guarantee shall not be required if the applicant has already posted a
performance guarantee with the Borough as a condition of a site plan or
subdivision approval. Proof of the posting must be supplied with the
permit application. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be
computed by the Borough Superintendent of Public Works or designee
§ 11-5.1 PINE HILL CODE § 11-5.2
AO:272
on the basis of costs required to make proper restorations or repairs
but at a minimum shall be at least $2,500.
b. Maintenance Bond. The maintenance bond will serve to guarantee that
the road as reconstructed will remain in good condition and free of
defects after acceptance, as follows:
1. For a period of two years after the date of acceptance which involve
trenches within a paved road surface, which have depth of four or
more feet from the road surface; or
2. For a period of two years after the date of final acceptance for all
other work, which requires a permit as set forth herein.
No performance bond shall be released prior to the submission of a
maintenance bond.
The maintenance bond amount shall be 50% of the performance
bond amount.
c. All bonds submitted must meet the following minimum requirements:
1. The bond must have an identifying number.
2. The name and address of the principal must be listed on the bond
and in the case of a corporation or partnership; the state of
incorporation or partnership must be noted.
3. The name, address and phone number of the surety company must
be listed on the bond and in addition the company must be
authorized to issue bond in the State of New Jersey pursuant to the
New Jersey Department of Insurance.
4. The amount of the bond must be in accordance with the bond fee
schedule established for performance and or maintenance bonds in
this section.
5. The work to be performed must be clearly defined in the bond.
6. The lot and block number, street address and the Borough road
opening permit application number must be listed on the bond.
7. Determination of the acceptability of all the work covered by the
bond shall be at the sole discretion of the Borough Public Works
Superintendent or designee.
8. The term or expiration date of the bond must be clearly stated and
must conform to the time periods set forth in this section. Bonds
must be automatically extended by bonding company until notified
by the Borough.
9. The manner in which a bond may be called in the event of nonperformance
must be specified in the bond.
§ 11-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-5.2
AO:273
§ 11-6. LIABILITY INSURANCE.
§ 11-6.1. Insurance Requirements. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. VI]
10. The bond shall be signed and attested to by the appropriate
persons for the principal and the surety company together with the
appropriate form of notarization.
d. In lieu of bonds, a certified check in the full amount required to
guarantee performance and maintenance may be provided. The amount
of the surety may be reduced by 50% for the maintenance surety
period. The check will be held in a separate designated escrow account
by written agreement.
e. In lieu of bonds, an irrevocable letter of credit in the full amount
required to guarantee performance and maintenance may be provided.
The amount of the surety may be reduced by 50% for the maintenance
surety period. Letters of credit must be submitted in substantially the
same form as the sample, which is available upon request from the
Borough. Letters of Credit must be automatically extended
continuously until notified by the Borough.
f. A utility company may, in lieu of giving a separate bond for each project,
annually in January of each year, may post a blanket performance/
maintenance bond or corporate bond in the amount of $25,000.
However, when, in the opinion of the Borough, the openings of trenches
contemplated by an application exceed the amount of the bond posted,
additional bonds/or cash security will be required.
g. All checks and bonds and Letters of Credit under this chapter shall be
submitted to the Borough before approval and shall be made payable to
the Borough of Pine Hill. Performance bonds will be held until receipt of
the certification of satisfactory completion issued by the Borough Public
Works Superintendent or designee. Performance bonds shall not be
released until satisfactory maintenance bonds have been posted as
required by this chapter.
h. If it becomes necessary for the Borough to sue under a performance
bond or maintenance bond or letter of credit because of unsatisfactory
work and if the cost of corrective work exceeds the original bond value,
the Borough reserves the right to recover all additional cost from the
applicant.
i. Inspection Fees. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant shall
make a deposit for inspection fees in an amount to be determined by the
Borough Superintendent of Public Works or designee. The amount shall
be calculated at 5% of the total project cost, including excavation and
restoration or based on the number of hours spent by the Borough
Superintendent of Public Works or designee to inspect the work
covered under the permit, computed at his/her hourly rate, whichever
is greater.
§ 11-5.2 PINE HILL CODE § 11-6.1
AO:274
a. The permittee and any contractor hired by the permittee shall provide
insurance coverage of such types and in such amounts as will
completely protect the permittee, contractor and the Borough, its
elected officials, officers, agents, servants, employees and assigns
against any and all risk of loss or liability arising out of any work under
this permit. The insurance must be furnished by insurance companies
authorized by the Commissioner of Insurance to do business in the
State of New Jersey and must be approved by or acceptable to the
Borough. The permittee shall furnish the Borough with Certificates of
Insurance naming the Borough as an additional insured, and providing
further that any liability insurance coverage shall be considered as
primary and not as excess insurance, describing the types and amounts
of insurance, identifying the coverage to this permit by reference and
providing for 30 days' written notice to the Borough by registered mail
prior to any modifications, cancellation, non-renewal or other change in
coverage. The policies must be effective prior to the commencement of
work and must remain in force until the certificate of satisfactory
completion is issued by the Borough Public Works Superintendent or
designee. If the permittee returns to the site to perform maintenance
work during the maintenance period a current certificate of insurance
must be provided to the Borough.
b. The following are the minimum mandatory types and minimum amount
of insurance coverage to be carried in accordance with this chapter.
1. Workers Compensation-Statutory Limits-Employer's Liability-
Unlimited.
2. General Liability in a comprehensive form with a minimum limit of
$1,000,000 to include:
(a) Premises-operations.
(b) Blanket contractual.
(c) Products-completed operations.
(d) Broad form property damage.
(e) Independent contractors and subcontractors.
(f) Personal injury.
3. Motor Vehicle Liability Insurance in a comprehensive form with a
minimum of $1,000,000 C.S.L. including:
(a) Owned automobiles.
(b) Hired automobiles.
(c) Non-owned automobile.
§ 11-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-6.1
AO:275
§ 11-6.2. Hold Harmless Clause. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. VI]
Upon receipt of the permit, the applicant agrees that it shall defend and
save the Borough its agencies, departments, bureaus, boards, officials and
employees harmless from any and all claims of any nature arising out
the construction and road opening work covered by the permit, and also
agrees that the Borough of Pine Hill in issuing the permit shall not assume
liability in connection therewith. In the event of any suit or claim against
the Borough due to the negligence or default of the permittee, the Borough
shall give written, notice to the permittee of such suit or claim. Any final
judgment requiring the Borough to pay for such damage shall be conclusive
upon the permittee, and the permittee shall be liable to repay the Borough
for all costs in connection with such suit, including, as applicable, any
attorney fees.
§ 11-7. OPENING IN NEW STREETS.
c. Utility companies may submit blanket insurance certificates from
themselves and/or their contractors, which shall be valid, until the
expiration of the coverage listed thereon.
d. The permittee shall provide proof that any contractor or subcontractor
have in force during the term of this permit insurance equal to the
coverage as herein set forth, or shall make arrangements to insure that
the activities of any contractors of subcontractors are included under
permittee's policy. If the contractor does not have adequate insurance
then the permittee must agree to indemnify the Borough for all
contractor's actions. Neither approval by the Borough nor failure to
disapprove Certificates of Insurance furnished by the permittee shall
release the permittee of full responsibility for all liability and casualty
claims or losses. The certificate shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Borough. If at any time during the term of this permit or
any extension thereof, any required policies of insurance should expire
or be canceled, it will be the responsibility of the permittee to furnish to
the Borough a Certificate of Insurance or an acceptable replacement of
the expiring policy prior to the expiration or cancellation date so that
there shall be no lapse in any coverage.
e. Residential Driveways.
1. The Permittee shall provide to the Borough a copy of a current
liability policy, insuring the premises in question where the
driveway is being constructed; the policy shall be necessary if the
work is to be performed by the applicant/policyholder. The
minimum limits of liability coverage must be $300,000.
2. If any of the work is to be performed by an outside contractor, the
contractor must supply an insurance certificate meeting the
requirements set forth in paragraphs a, b and d of this subsection.
§ 11-6.1 PINE HILL CODE § 11-7.1
AO:276
§ 11-7.1. Notice Prior to Paving. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. VII]
When the Borough shall improve or pave any street, the Borough Clerk shall
first give notice to all persons owning property abutting on the street about
to be paved or improved and to all public utilities and authorities operating
in the Borough, and all such persons, utilities and authorities shall make
all connections as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate
excavation of the street within 30 days from the giving of such notice. The
time shall be extended if permission is requested in writing and approved
by the Borough Supervisor of Public Works.
§ 11-7.2. Restrictions upon Excavations in New Streets. [Ord. No.
2015-933 Art. VII]
§ 11-8. EMERGENCY OPENINGS.
§ 11-8.1. Emergency Repairs Authorized. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art.
VIII]
a. No permit shall be issued by the Borough for the opening on any
roadway surface which has been reconstructed, repaved, or otherwise
improved by the Borough for a sixty-month period after completion of
said construction except in the event of an emergency or other
approved opening by the Borough. The moratorium period shall
commence on the date of final acceptance of the road which has been
resurfaced, reconstructed or otherwise improved.
b. Any Borough road that has been opened during the Borough's
moratorium period, without approval, shall result in a $1,000 fine and
repairs shall be made by the offending party to the satisfaction of the
Borough and in accordance with Borough specifications.
c. If an application for a permit is denied during the moratorium time
period, the Borough Administrator shall send the applicant written
notice of the denial and state the reason for the denial.
d. If any approval is granted to permit the opening of any roadway surface
during the moratorium time period, appropriate bonds and insurance
shall be required in form acceptable to the Borough Legal Counsel and
Administrator. In addition, the Borough may require the permit
applicant to videotape or photograph all areas of the proposed
construction of the opening to protect the interest of the Borough and
all adjoining properties to the construction area and to restore the road
opening area to standards established by the Borough as set forth
herein.
a. In case of an emergency involving underground storm or drain water,
gas, water, sewer, telephone, cable or electric utilities, where
immediate repair is imperative to prevent loss or damage to streets or
property or discontinuance of service, it shall not be necessary to obtain
permits before commencing such repair, but (1) Borough
§ 11-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-8.1
AO:277
§ 11-9. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. IX]
§ 11-10. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
§ 11-10.1. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-933 Art. X]
Superintendent of Public Works must be notified immediately of the
occurrence, and (2) such permit(s) shall be obtained within two days
thereafter, and this section shall not be held or taken in any case to
exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this chapter.
b. The Borough Superintendent of Public Works or designee is hereby
designated as the appropriate official to determine whether a bona fide
emergency exists or existed to justify the emergent opening of any
street covered by this section.
a. Maps of Utility Installations. Every person owning, using, controlling or
having an interest in pipes, conduits, ducts or other structures under
the surface of any street used for the purpose of supplying or conveying
gas, electricity, communication impulses, water or steam to or from the
Borough or to or from its inhabitants, or for any other purpose, shall file
with the Borough Engineer within one year after the adoption of this
chapter accurate information showing the as-built location, size and
description of all such installations.
b. Additional Information. Within 30 days after the first day of January of
each and every year, such person shall file with the Borough Engineer
additional information showing installations, including all those made
or abandoned during the previous year; provided, however, that if no
additions have been made to its installation during the previous year, a
utility or authority may file with the Engineer a written statement to
that effect within the period of time specified above. A utility or
authority may, at its own option, elect to provide additional information
throughout the year as it is available rather than proceed as above
noted. The Borough Engineer may, however, request additional
information periodically as may be necessitated by proposed
construction or reconstruction of roadways within the Borough.
c. Notices to Property Owners and Tenants. If the work to be undertaken
by the permittee is such that it will affect the use of properties abutting
or adjoining the project or subsurface installations, including utilities,
in the vicinity of the proposed opening, the permittee shall be required
to submit evidence in affidavit form that notices were served on the
owners and tenants of such properties and subsurface installations
personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $5,000 or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day that
a violation is permitted to exist after notice in writing shall have been
served by the Clerk shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 11-8.1 PINE HILL CODE § 11-10.1
AO:278
Chapter 12
WATER AND SEWERS
§ 12-1. SEWERS.
§ 12-1.1. Connection Required.
b. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person violating this chapter
by causing the non-emergent opening of a street in violation of this
chapter shall be liable for the reasonable costs incurred by the Borough
in restoring the street to its original condition.
a. The owner of every existing or hereafter constructed or acquired house,
building or structure which may be occupied or used by human beings,
located on a street along the line of a sewer now or hereafter
constructed or acquired in the borough, where the nearest part of the
house, building or structure is located not more than 150 feet in a direct
line from the connecting point of a sewer line shall, within 30 days after
the date on which the service of such sewer is made available to same
unless a toilet is now installed therein shall connect such toilet and any
other sewage facilities emanating from the house, building or structure
to the sewer system under and pursuant to the rules and regulations
which shall be filed in the office of the borough municipal utilities
authority.
b. If any such house, building or structure shall be used for industrial or
commercial purposes, the owner thereof shall within 30 days after the
date on which the services of the sewer are made available to the
house, or structure, or prior to occupancy or use of same, whichever
date is later, install such facilities as are necessary to accept and
dispose of industrial wastes emanating therefrom and connect such
facilities with sewer system under and pursuant to rules and
regulations which shall be filed in the offices of the borough municipal
utilities authority.
c. The mandatory provisions of this paragraph shall not apply in those
cases where public sewer is within 150 feet of the building or structure
and is not available due to a State or county imposed moratorium on
further sewer connections. In those cases, alternative sewer systems
shall be permitted provided the owner.
1. Obtains all necessary county, State and Federal approvals as
required by law.
2. Installs the necessary sewer lines running from the house, building,
or structure to the street or future connection to the public sewer
system.
3. Submits plans to the borough Building Inspector showing the
design of the proposed installation of sewer lines.
§ 11-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-1.1
AO:279
§ 12-1.2. Failure To Connect.
If the owner of any house, building or structure shall fail to make any
installation or connection required herein within the time herein required,
the borough may proceed to make such installation or connection, and
assess the cost thereof, as a lien against such house, building or structure,
pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 40: 63-52 through 40:63-64.
§ 12-1.3. Agreement Between Borough And Municipal Utilities
Authority.
§ 12-2. PLUMBING CODE OF NEW JERSEY.
§ 12-2.1. Adoption Of Code.
A code regulating the installation, maintenance, repair and control of the
plumbing of buildings, and the connection thereof with outside sewers,
cesspools, or other receptacles, regulating the practice of plumbing and the
issuance of licenses to practice plumbing, is hereby established pursuant to
the provisions of Chapter 275 P.L. of 1948. A copy of the code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof
herein.
4. Agrees in writing by letter to the borough Building Inspector to
connect the lateral sewer lines to the system after sewerage
becomes available by reason of the termination of the State or
county imposed moratorium.
a. The borough has determined that there exists within the developed
areas of the borough a pressing need for a system of sanitary sewers
and created the borough municipal utilities authority (the "authority")
for the purpose of alleviating such needs; and the authority has
undertaken a project consisting of the construction of a system of
sanitary sewers, including collecting sewers, interceptor sewers, force
mains, pumping stations and related facilities to serve certain portions
of the borough (the "1969 Sewer Project"); and in consideration of the
authority's operation and maintenance of the 1969 sewer project for the
benefit of the borough residents, the borough desires to make certain
payments of the authority (the "treatment charges") as authorized by
the provisions of Section 49 of the Municipal Utilities Authorities Law.
b. The borough has entered into an agreement with the authority
providing for the payment of treatment charges by the borough to the
authority in substantially the following form, and the terms and
conditions thereof are hereby approved and specifically agreed to. The
agreement, signed April 7, 1969, and amended September 20, 1971, is
hereby adopted and incorporated without the inclusion of the text
thereof herein. Three copies of the agreement shall be placed in the
borough Clerk's office for the use and examination of the public.
§ 12-1.1 PINE HILL CODE § 12-2.2
AO:280
§ 12-2.2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the "Plumbing Code of New Jersey (1953)".
§ 12-2.3. Public Record.
Two copies of the "Plumbing Code of New Jersey (1953)", similarly marked,
have been placed on file in the borough Clerk's office and shall remain on
file in such office for the use and examination of the public.
§ 12-2.4. Fees.
In connection with the provisions of this section and the code hereby
established and adopted as a part hereof, the following fees shall be
charged and received:
§ 12-2.5. Enforcement.
All fees, penalties, and moneys collected under this section or the code
established herein shall be first paid to the secretary of the Board of health,
after which it shall be paid over to the borough treasurer. The enforcement
of this section shall be by the Board of health of the borough as well as its
supervision in accordance with the provisions of the "Plumbing Code of New
Jersey (1953)".
§ 12-3. INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM CODE.
§ 12-3.1. Adoption Of Code.
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance, and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems, the issuance
of licenses to locate, construct, empty or clean such system, and fixing
penalties for the violation thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to R.S.
a. For the issuance and annual renewal of a license as a master plumber,
$25.
b. For the issuance and annual renewal of a license for construction,
installation and cleaning of cesspools, $10.
c. For the issuance of a permit for a proposed plumbing job $7.
d. For the issuance of a permit for a proposed construction and
installation of a cesspool, $5.
e. For the issuance of a permit for a proposed cleaning of a cesspool, $2.
A new permit for each proposed plumbing job shall be obtained
including proposed construction and installation of cesspools and
cleaning of cesspools.
§ 12-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.1
AO:281
26:3-69.1 to 69.6. A copy of code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ 12-3.2. Title.
The code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1953).
§ 12-3.3. Public Record.
Three copies of the individual sewage disposal system code of New Jersey
(1953) have been placed on file in the office of the secretary, Clerk or other
similar officer of the Board of health and shall remain on file in the office for
the use and examination of the public.
§ 12-3.4. License Required.
§ 12-3.5. New Systems.
§ 12-3.6. License To Clean Septic Tanks.
a. No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage system
until a license for the location, construction or alteration of the disposal
system is issued by the Board of health.
b. The Board of health may issue a license if an application for the same is
accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey stating that the design of the
individual sewage disposal system, as proposed, is in compliance with
the code.
a. New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in operation, nor
shall new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or
occupied, which shall rely on such a system for sewage disposal, until
the Board of health issues a certified indication that the disposal system
has been located and constructed in compliance with the terms of the
licence issued and the requirements of the aforesaid code. Issuance of
such certificate shall not be required for alteration to an existing
individual sewage disposal system.
b. The Board of health may issue such a certificate if an engineer licensed
to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement
in writing signed by him to the Board of health that the disposal system
has been located and constructed in accordance with the terms of the
license issued and the requirements of the aforesaid code.
a. Persons shall not engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage
of human excrement who do not hold a license to engage in such
business issued by the Board of health. Such license shall be valid for a
§ 12-3.1 PINE HILL CODE § 12-3.6
AO:282
§ 12-3.7. Denial Of License.
In case any license or certification required by this section is denied by the
Board of health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board of health
within 15 days after request therefor is made by the applicant and upon
such hearing the Board of health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous
determination and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of
such hearing.
§ 12-3.8. Work Stoppage.
The Board of health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal sewage disposal system, which is being erected or installed
in violation of the code, to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall
be necessary to remedy such violation, and, thereafter, the work continued
without any violation of any of the provisions of the code, and after issuance
of any such order and the service of a copy thereof upon any person
connected with or working in and about the erection or installation of any
such disposal system, or any part thereof, no further work shall be done
thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 12-3.9. Fees.
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
period of one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed by the
Board of health.
b. The license may be revoked for failure of the licensee to comply with
the provisions of the code or any rule or ordinance of the Board of
health.
c. The contents of any septic tank, cesspool, privy or other receptacle
containing human excrement shall not be removed until a license for
such removal has been obtained from the Board of health.
a. For the filing of an application and plans for license to locate and
construct an individual sewage disposal system, $1.
b. For the filing of an application and plans for a license to alter an
existing individual sewage disposal system, $1.
c. For the issuance of a license to locate and construct or alter an
individual sewage disposal system, $2.
d. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system, or part
thereof, caused by the failure of the license to locate and construct or
alter the same in accordance with the terms of the license issued or the
terms of the aforesaid code, an inspection fee of $2.
e. For the issuance or renewal of a license to a person or corporation
engaged in the business of cleaning or emptying receptacles for the
§ 12-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3.9
AO:283
§ 12-4. WATER SYSTEM.
§ 12-4.1. Connection Required.
The owner of every existing house, building or structure which is or may
be occupied or used by human beings located on a street along the line of
any water main now or hereafter constructed, acquired or operated in the
borough by the borough municipal utilities authority, shall, within 30 days
after the date of which the services of such water system are made available
to such house, building or structure, connect same to the present water
system and thereafter utilize only the water supplied by the central water
system.
§ 12-4.2. Failure To Connect.
If the owner of any house, building or structure referred to above shall fail
to make any installation or permit the connection required by this section
within the time herein required, the borough may proceed to make such
installation or connection, and assess the cost thereof as a lien against the
house, building or structure, pursuant to R.S. 40:64-54; 40:63-60; 40:63-61,
as amended.
§ 12-4.3. Rules And Regulations.
The installations and connections required to be made shall be made in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the authority, which rules and
regulations shall be kept on file in the office of the authority.
§ 12-5. SERVICE AGREEMENT WITH THE CAMDEN COUNTY
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AUTHORITY (CCMUA).
§ 12-5.1. Transportation And Treatment Of Wastewater: Terms And
Obligations.
reception and storage of human excrement or other putrescible matter,
$5 for each vehicle or conveyance.
f. For the issuance of a license to clean or empty any receptacle used for
the reception or storage of human excrement or other putrescible
matter, $1.
a. The Borough of Pine Hill agrees to enter into the service agreement
attached hereto with the Camden County Municipal Utilities and
hereby authorizes and directs the Mayor to execute said service
agreement on behalf of the Borough of Pine Hill immediately following
the lawful adoption of this section.
b. The ordinance and attached service agreement shall be filed in the
office of the Municipal Clerk located at 48 W. Sixth Avenue, Pine Hill,
New Jersey, 08021.
§ 12-3.9 PINE HILL CODE § 12-6
AO:284
§ 12-6. WATER CONSERVATION.27
§ 12-6.1. Findings.
It is the finding of council that there exists good reason to be responsible
with our natural resources, especially water, and that all citizens should
endeavor to conserve water.
§ 12-6.2. Regulations.
§ 12-6.3. Penalties.
Any violation of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000
and up to 30 days in jail. Each day that this section is violated shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 12-6.4. Enforcing Officer.
The Code Enforcement Officer, member of the Pine Hill Police Department
or any other borough official designated by council shall enforce the
provisions of this section.
Chapter 12A
IMPROPER WASTE DISPOSAL
§ 12A-1. DISCHARGES INTO SEWERS PROHIBITED.
No person shall discharge or permit the discharge of any solid, semi-solid
or liquid waste into any sanitary sewer line located within the Borough of
Pine Hill, excepting any discharge made through a lawful sewer connection
approved by the appropriate authority and in a manner consistent with the
regulations of the approving authority.
§ 12A-2. DEFINITIONS.
a. All outside water usage is limited to properties with even numbered
addresses on even numbered days and to properties with odd
numbered addresses on odd numbered days. On the 31st day of the
month, all outside water usage is completely prohibited.
b. Outside water usage is the use of water outside any building including
but not limited to the watering of lawns, washing cars and weekly
porches and sidewalks.
c. The watering of lawns on permitted days shall take place only between
5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
27.Editor's Note: Former Section 12-6. Water Emergency Regulations previously codified
herein and including portions of Ordinance Nos. 93-540 and 96-605 was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 2005-772.
§ 12-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12A-2
AO:285
§ 12A-3. SEPARATE VIOLATIONS.
Each incident of illegal discharge shall constitute a separate violation. In
the case of an employee of a person, where the employee actually causes
the illegal discharge to take place, both the employee and the person
employing him shall be deemed to have violated this unless the person
employing can prove he directed the employee to properly dispose of the
waste in a legal disposal area and had no knowledge of the employee's
intent to illegally dispose of the waste.
§ 12A-4. PENALTIES.
The minimum penalty for a first offense under this shall be $500. The
minimum penalty for a second or subsequent offense shall be a $500 fine
plus 30 days in the county jail. The maximum penalty for violation of this
shall be a fine of $500 or up to 90 days in the county jail, or both, for each
separate offense.
§ 12A-5. MUNICIPAL STORM SEWER SYSTEMS.
§ 12A-5.1. Improper Disposal of Waste.
a. PERSON for the purposes of this - Shall mean any natural or judicially
recognized person, including business entities such as proprietorships,
partnerships and corporations.
b. SOLID, SEMI-SOLID, OR LIQUID WASTE - Shall mean and include any
material or matter which is discharged into a sanitary sewer line,
including septage or septic tank wastes.
c. APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY and APPROVING AUTHORITY - Shall mean
any and all public bodies that have jurisdiction to regulate sanitary
sewers in the borough.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to prohibit the spilling,
dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) operated by the Borough
of Pine Hill, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this subsection clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used
in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-
§ 12A-2 PINE HILL CODE § 12A-5.1
AO:286
made channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Borough
of Pine Hill or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater. NOTE: In municipalities with combined
sewer systems, "MS4s do not include combined sewers systems, which
are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all
times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other
sources."
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted
to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other
sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
c. Prohibited Conduct. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system
operated by Borough of Pine Hill is prohibited. The spilling, dumping,
or disposal of materials other than stormwater in such a manner as to
cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer
system is also prohibited.
d. Exceptions to Prohibition.
1. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
2. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters).
3. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact
cooling water).
4. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
5. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
6. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
7. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
8. Flows from firefighting activities.
9. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(a) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use
for their intended purposes; and
§ 12A-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12A-5.1
AO:287
§ 12A-5.2. Illicit Connection.
(b) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and deicing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited
to exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not
apply to engines or other enclosed machinery.
e. Enforcement. This subsection shall be enforced by the police
department and/or other municipal officials of Borough of Pine Hill.
f. Penalties. Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the
provisions of this subsection, after being duly notified, shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $500.
a. Purpose. An ordinance to prohibit illicit connections to the municipal
separate storm sewer system(s) operated by the Borough of Pine Hill,
so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for the failure to comply.
b. Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this subsection clearly
demonstrates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used
in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is
always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions below are
the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from
humans or household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling
water, process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than
stormwater) to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by
the Borough of Pine Hill, unless that discharge is authorized under a
NJPDES permit other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General
Permit (NJPDES Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections
may include, but are not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the
municipal separate storm sewer system.
§ 12A-5.1 PINE HILL CODE § 12A-5.2
AO:288
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but
not limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or
(c) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Borough of Pine Hill or other public body, and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater. NOTE: In municipalities with
combined sewer systems, "MS4s do not include combined sewer
systems, which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary
sewage at all times and to collect and transport stormwater from
streets and other sources."
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other
than heat) or finished product. Non-contact cooling water may however
contain algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as
heat exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, or political subdivision of this state
subject to municipal jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results
from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product,
finished product, byproduct, or waste product. Process wastewater
includes, but is not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than
non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation
(including rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted
to the subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other
sewerage or drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal
equipment.
c. Prohibited Conduct. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged through an illicit connection to the municipal separate
storm sewer system operated by the Borough of Pine Hill any domestic
sewage, non-contact cooling water, process wastewater, or other
industrial waste (other than stormwater).
d. Enforcement. This subsection shall be enforced by the police
department and/or other municipal officials of Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 12A-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12A-5.2
AO:289
Chapter 13
LITTER, RUBBISH, SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
§ 13-1. LITTER.
§ 13-1.1. Definitions.
As used in this section:
§ 13-1.2. General Prohibitions.
No person shall sweep, throw, deposit or dump litter in or on any property
whether occupied, open or vacant and whether owned by that person, or
in a public place or pond, lake or stream or other body of water within the
borough, except in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles
for collection.
§ 13-1.3. Placing In Receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in a manner which prevents the litter from being
e. Penalties. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions
of this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
a. LITTER - Shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein,
and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein
prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and
welfare.
b. GARBAGE - Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable waste
resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of
food.
c. REFUSE - Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste
(except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and
industrial waste.
d. RUBBISH - Shall mean nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
e. VEHICLE - Shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including
devices used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks.
f. PUBLIC PLACE - Shall mean all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys,
beaches or other public ways, and all public parks, squares, spaces,
docks, grounds and buildings.
§ 12A-5.2 PINE HILL CODE § 13-1.3
AO:290
carried or deposited by the elements upon a public place or upon private
property.
§ 13-1.4. Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited.
No person, including merchants owning or occupying a place of business,
shall sweep into or deposit in a gutter, road, right-of-way or other public
place within the borough the accumulation of litter from a building or lot or
from a public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying
property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter.
§ 13-1.5. Litter Thrown By Persons In Vehicles.
No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle shall throw or deposit
litter in or upon any public or private property.
§ 13-1.6. Transportation From Outside Borough.
No person shall bring, cart, remove, transport or collect any litter from
outside the borough and bring it into the borough for the purpose of
dumping or disposing thereof. No truck or other vehicle containing litter
which has been transported into the borough shall be parked or allowed to
remain standing on any street in the borough or on any public property for
a period in excess of two hours.
§ 13-1.7. Handbills.
Advertisements, handbills, circulars and papers may be distributed in the
borough only if they are so securely placed at each dwelling that they
will not be blown away by the wind; otherwise no person shall place any
advertisement, handbill, circular or paper on or in any public street,
sidewalk, building, or vehicle within the borough.
§ 13-1.8. Merchants To Clean Sidewalk Area.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street, or other public place within the borough the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
driveway or sidewalk. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the borough shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business
premises free of litter.
§ 13-1.9. Littering Parks.
No persons shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the borough
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
persons responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 13-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.10
AO:291
§ 13-1.10. Littering Watercourses And Bodies Of Water.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake or stream
or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the borough.
§ 13-1.11. Littering By Persons In Aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the borough
any litter, handbill or any other object.
§ 13-1.12. Depositing Or Storing Litter On Private Property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the borough, whether owned by such person or not, except that the
owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 13-1.13. Owners To Maintain Premises Free Of Litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit die storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 13-1.14. Littering Open Or Vacant Private Property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the borough, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 13-2. NOTICES TO ABATE: NONCOMPLIANCE PROCEDURES;
COLLECTION OF COSTS INCURRED BY BOROUGH.
a. Notice to Remove. The health officer or any officer listed in subsection
10-1.1 are hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any
property within the borough to properly dispose of litter or debris
located on such owner's property. Such notice shall be by personal
service or by certified mail addressed to said owner at his or her last
known address as determined by the tax office records.
b. Action upon Noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter dangerous to
public health, safety or welfare, within 10 days after receipt of written
notice provided for In paragraph a above, or within 15 days after the
date of such notice In the event the same is returned to the borough
Post Office Department because of its inability to make delivery thereof,
provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of
such owner or agent, the health officer or other enforcing officer is
hereby authorized and empowered to order its disposal by the borough.
§ 13-1.10 PINE HILL CODE § 13-2
AO:292
§ 13-3. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this chapter and upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in an amount not less than $200 minimum or exceeding $1,000 or
be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months or
be so fined and imprisoned both in the direction of the municipal court
judge of the Borough of Pine Hill. Each day that such violation is committed
or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
§ 13-4. ACCUMULATION OR STORAGE OF LITTER, JUNK OR
OTHER WASTE PROHIBITED.
1. Repeated offenses. In the event an owner of property is issued two
notices of violations of this section within a twelve-month period,
the enforcing officer may issue a summons without an opportunity
to comply with a violation of this section.
c. Charges Included in Tax Bill. When the borough has effected the
removal of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual
cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the
date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior
thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next
regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the borough, and said
charge shall be due and payable by said owner at the time of payment of
such bill.
d. Recorded Statement Constitutes Lien. Where the full amount due the
borough is not paid by such owner within 30 days after the disposal of
such Utter, as provided for in paragraphs a and b above, then and in
that case the health officer or other enforcing officer shall cause to be
filed in the Tax Collector's office of the borough a sworn statement
showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work
was done, the location of the property on which said work was done.
The filing of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the
property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in
principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until
final payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be
collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and
further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of 8% in the event same
is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which said
charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in
accordance with the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence
that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has
been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every
person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest,
constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in
the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by
law.
§ 13-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-4.1
AO:293
§ 13-4.1. Maintenance Of Property.
§ 13-4.2. Depositing Of Litter, Junk Or Other Wastes On Private,
Property Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any individual, corporation or other entity to place,
throw or otherwise deposit any litter, trash, junk, debris or other waste
materials on any private property within the Borough of Pine Hill, whether
owned by such individual, corporation or other entity or not.
§ 13-4.3. Notice To Abate Conditions: Removal Of Litter Or Other
Wastes By Borough.
a. The owner, individual or entity in control of any privately owned real
estate in the Borough of Pine Hill shall maintain such real estate and all
improvements thereon in a clean and safe condition, free of litter, trash,
debris, junk or other waste materials in authorized private receptacles
or containers for collection by the municipality or by authorized private
refuse haulers. Provided, further, that this section shall not apply to any
public or private enterprise licensed by any agency, department,
division, subpart or entity of the State of New Jersey and the United
States of America for the collection, storage, maintenance and/or
disposal of litter, waste, junk, debris or trash.
b. It shall be unlawful for any individual, corporation or other entity to
permit the accumulation, maintenance, storage or collection of any
litter, trash, junk, debris or waste materials on any privately owned real
estate or improvements in the Borough of Pine Hill, New Jersey.
c. It shall be unlawful for any individual, corporation or other entity to
permit the accumulation, maintenance, storage or collection of any
objects, articles, or materials of any nature whatsoever which are
unsightly, odorous, annoying to the public or which impair or adversely
impact the aesthetic appearance of the area surrounding such privately
owned real estate.
d. It shall be unlawful for any individual, corporation or other entity to
permit the accumulation, maintenance, storage or collection of any
objects, articles or materials of any nature whatsoever which may
impair or adversely affect the health, safety or welfare of any resident
of the Borough of Pine Hill or of any member of the general public.
a. The health officer, or any other agency, employee or official designated
by the governing body of the Borough of Pine Hill is hereby authorized
and empowered to notify the owner of any privately owned real estate
within the Borough of Pine Hill or the agent of such owner, to properly
dispose of any litter, trash, junk, debris or other waste materials on
such owner's property which may impair or adversely affect the public
health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by personal service or by
certified mail addressed to said owner at last known address.
§ 13-4.1 PINE HILL CODE § 13-4.3
AO:294
b. Action upon Noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter, trash, junk,
debris or waste materials which may impair or adversely affect the
public health, safety or welfare within 10 days after receipt of written
notice provided for in paragraph a above, or within 15 days after the
date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the Borough of
Pine Hill Post Office Department because of its inability to make
delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last
known address of such owner or agent, the health officer or other
enforcing officer is hereby authorized and empowered to order its
disposal by the Borough of Pine Hill.
1. Repeated offenses. In the event an owner of private property is
issued two notices of violation of this section within a twelve-month
period, the enforcing officer may issue a summons without an
opportunity to comply with a violation of this section.
c. Charges Included in Tax Bill. When the Borough of Pine Hill has
effected the removal of such litter, trash, junk, debris or waste materials
or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest
at the rate of 12% from the date of the completion of the work, if not
paid by such property owner on the next regular tax bill forwarded to
such owner by the Borough of Pine Hill, and said charge shall be due
and payable by said owner at the time of payment of such bill.
d. Recorded Statement Constitutes Lien. Where the full amount due the
Borough of Pine Hill is not paid by such owner within 30 days after the
disposal of such litter, trash, junk, debris or waste materials, as
provided for in paragraphs a and b above, then and in that case the
health officer or other enforcing officer shall cause to be filed in the Tax
Collector's office of the Borough of Pine Hill a sworn statement showing
the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was
done, the location of the property on which said work was done. The
filing of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property
and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal
and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final
payment has been made. Said costs and expenses shall be collected In
the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and further, shall be
subject to a delinquent penalty of 18% in the event same is not paid in
full on or before the date the tax bill upon which said charge appears
becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with
the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal
formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done
properly and satisfactorily and shall be full notice to every person
concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a
charge against the property designated or described in the statement
and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law.
§ 13-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-4.4
AO:295
§ 13-4.4. Violations: Penalty.
Any individual, corporation partnership, firm or other entity, of any nature
whatsoever, violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a violation of this section and upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in an amount not exceeding $200 or be imprisoned in the county jail
for a period not exceeding 60 days, or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each
day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 13-5. MANDATORY RECYCLING.28
§ 13-5.1. Definitions.
ALUMINUM — Shall mean all beverage and other containers made of
aluminum, commonly known as "aluminum cans."
ASPHALT SHINGLES — Shall mean and include all shingles composed of
asphalt which are generated at commercial and residential construction
sites.
BIMETAL CANS — Shall mean and include all disposable soda, beer or
other beverage containers or food containers made from a combination of
aluminum and steel or tin-plated steel.
CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION AND LAND CLEARING DEBRIS — Shall
mean and include asphalt, concrete and wood wastes, specifically stumps,
large tree parts, pallets and waste lumber from construction and
demolition, such as boards, two-by-fours, scrap shingles and other wood
structural materials.
CORRUGATED — Shall mean structural material shaped in parallel furrows
and ridges for rigidity, used to make packing and shipping containers.
DRY CELL BATTERIES — Shall mean and include all batteries intended for
general household and/or other use.
GLASS — Shall mean all containers made from silica or sand, soda ash and
limestone, the product being transparent or translucent and being used for
packaging or bottling of various matter, and all other material commonly
known as "glass", excluding, however, blue glass, plate glass and glass
commonly known as "window glass."
LEAVES — Shall mean those materials naturally formed from trees and
bushes that are suitable for composting and mulching purposes.
MAGAZINES — Shall mean and include all magazines or periodicals printed
on glossy stock or paper of heavier quality than that commonly recognized
as "newsprint."
METAL — Shall mean all products made of metal, exclusive of aluminum,
including washers, dryers, refrigerators, stoves, hot water heaters, tire
rims, springs, bicycles, bimetal cans (tin cans) or scrap metal.
28.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 0-85-406.
§ 13-4.4 PINE HILL CODE § 13-5.1
AO:296
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean paper of the type commonly referred to as
"newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals, usual daily or weekly, having
printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and
other matters of public interest. Magazines and periodicals, as well as all
other paper products of any nature, are not considered "newspaper."
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean those items which must be
separated from other solid waste for recycling pursuant to this section.
RECYCLING COORDINATOR — Shall mean the individual designated by the
Mayor and council in accordance with this section.
REGULATIONS — Shall mean and include such rules, implementation
dates, schedules and other requirements promulgated by the recycling
coordinator and approved by the borough council as may be necessary to
carry out the purposes and objectives of this section.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean and include all garbage and rubbish normally
placed at the curb or in containers for regular collection by the municipality
or private companies.
USED OIL — Shall mean a petroleum based or synthetic oil which is used in
an internal combustion engine as an engine lubricant, or as a product used
for lubricating transmissions, gears or axles, which through use, storage or
handling has become unsuitable for its original purpose due to the presence
of chemical or physical impurities or loss of original properties.
WET CELL BATTERIES — Shall mean and include all batteries intended for
automotive use.
WHITE GOODS — Shall mean and include all large appliances which may
be made from metal, steel, cast iron or other material and which may
contain CFC's or HFC's, such as refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners,
humidifiers, stoves, washers and dryers, dishwashers, water heaters and
plumbing fixtures. This list is intended to be typical and is not exclusive.
§ 13-5.2. Mandatory Requirements.
a. On and after effective date of Ordinance No. 85-406 (May 20, 1985), it
shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners, lessees and
occupants of residential property to separate from the municipal solid
waste, used newspaper.
b. On and after effective date of Ordinance No. 86-426 (June 16. 1986), it
shall be mandatory for all persons who are owners, lessees and
occupants of residential property to separate from the municipal solid
waste, glass, aluminum, light metal, and batteries.
c. On and after adoption of this section and in accordance with existing
state regulations (N.J.A.C. 14A:3-11), all service stations, automobile
repair shops and junkyards with used-oil holding tanks shall accept up
to five gallons at a time of used motor oil from individuals changing oil
from cars, lawn mowers or motorcycles and shall post a sign informing
the public that they are a "used-oil collection site."
§ 13-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-5.2
AO:297
d. On and after adoption of this section it shall be mandatory for all
owners, lessees and occupants of residential property to separate grass
clippings from other solid waste and dispose of the same by grass
cycling, home composting or any other manner approved by regulations
of the recycling coordinator.
e. On and after adoption of this section it shall be mandatory for all
owners, lessees and occupants of residential and nonresidential
property to separate wet and dry cell batteries from other solid waste
for recycling or disposal through available hazardous waste collection
programs.
f. On and after adoption of this section it shall be mandatory for all
owners, lessees and occupants of residential and nonresidential
property to separate white goods from other solid waste. These items
shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the recycling coordinator.
g. On and after adoption of this section it shall be mandatory for all
owners, lessees and occupants of residential and nonresidential
property to separate asphalt shingles from other solid waste for
recycling. These items should be directed to an appropriate asphalt
recycling facility approved by the county.
h. On and after adoption of this section it shall be mandatory for all
owners, lessees and occupants of residential and nonresidential
property to separate concrete, asphalt, tree stumps and large tree parts
(over three inches in diameter) from other solid waste and bring the
same to appropriate recycling facilities. Small quantities from
residential properties, however, i.e., less than one-third cubic yard or
approximately two 30 gallon trash cans, shall be exempt from this
requirement.
i. On and after adoption of this section it shall be mandatory for all
applicants for construction and demolition permits to identify disposal
and recycling arrangements for all recyclable materials prior to the
issuance of a permit. In addition, following the demolition of a
structure, a construction permit covering the same site shall not be
issued until the applicant has exhibited a satisfactory bill of lading to
the construction official and recycling coordinator showing that the
debris from the previously demolished structure has been disposed of
at an approved facility.
j. On and after adoption of this section it shall be mandatory for all
persons who are owners, lessees and occupants of residential property
or owners, lessees and occupants of business and industrial property
and of private, public and governmental institutions and buildings to
separate construction, demolition and land debris from all other solid
wastes for collection and ultimate recycling of said materials and bring
the same to appropriate recycling facilities as approved by regulations
of the recycling coordinator.
§ 13-5.2 PINE HILL CODE § 13-5.3
AO:298
§ 13-5.3. Designation Of Recyclable Materials.
The following materials are designated as recyclable under the mandatory
program established by this chapter:
§ 13-5.4. Recycling Coordinator.
a. Aluminum.
b. Asphalt Shingles.
c. Asphalt.
d. Bimetal Cans.
e. Concrete.
f. Corrugated Cardboard.
g. Dry Cell Batteries.
h. Glass.
i. Grass Clippings.
j. Leaves.
k. Newspaper.
l. Wet Cell Batteries.
m. White Goods.
a. Establishment. The position of recycling coordinator is hereby created
and established within the Borough of Pine Hill.
b. The recycling coordinator is the director of environmental affairs or any
other official appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the council.
c. Responsibilities and Authority.
1. The recycling coordinator shall have all of the responsibilities given
to the director of environmental affairs. If the recycling coordinator
is other than the director of environmental affairs any rules or
regulations shall be approved by the governing body and may be
changed, modified, repealed or amended in whole or in part by
majority vote of the council.
2. The recycling coordinator shall also have the following authority:
(a) To designate municipal recycling sites as needed.
(b) To promulgate rules and regulations concerning the
separation, placement, storage, handling and management of
recyclable materials.
§ 13-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-5.4
AO:299
§ 13-5.5. Collection Of Solid Waste Or Recyclable Material.
(c) To establish a schedule for pickup of recyclable materials.
(d) To establish and manage a program to inform and educate the
public.
(e) To perform any other task or duty which is necessary in order
to effectuate the provisions of this section.
a. All separated recyclables and solid waste shall be placed at curbside for
pickup, collection and recycling in strict conformity with the following:
1. Newspapers and magazines shall be separated and secured in
individual bundles, not exceeding 12 inches in height, using twine
or paper bags. Bundles shall not be contained in plastic bags.
2. Aluminum, glass, light metal shall be placed in a labeled recycling
container used for only that purpose.
3. Dry and wet cell batteries shall be disposed of at drop off points
described by the county, recycling coordinator or through available
hazardous waste collection programs.
4. Used-oil shall be disposed of according to subsection 13-5.2c or
through the regulations described by the county or recycling
coordinator.
5. Leaves shall be disposed of according to the regulations described
by the recycling coordinator. All owners, lessees and occupants of
residential and nonresidential property located or residing on
county highways shall not rake leaves onto said highways. These
owners, lessees and occupants of residential and nonresidential
property must have leaves contained in an area or space as not to
create or cause a hazardous condition. This area or space must be
accessible to allow equipment of public works department access
to pick up leaves in a safe, orderly and efficient manner to maintain
the health and welfare of all the public.
(a) County roads are as listed:
(1) Erial Road.
(2) Hickstown Road.
(3) Turnerville Road.
(4) Branch Avenue.
(5) Berlin-Cross Keys Road.
(6) Blackwood-Clementon-Berlin Road.
(7) New Freedom Road.
§ 13-5.4 PINE HILL CODE § 13-5.5
AO:300
§ 13-5.6. General Requirements Or Regulations.
If an area or space is not available, leaves must be bagged.
The public works department must be called for pick up
in order to prevent a safety hazard. Bags still in good
condition shall be left for reuse.
Bags are at the expense of the owners, lessees and
occupants of residential and nonresidential property.
6. Grass clippings shall be disposed of according to subsection
13-5.2d.
7. White goods shall be disposed of according to the regulations
described by the recycling coordinator.
8. Asphalt shingles shall be disposed of according to subsection
13-5.2g.
9. Concrete, asphalt, tree stumps and large tree parts (over three
inches in diameter) shall be disposed of according to subsection
13-5.2h or to the regulations described by the recycling
coordinator.
10. Construction and demolition debris shall be disposed of according
to subsection 13-5.2i and j.
a. No material for recycling or solid waste shall be placed at the curb or
street side earlier than 6:00 p.m. the evening of the day preceding a
scheduled collection day. Material must be placed at the curb or street
side by 7:00 a.m. of a given collection day. Collection shall occur rain or
shine.
b. No material, cans, or bundles for recycling or solid waste shall weigh
more than 50 pounds.
c. All parts of tree branches, wood, woody plants, brush or other like
vegetative materials shall be cut in four-foot lengths and tied in
bundles. Tied bundles shall not exceed 50 pounds.
d. Trash can covers may be removed only at the time of collection and
shall be immediately replaced by the collector after collections.
e. All material for recycling or solid waste shall be stored and held in
receptacles as defined herein. Any trash, rubbish and/or garden refuse
of such a nature or size that it cannot be placed in a receptacle shall be
properly and securely tied into bundles or packages to prevent spilling
or scattering. Such bundles or packages shall be of a size to permit ease
of handling by one man, and shall not in any case weigh more than 50
pounds.
f. Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this section or the rules and regulations of the
§ 13-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-5.6
AO:301
§ 13-5.7. Collection By Unauthorized Persons Prohibited.
From the time of placement at the curb for pickup, collection and recycling,
recyclables shall be the property of the Borough of Pine Hill or its duly
authorized agent. No person unauthorized by the Borough of Pine Hill shall
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such recyclables.
Each collection or pickup of recyclables in violation thereof from any one or
more residences shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable
as hereinafter provided.
§ 13-5.8. Direct Disposal Of Recyclable Material.
Anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any individual,
partnership or corporation who is owner, lessee or occupant of a residential
or nonresidential property may donate, pay for the removal of or sell
said recyclable material, as defined herein, to any individual, partnership
or corporation, whether or not operating for profit. Said individual,
partnership or corporation, however, shall not pick up said recyclable
materials at curbside.
recycling coordinator may be treated as rubbish and collected and
disposed of as such by the agency responsible for the collection thereof.
g. Receptacles shall be conveniently located on the premises for the
storage of the substances and/or materials referred to in this section,
and shall be maintained in such manner as to prevent the creation of a
nuisance or menace to health.
h. The resident, occupant, owner shall keep all receptacles clean and in a
proper condition for safe handling.
i. Immediately after receptacles are properly emptied, they shall be
returned to the point from which they were taken by the resident,
occupant or owner.
j. All solid waste or recyclables shall be thoroughly and completely
drained of all liquids, wrapped securely or covered in containers.
k. All receptacles shall be of metal or plastic, sufficiently strong for the
purpose, and may be pails or cans with a capacity of not less than 2 1/2
nor more than 20 gallons; they shall be watertight and shall have closefitting
metal or plastic covers, and said receptacles shall be kept
covered except when opened for filling or emptying of material.
l. All receptacles must be set by the occupant on the sidewalk in front of
the premises at the curb or street before the time fixed for the
collection of solid waste or recycling under this section.
m. The owner, agent, lessee, tenant and/or occupant of every dwelling and
other premises shall provide and keep on such premises sufficient and
suitable receptacles for receiving and holding the substances and/or
materials referred to herein.
§ 13-5.6 PINE HILL CODE § 13-5.9
AO:302
§ 13-5.9. Reporting Requirements.
§ 13-5.10. Enforcement.
The recycling coordinator and superintendent of public works, Code
Enforcement Officer and/or the Borough of Pine Hill Police Department
or their duly authorized designees are hereby designated and authorized
as the enforcement officers of this chapter. The aforementioned officials
of the Borough of Pine Hill will have the power to issue warnings and/or
summonses for noncompliance with any provisions of this section.
§ 13-5.11. Violations And Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this section shall
be fined not to exceed $500 for each offense, with the first offense being
no less than $50 and the second offense being no less than $100 or be
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 90 days, or be both so fined and
imprisoned. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
§ 13-6. (RESERVED)29
a. All nonresidential establishments, businesses and institutions as well as
multifamily housing developments not served by municipal recycling
collection programs shall provide the recycling coordinator with the
name and address of each hauler who is picking up any type of
recycling material and the type of material being picked up by the
hauler. Each such hauler must be registered with the county. Weight
receipts and/or letters on official company stationery should clearly
describe the quantity and disposition of each material. Those hauling
their own recyclables shall file a quarterly report, which shall be signed
by an officer of the company, with the recycling coordinator within 10
days after a change is made.
b. All individuals or entities collecting recyclable material within the
Borough of Pine Hill must be registered with the county. Each such
individual or entity shall file a quarterly report with the recycling
coordinator, which shall be signed by an officer of the company, within
30 days of the end of each quarter, which shall include the quantities
and destination of each recyclable material which has been collected
from the Borough of Pine Hill residents, businesses and institutions.
The destination of the recyclable material(s) must be approved by the
county. Additionally, such individual or entity shall, within 30 days of the
end of each year, file an annual report with the recycling coordinator,
which shall be signed by an officer of the company, indicating the total
quantities of each recyclable material which have been collected over
the year from Borough of Pine Hill residents, businesses and
institutions.
§ 13-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-7
AO:303
§ 13-7. YARD WASTE COLLECTION PROGRAM.
§ 13-7.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in Borough of Pine Hill, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 13-7.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing state, county, or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves and grass clippings.
§ 13-7.3. Yard Waste Collection.
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this ordinance. If such placement of yard waste
occurs, the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove
the yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of
this section.
29.Editor's Note: Former section 13-6, Program for Mandatory Separation of Glass,
Aluminum, Light Metal and Batteries for Recycling, previously codified herein and
containing portions of Ordinance No. 0-86-426, was repealed by Ordinance No. 96-607.
See section 13-5 for regulations pertaining to the recycling of these materials.
§ 13-7 PINE HILL CODE § 13-7.4
AO:304
§ 13-7.4. Enforcement.
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by Borough of Pine Hill Code
Enforcement.
§ 13-7.5. Violations and Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 13-8. LITTER CONTROL.
(Pursuant to mandatory stormwater control regulations).
§ 13-8.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to establish requirements to control littering
in Borough of Pine Hill, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare,
and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 13-8.2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic,
rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap
or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a container suitable for the depositing
of litter.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 13-8.3. Prohibited Acts and Regulated Activities.
§ 13-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-8.3
AO:305
§ 13-8.4. Enforcement.
This section shall be enforced by the police department and/or other
municipal officials of Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 13-8.5. Penalties.
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.
Chapter 14
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 14-1. DEFINITIONS.
BOARD OF HEALTH — Shall mean the borough board of health.
PORTABLE SWIMMING POOL — Shall mean and include any pool
consisting of a water tight container open at the top, made of fabric, plastic
or any other material and supported by a frame and resting on the ground,
capable of being wholly or partly filled with water, and so constructed
or erected that it may be taken apart and stored when not in use. The
term "portable swimming pool" shall further mean portable swimming pools
capable of being filled to a water depth in excess of 15 inches, with sides
higher than 24 inches with access made by ladder, ramp, step or steps or
any other means and with a circumference greater than 35 feet.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOLS — Shall mean any pool, tank or similar
containers which are artificially constructed, designated or maintained for
baths, wading or swimming purposes and used as an accessory to a
residence by persons living therein or their guests. The term "private
swimming pools" shall also include partly artifical swimming pools, which
shall mean a pool formed by a natural body of water with a limited or
controlled flow or which has an inadequate water flow that shall be
maintained by artificial means. The term "private swimming pools" shall
also mean a pool with a circumference of 35 feet or greater and capable
of being filled to a water depth of 15 inches or more. The term "private
swimming pool" shall further apply to pools located indoors or outdoors;
and constructed or erected level with or below the ground or with sides less
than two feet above ground level.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
b. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this section, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or board shall also be deemed to have
violated this section.
§ 13-8.3 PINE HILL CODE § 14-1
AO:306
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL — Shall mean either outdoor or indoor pools
which are artificially or partly artificially constructed to provide
recreational facilities to the general public for swimming, bathing or
wading.
WADING POOL — Shall mean artificially constructed or erected pools not
designated or used for swimming with a maximum circumference of 35 feet
and a maximum water depth not exceeding 12 inches.
§ 14-2. REGULATIONS
No person shall erect, construct, maintain, operate or use any swimming
pool in the borough, except as herein provided, and unless the same
complies with the requirements of this chapter in all respects.
§ 14-3. PERMITS
It shall be unlawful to establish or construct a private or public swimming
pool without first obtaining a permit therefor in the manner hereinafter
prescribed. No permit shall be required for a wading pool.
Application for a permit to construct a private or public swimming pool
accompanied by four sets of plans and specifications or proper descriptive
brochures and a fee of $15 shall be made to the Building Inspector by
the owner of the property. The Building Inspector shall not pass upon the
structural features or durability of the pool except, in so far as may be
necessary, to assure safe and sound construction in accordance with the
generally acceptable principles of safe swimming pool construction and for
the purpose of insuring compliance with the terms of this chapter. If the
Building Inspector is satisfied with respect to the structural features of the
proposed pool, he shall submit the plans and specifications or brochures to
the Board of health which shall review the same for the purpose of assuring
that the health and sanitary features and equipment of the pool are in
accordance with the terms of this chapter. If the Board of health approves
the plans and specifications, it shall cause a statement to that effect to be
endorsed thereon and return the same to the Building Inspector.
§ 14-4. MATERIAL OF CONSTRUCTION.
All material used in the construction of private swimming pools shall be
waterproof and easily cleaned. The bottom and sides of the pool shall be
either white or a light color, except that aluminum paint shall not be used
as a finish. Sand or earth bottoms shall not be used.
§ 14-5. WATER SUPPLY.
There shall be no physical connection between a potable water, public or
private supply system and such private swimming pool at a point below the
maximum water level of the pool or to a recirculating or heating system
of a pool, unless such physical connection is so installed and operated that
§ 14-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5
AO:307
no pool water can be discharged or syphoned into a potable water supply
system.
§ 14-6. WATER PURITY.
All private swimming pools shall be so constructed, installed and
maintained as to provide necessary equipment for chlorination and other
disinfection and filtering to comply with approved bacteriological standards
as may be promulgated by regulations issued by the borough board of
health.
§ 14-7. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
Private swimming pools shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate
emptying and cleaning, and shall be maintained and operated in such a
manner as to be clean and sanitary at all times. The interior of the pool
shall be constructed with a smooth finish. Inlets shall be so located and
spaced as to secure satisfactory dispersion of inflowing water throughout
the pool, and to permit draining, cleaning and disinfecting of the bottom
and the sides.
§ 14-8. LIGHTING.
No artificial lighting shall be maintained or operated in connection with any
private swimming pool, wading pool, tank or plunge in such manner as to
be a nuisance or an annoyance to neighboring properties.
§ 14-9. FENCING.
All private swimming pools now existing or hereafter constructed, installed,
established or used shall be enclosed by a permanent fence of durable
material at least four feet in height, which fence shall be so constructed
as not to have openings, mesh, holes or gaps larger than four inches in
any dimension except for doors and gates; if a picket fence is erected or
maintained the spacing between pickets shall not exceed four inches. All
gates used in conjunction with the fence shall meet the same specifications
as the fence itself, and shall be equipped with approved locking devices
which shall be self closing, and shall be locked at all times when the private
swimming pool is not in use.
§ 14-10. PORTABLE SWIMMING POOLS.
All portable swimming pools, in lieu of fencing, may be equipped with a
suitable strong cover, which shall be put in place and locked at all times
when the occupant of the dwelling to which the pool is an accessory or
some other responsible person delegated by him is not either in the pool
or attendant thereon. If a portable swimming pool is equipped with a
ladder, stairway, or ramp in order to facilitate entry into the same, such
ladder, stairway, or ramp shall be removed when the pool is not in use and
temporarily unattended.
§ 14-5 PINE HILL CODE § 14-11
AO:308
§ 14-11. LOCATION.
None of the installations as set forth in section 14-1 shall be erected or
placed nearer to a street property line or nearer to a side or rear property
line than herein set forth:
Residential A and B:
Front — Not less than required setback for home.
Rear and Sides — Minimum 15 feet from property line.
Corner residences — Minimum of 25 feet from corner of property line.
No private swimming pool, portable swimming pool or wading pool shall
be constructed or installed on any lot unless the lot is located a residence
building as permitted in the zoning chapter of this revision.
§ 14-12. ENFORCEMENT.
Any nuisance which may exist or develop, in or in consequence of, or
in connection with any private swimming pool, portable swimming pool,
wading pools, tank or plunge, shall be abated or removed by the owners.
Whenever any private swimming pool, portable swimming pool, wading
pool, tank or plunge, by reason of mechanical defects or lack of supervision
is, in the opinion of the Board of health, polluted and detrimental to health,
it shall be summarily closed.
Owners or persons in possession of private swimming pools, portable
swimming pools, wading pools, tanks or plunges shall allow the sanitary
inspector and the Building Inspector access to inspect the pool and the
appurtenances at any time that may be required by the Board of health or
the Building Inspector.
The Board of health may cause any pool, tank or plunge subject to this
chapter to be inspected for compliance with the borough plumbing code.
Any accessory buildings, such as locker rooms, bath houses, cabanas,
shower rooms, toilets, runways or any other physical facility or equipment
incident to the operation of any of the above described shall be in
conformance with the rules and regulations of both the Board of health and
the building code of the borough.
§ 14-13. PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS.
Public swimming pools shall be constructed, maintained, located, altered
and operated in accordance with the "Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey
(1955)".
§ 14-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-14
AO:309
§ 14-14. POLICE ENFORCEMENT.
It shall be the duty of the police department of the borough to enforce
the provisions of this chapter pertaining to regulations, permits and safety
equipment and requirements.
Chapter 15
CABLE TELEVISION AND COMMUNICATIONS
§ 15-1. PURPOSE OF THE ORDINANCE. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 1]
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ 15-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 2]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R.
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
Section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or
conflict with the Federal and State definitions:
a. TOWN or MUNICIPALITY - Shall mean the Borough of Pine Hill, County
of Camden, State of New Jersey.
b. COMPANY - Shall mean the grantee of rights under this chapter and is
known as Comcast of Garden State, L.P.
c. ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT - Shall mean Chapter 186 of the
General Laws of New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto,
N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1, et seq.
d. FCC - Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
e. BOARD or BPU - Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities, State of New
Jersey.
f. OFFICE or OCTV - Shall mean the Office of Cable Television of the
Board.
§ 14-14 PINE HILL CODE § 15-2
AO:310
§ 15-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 3]
Public hearings conducted by the municipality, concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the Company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the Municipality hereby finds
that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the Company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 15-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 4]
The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15 years
from the date of expiration of the previous Certificate of Approval issued
by the Board with a ten-year automatic renewal as provided by N.J.S.A.
48:5A-19 and 25, and N.J.A.C. 14:18-13.6.
In the event that the Municipality shall find that the Company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
chapter, the Municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including modification and/
or termination of the Certificate of Approval; provided however, that the
Municipality shall first have given the Company written notice of all alleged
instances of noncompliance and an opportunity to cure same within 90 days
of that notification.
§ 15-5. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 5]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the Municipality or any higher amount permitted by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
g. BASIC CABLE SERVICE- Shall mean any service tier, which includes
the retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by
the FCC.
h. APPLICATION - Shall mean the Company's Application for renewal of
municipal consent.
i. PRIMARY SERVICE AREA OR PSA - Shall mean and consist of the area
of the municipality currently served with existing plant as set forth in
the map annexed to the Company's application for municipal consent.
§ 15-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-6
AO:311
§ 15-6. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 6]
The consent granted under this chapter to the renewal of the franchise shall
apply to the entirety of the Municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ 15-7. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 7]
The Company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as set
forth in the Company's application. Any extension of plant beyond the
primary service area shall be governed by the Company's Line Extension
Policy, as set forth in the Company's application.
§ 15-8. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
§ 15-8.1. Restoration. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 8]
In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface in the natural
topography, the Company shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such
places or things so disturbed in as good a condition as existed prior to the
commencement of said work.
§ 15-8.2. Relocation. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 8]
If at any time during the period of this consent, the Municipality shall alter
or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place the Company,
upon reasonable notice by the Municipality, shall remove, re-lay or relocate
its equipment, at the expense of the Company.
§ 15-8.3. Removal or Trimming of Trees. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 8]
During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this franchise, the
Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places of the municipality so as
to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires and cable of the Company. Such trimming shall be only to the extent
necessary to maintain proper clearance of the Company's wire and cables.
§ 15-9. CUSTOMER SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 9]
In providing services to its customers, the Company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1, et seq. and all applicable State and Federal statutes and
regulations. The Company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the Municipality Administrator or Clerk.
a. The Company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable State
and Federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
§ 15-6 PINE HILL CODE § 15-9
AO:312
§ 15-10. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. No. 2008-823
§ 10]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the Complaint Officer
for the Municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
Municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by Municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ 15-11. LOCAL OFFICE. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 11]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ 15-12. PERFORMANCE BONDS. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 12]
During the life of the franchise the Company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the Company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ 15-13. SUBSCRIBER RATES. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 13]
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
Federal and State law.
§ 15-14. COMMITMENTS BY THE COMPANY. [Ord. No. 2008-823
§ 14]
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
b. The Company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable State
and Federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of
devices for the hearing impaired and the notification of same to
customers.
c. The Company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
d. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
Municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the
Complaint Officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ 15-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-14
AO:313
§ 15-15. EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS. [Ord. No.
2008-823 § 15]
a. The Company shall provide Total Preferred cable television service on
one outlet at no cost to each school in the Municipality, public and
private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided the school is
within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
school requesting service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on
all additional outlets.
b. The Company shall provide Total Preferred cable television service at
no cost on one outlet to Borough hall, each police, fire, emergency
management facility and public library in the Municipality, provided the
facility is located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each
additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus
labor basis by the Municipality. Monthly service charges shall be
waived on all additional outlets.
c. The Company shall provide free basic Internet service, via high-speed
cable and modem, to one non-networked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future school in the Municipality, public and
private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, at no charge provided
the facility is located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant.
The Internet service shall be installed on a personal computer that is
accessible to the students and not for administrative use only.
d. The Company shall provide free basic Internet access via high-speed
cable and modem on one non-networked personal computer in each
qualified existing and future public library at no charge provided the
facility is located within 175 feet of active cable distribution plant. The
Internet shall be installed on a personal computer that is accessible to
library patrons and not for administrative use only.
e. Within 12 months of receipt of a Renewal Certificate of Approval, the
Company shall provide the Borough with a one-time technology grant in
the amount of $25,500 for the Township's cable and technology related
needs.
a. The Company will continue to provide one hannel for educational and
governmental ("EG") access for the shared use by the residents of Pine
Hill Borough, Berlin Township, Lindenwold Borough and Clementon
Borough (collectively, "Municipalities"). The governing bodies of Pine
Hill Borough, Berlin Township, Lindenwold Borough and Clementon
Borough or a designated educational institution shall provide
educational access video programming. The governing bodies of Pine
Hill Borough, Berlin Township, Lindenwold Borough and Clementon
Borough shall provide government video programming. Unused
capacity may be utilized by the Company subject to the provisions for
"fallow time" below.
§ 15-14 PINE HILL CODE § 15-15
AO:314
§ 15-16. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 16]
The Company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS") rules in
accordance with applicable State and Federal statutes and regulations.
The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the Municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system as
contemplated herein.
b. The Company does not relinquish its ownership of or ultimate right of
control over a channel by designating it for EG use. An EG access user -
whether an educational or government user - acquires no property or
other interest by virtue of the use of a channel so designated, and may
not rely on the continued use of a particular channel number, no matter
how long the same channel may have been designated for such use.
c. The Company shall not exercise editorial control over any educational
or governmental use of channel capacity, except the Company may
refuse to transmit any educational or governmental access program or
portion of an educational or governmental access program that
contains obscenity, indecency, or nudity.
d. The governing bodies of Pine Hill Borough, Berlin Township,
Lindenwold Borough and Clementon Borough shall be responsible for
developing, implementing, and enforcing rules for EG Access Channel
use which shall ensure that the EG Access Channel and the EG Access
Equipment, which shall be provided by the Municipalities, will be
available on a first-come, first served, non-discriminatory basis.
e. Educational Access. "Educational access" shall mean noncommercial
use by educational institutions such as public or private schools, but not
"home schools," community colleges, and universities.
f. Government Access. "Government access" shall mean noncommercial
use by the governing bodies of Pine Hill Borough, Berlin Township,
Lindenwold Borough and Clementon Borough, for showing the public
local government at work.
g. Company Use of Fallow Time. Because blank or under utilized EG
channels are not in the public interest, in the event the municipalities or
other EG access users elect not to fully program their EG access
channel, the Company may program unused time on those channels (at
its discretion and for any purpose), subject to reclamation by the
Municipality upon no less than 60 days' written notice.
h. Indemnification. The municipalities shall indemnify Company for any
liability, loss, or damage it may suffer due to violation of the intellectual
property rights of third parties on the EG channel and from claims
arising out of the municipalities' rules for or administration of access.
§ 15-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-17
AO:315
§ 15-17. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 17]
The Company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ 15-18. INCORPORATION OF THE APPLICATION. [Ord. No.
2008-823 § 18]
All of the statements and commitments contained in the application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference provided same do not conflict with applicable State or Federal
law.
§ 15-19. COMPETITIVE EQUITY. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 19]
Should the Municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity
on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms
contained herein, the Company may substitute such language that is more
favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this chapter
subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ 15-20. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 20]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
Federal or State agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the chapter.
§ 15-21. THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 21]
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ 15-22. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. 2008-823 § 22]
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a Renewal
Certificate of Approval from the BPU.
§ 15-17 PINE HILL CODE § 15-22
AO:316
Chapter 16
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Chapter 16, Land Subdivision, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 52, 60,
206, 264, 297, 0-85-404, 88-462 and 93-543, was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 95-588. For subdivision regulations see
Chapter 23, Land Use.
Chapter 17
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Chapter 17, Zoning, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 169, 170, 194, 199, 207,
208, 215, 218, 244, 250, 258, 265, 267, 275, 278, 332, 337, 373-83,
85-402. 85-416, 88-462, 89-479 and 89-483, was repealed in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 95-588. For zoning regulations see
Chapter 23, Land Use.
Chapter 18
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Chapter 18, Land Use Procedures, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 289, 356,
88-462, 94-560 and 94-562, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 95-588. For land use procedures see Chapter 23, Land Use.
Chapter 19
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Chapter 19, Site Plan Review, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 301,
0-85-403, and 88-462, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
95-588. For site plan review procedures see Chapter 23, Land Use.
Chapter 20
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 20-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 20-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2009-841 § 1.1]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
§ 15-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.1
AO:317
of its citizenry. Therefore, the governing body of the Borough of Pine Hill,
State of New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 20-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2009-841 § 1.2]
§ 20-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2009-841 § 1.3]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
§ 20-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No. 2009-841
§ 1.4]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
a. The flood hazard areas of the Borough of Pine Hill are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 20-1.1 PINE HILL CODE § 20-1.4
AO:318
§ 20-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2009-841 § 2.0]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the Construction Code
Official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO, AH, or
VO Zone on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with
a 1% annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the floodplain
within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 20-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2
AO:319
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the area of
special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built in
the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water,
and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area
of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — Shall mean the Official Map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic. Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
§ 20-2 PINE HILL CODE § 20-2
AO:320
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the Municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is [i] built on a
single chassis; [ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as
a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 20-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2
AO:321
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348) shall mean and includes substantial improvements and means
the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or
other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or
the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 20-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b.
§ 20-2 PINE HILL CODE § 20-3.1
AO:322
§ 20-3.1. Lands to Which This chapter Applies. [Ord. No. 2009-841
§ 3.1]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Borough of Pine Hill, Camden County, New Jersey.
§ 20-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. No. 2009-841 § 3.2]
The areas of special flood hazard for the Borough of Pine Hill, Community
No. 340143, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 20-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. No. 2009-841 § 3.3]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Borough of Pine Hill
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 20-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2009-841
§ 3.4]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 20-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2009-841 § 3.5]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Camden
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated June 16, 2009.
b. "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Camden County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 34007C0117F,
34007C0119E, 34007C0136F, 34007C0137E, 34007C0138E,
34007C0139E whose effective date is June 16, 2009.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part
of this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at the
Borough of Pine Hill Municipal Building located at 45 West 7th Avenue,
Pine Hill, NJ 08021.
§ 20-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.5
AO:323
§ 20-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No. 2009-841
§ 3.6]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of Pine Hill,
any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration,
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 20-4. ADMINISTRATION.
§ 20-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No. 2009-841
§ 4.1]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection
20-3.2. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Construction Code Official and may include, but not be
limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of
the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and,
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 20-5.2b; and,
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
§ 20-3.5 PINE HILL CODE § 20-4.2
AO:324
§ 20-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. No.
2009-841 § 4.2]
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 20-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. [Ord. No.
2009-841 § 4.3]
Duties of the Construction Code Official shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of subsection 20-5.3a are met.
b. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
20-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
Construction Code Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal,
State or other source, in order to administer subsections 20-5.2a,
Specific Standards, Residential Construction, and 20-5.2b. Specific
Standards, Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to Be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection 20-4.1c.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
§ 20-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-4.3
AO:325
§ 20-4.4. Variance Procedure. [Ord. No. 2009-841 § 4.4]
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection
20-4.4.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Planning/Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by the
Borough of Pine Hill shall hear and decide appeals and requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
2. The Planning/Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide
appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Construction Code Official
in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning/Zoning Board of
Adjustment, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the
Superior Court of New Jersey, as provided by law.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Planning/Zoning Board of
Adjustment, shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
§ 20-4.3 PINE HILL CODE § 20-4.4
AO:326
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 20-4.4a,4 and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning/Zoning Board of Adjustment
may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
6. The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing section
20-4.4a, 4(a) — (k) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required
for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
§ 20-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-4.4
AO:327
§ 20-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 20-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2009-841 § 5.1]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in subsection
20-4.4a,4, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
§ 20-4.4 PINE HILL CODE § 20-5.1
AO:328
§ 20-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 2009-841 § 5.2]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 20-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 20-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-5.2
AO:329
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 20-4.3b, Use of Other Base
Flood Data, the following standards are required:
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation;
2. Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base
flood elevation; or
2. Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures; or
together with the attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, shall:
3. Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
4. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
5. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in subsection 20-4.3c,2.
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 20-5.1a,2.
§ 20-5.2 PINE HILL CODE § 20-5.2
AO:330
§ 20-5.3. Floodways. [Ord. No. 2009-841 § 5.3]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
20-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
Chapter 21
SOIL REMOVAL AND SALE
§ 21-1. PERMISSION TO EXCAVATE REQUIRED.
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil or earth for sale or for
use other than on the premises from which the soil or earth shall be taken,
except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on
such premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto, without first
having procured permission therefor from the governing body.
§ 21-2. APPLICATION: FILING OF MAPS.
The governing body shall not consider any application for the removal of
soil or earth from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until the
owner of the premises shall first file with the borough Clerk an application
requesting such permission, together with a map of the premises showing
the contour lines and proposed contour lines and proposed grades resulting
from such intended removal of soil or earth in relation to the topography of
the premises, and said proposed contour lines and proposed grades shall be
subject to inspection and approval of the Borough Engineer and governing
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If subsection 20-5.3 is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 20-5, Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 20-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2
AO:331
body. No such permission for soil or earth removal shall be issued until such
map has been filed and until the proposed contour lines and grades have
been approved by Mayor and council.
§ 21-3. HEARING: FACTORS CONSIDERED.
Upon written request for a hearing made by the applicant to the Mayor
and council, an opportunity to be heard shall be granted within 30 days
thereafter, and the Mayor and council in considering and reviewing the
application and in arriving at its decision shall be guided and take into
consideration the public health, safety and general welfare, and particular
consideration shall be given to the following factors:
§ 21-4. REMOVAL REQUIREMENTS: HOURS OF EXCAVATION.
If permission to remove the soil shall be granted, the owner or person
in charge shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no sharp
declivities, pits or depressions. Following the completion of the removal
of soil, the area shall be cleared of debris and graded to conform to the
contour lines and grades as approved by the Borough Engineer and the
governing body.
The excavation and soil removal operation shall be conducted only between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing time, Monday through
Saturday. The working of the excavation and soil removal operation is
prohibited on Sunday.
§ 21-5. BOND.
Before any permits or permission for soil or earth removal shall be granted
or issued, the owner or applicant shall file with the borough Clerk a bond, in
a. Soil erosion by water and wind.
b. Drainage.
c. Soil fertility.
d. Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
e. Land values and uses.
f. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the borough.
If after examining the application and the map, and after the hearing in
the event a hearing is requested by the applicant, the governing body
shall be of the opinion that the proposed soil removal will not create
conditions inimical to the public health, welfare and safety and will
not result in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions,
soil erosion or fertility problems, depressed land values, nor create any
drainage, sewerage problems or other conditions of danger, permission
to remove the soil shall be granted.
§ 21-2 PINE HILL CODE § 21-5
AO:332
form and with surety acceptable to the governing body, in such amount as in
the opinion of the Mayor and council shall be sufficient to insure the faithful
performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the provisions of the
chapter.
§ 21-6. PERMITS REQUIRED PRIOR TO OPERATIONS: DURATION;
RENEWALS.
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed under the
provisions of this chapter unless a permit therefor shall be made and no soil
shall be removed except in conformity with the provisions of the chapter.
The borough Clerk will issue a permit for the excavation and removal of soil
to the applicant upon compliance with terms of this chapter. Said permit will
be effective for a period of six months from the date of issuance. When the
excavation and soil removal work has been in continuous operation during
the period of the permit and has been performed in accordance with the
conditions under which the original permit was granted, said permit may be
renewed for a further period of six months by the Mayor and council upon
request for renewal from the permittee.
Request for renewal shall be made by letter to the borough Clerk at least 10
days before the expiration of the original permit or any extension thereof.
The letter shall state the name and address of the permittee, the date
of issuance of the permit which is sought to be renewed, the location of
the excavating and soil removal operation within the borough and that the
operation has been continuous, as defined in the chapter.
A continuous operation is one in which the work of excavating and soil
removal is performed on an average of two days of every calendar week,
weather permitting, during the period of the permit.
All permits for excavation and soil removal operation which have been
issued by the Mayor and council prior to the adoption of this chapter and
which are one year old or older must be renewed.
§ 21-7. ENFORCEMENT.
The police department, in its regular patrol of the borough shall establish
whether movement of soil in and through the borough has been authorized
by the procurement of a soil removal permit. Infractions of this chapter shall
be brought to the local court by the police department.
§ 21-8. REPEALER.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are
hereby repealed.
§ 21-9. DEFINITIONS.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 21-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-9
AO:333
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot or parcel of land separated from other lots or
parcels by subdivision, plan or record of survey, as set forth on the Official
Tax Map of the Borough of Pine Hill.
Chapter 22
NATURAL RESOURCES
§ 21-9 PINE HILL CODE § 21-9
AO:334
ARTICLE I
RESOURCE EXTRACTION
§ 22-1. TITLE.
This article may be known and may be cited as the "Pine Hill Borough
Resource Extraction Ordinance."
§ 22-2. DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this article, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context, the following words shall be defined to include and to
mean the following:
BOROUGH — Shall mean the Borough of Pine Hill, Camden County, State of
New Jersey.
BOROUGH CLERK — Shall mean the borough Clerk of Pine Hill or his
designee.
COUNCIL — Shall mean the borough council of Pine Hill.
CUMULATIVE IMPACT — Shall mean the impact on the environment which
results from the incremental impact of the action when added to other past,
present and reasonably foreseeable future actions.
EFFECTS —
EXISTING RESOURCE EXTRACTION OPERATION — Shall mean a lot or
lots which are, at the time of adoption of this article, being extracted as part
of the regular business of the permittee, and shall include the entire tract of
land on which the permittee has a valid permit currently in effect. Adjacent
and/or contiguous land not presently under permit shall not be considered
an existing resource extraction operation.
Includes:
Direct effects, which are caused by the action and occur at the
same time and place.
1.
Indirect effects, which are caused by the action and are later
in time or farther removed In distance but are still reasonably
foreseeable. Indirect effects may include growth-inducing effects
and other effects related to induced changes in the pattern of land
use, population density or growth rate and related effects on air
and water and other natural systems, including ecosystems.
2.
a.
"Effects" and "impacts" as used in this article are synonymous. "Effects"
included ecological, aesthetic, historic, cultural, economic, social or
health, whether direct, indirect or cumulative. "Effects" may also
include those resulting from actions which may have both beneficial
and detrimental effects, even if, on balance, the permittee believes that
the effect will be beneficial.
b.
§ 22-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-2
AO:335
LOT — Shall mean any parcel of land or portion thereof, the boundary lines
of which can be ascertained by reference to the maps and records, or either,
in the office of the Tax Assessor of the Borough of Pine Hill or in the office
of the Camden County Register of Deeds.
PERMITTEE — Shall mean one who is issued a permit or a renewal permit
under the terms thereof.
PERSON — Includes any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
"Premises" shall mean one or more lots of contiguous parcels of land in
single ownership, which ownership can be ascertained by reference to the
maps and records, or either, in the office of the Tax Assessor of Pine Hill or
in the office of the Camden County Register of Deeds.
SOIL — Shall mean both surface (topsoil) and subsoil, and shall include dirt,
stone, gravel, sand, humus, clay, loam, rock, ilmenite, and mixtures of any
of these.
§ 22-3. PROHIBITION OF RESOURCE EXTRACTION OPERATIONS.
The Borough of Pine Hill finds that for the public health, safety and general
welfare of its citizens, all resource extraction operations are now prohibited
throughout the Borough of Pine Hill. The prohibition set forth in this section
shall not apply to any existing resource extraction operation. Any existing
resource extraction operation may continue to operate within the Borough
of Pine Hill if it complies with the requirements set forth herein. Any
renewal permit for existing resource extraction operation shall be subject
to the applicable licensing requirements of this chapter.
§ 22-4. PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EXISTING OPERATIONS.
No person or owner shall cause, allow, permit, or suffer any excavation for
the removal of soil or otherwise remove soil for sale or for use other than
on the premises from which the soil shall be taken without first having
obtained a permit therefor approved by the borough council. Said permit
or a true copy thereof shall be conspicuously posted and displayed on the
entrance to the premises. Notwithstanding the above, the extraction or
mining of soil, other than sand, gravel, clay and ilmenite, is prohibited in
the Pinelands area.
§ 22-5. APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
Before the issuance or removal of a permit, the applicant shall make
application thereof to the office of the borough Clerk and furnish in said
application and accompanying documents the following:
a. The name and address of the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership,
the partnership name and business address, together with the names of
all partners and their residential addresses; if the applicant is a
corporation, the name of the corporation, the place of business of such
corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the names and
§ 22-2 PINE HILL CODE § 22-5
AO:336
addresses of all officers and the positions held in such corporation,
together with the names and addresses of all directors of such
corporation, the names and addresses of all stockholders holding 10%
or more of the stock of the corporation and the name and address of the
legal representative of the corporation.
b. The name and address of the owner or owners of the premises involved;
if the owner or owners are a partnership, then the partnership name
and business address, and the names of the partners, together with
their residential addresses; if the ownership is a corporation, the name
of the corporation, its place of business, the date and state of
incorporation, the names and addresses of all officers and the positions
held in the corporation, the names and addresses of all directors, the
names and addresses of all stockholders holding 10% or more of the
stock of the corporation and the name and address of the legal
representative of the corporation if any.
c. A detailed description of the premises and its location, together with
the Pine Hill Tax Map plate, block and lot number or numbers where the
excavation or soil removal is to be conducted.
d. A map for the premises for which the permit is sought showing the
existing topographical contour lines of the land involved and abutting
lands and roads within 300 feet, showing the existing contour lines of
the land Involved In abutting lands and roads within 300 feet (at one
foot Intervals for slopes at 0% to 12% and at two feet intervals for
slopes 12% to 20% and at five feet intervals for slopes greater than 20%
and at two feet intervals for slopes greater than 12% on U.S.G.S. datum
at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 200 feet), together with a
copy of the United States Geological Survey Quadrangle sheets
showing topographical Information within one mile of the premises; the
proposed topographical contour grades at the same intervals noted for
the existing topography which will result from the intended soil
removal: All roads and buildings, streams and bodies of water within
300 feet of the premises; the names and addresses of adjoining
landowners within 300 feet; existing water drainage conditions; all
wooded areas; the limit of the area or areas on the premises within
which the soil operations or removal is to be conducted and the
dimensions of the premises Is to be conducted and the dimensions of
the premises or lot; the existing elevations of the lands, buildings,
structures, streets, streams, bodies of water and watercourses on the
premises or lot and the proposed final elevations at each point where
existing elevations are shown on the map which are to be changed as a
result of completion of the proposed work; the proposed slopes and
lateral supports at the limits of the areas, upon completion of the
excavation and soil removal operations; the proposed provisions and
facilities for water drainage; and an accurate cross section or sections
showing the location or locations and quantities, in cubic yards, of soil
to be removed; outbounds and topographical survey by a New Jersey
licensed land surveyor; that the location of all wetlands within 300 feet
§ 22-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-5
AO:337
of parcel and locations of all public and private wells within 1,000 feet
of parcel; location of all buildings, lot lines, right-of-way lines and storm
drainage systems within 300 feet of parcel; the schedule of removal and
reclamation is to be included on the plan; soils maps including soils type
and descriptions; soil borings noting seasonal high and ground water
tables. The map shall be prepared by a licensed engineer of the State
of New Jersey.
e. If the owner is not the applicant, written consent of the owner to the
applicant and proposed excavation and soil removal shall be submitted
with the application as well as a statement of the relationship between
the owner and the applicant.
f. Plans showing the place or places where the entrances or exits to the
excavation or area of soil removal operation, fences or buildings are to
be located.
g. A statement of the type and number of pieces of equipment and
apparatus to be used in the excavation and soil removal operations.
h. A statement that the hours of operations will not exceed 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. Such restriction shall apply only to
the entering and/or exiting of trucks but shall not be applicable to any
on-premises mining process equipment such as pumps, conveyors,
loaders and dredges unless the borough council finds that the
extraction operation is within 1,000 feet of any existing residential
premises at time of approval; in which case these restrictions shall
apply to on-premises work.
i. Proof of liability insurance coverage in amounts of not less than
$1,000,000 total for each accident causing personal injury and
$500,000 for property damage for each accident. If available and
economically feasible, specific environmental cleanup insurance shall
be purchased by the applicant with limits to be set by the council. This
requirement may be waived or otherwise reduced by the committee
upon request.
j. The applicant's best estimate of the total cubic yards of soil to be
removed pursuant to the permit, which must be completed by a New
Jersey licensed professional engineer.
k. The applicant's best estimate for the period of time for which the
excavation of soil removal operations will be conducted and the removal
completed.
l. (Reserved)
m. (Reserved)
n. (Reserved)
o. An environmental impact statement.
§ 22-5 PINE HILL CODE § 22-6
AO:338
§ 22-6. ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT.
Attached to the application for a renewal of a permit shall be an
environmental impact statement, in accordance with 42 U.S.G. § 4331 et
seq. The environmental impact statement shall include the following:
a. Purpose. The environmental impact statement shall provide a full and
fair discussion of significant environmental impacts. Statements shall
be concise, clear and to the point and shall be supported by evidence
that the applicant has made the necessary environmental analysis.
b. Implementation. To achieve the purposes in paragraph a, applicants
shall prepare environmental impact statement in the following manner:
1. Environmental impact statements shall be analytic rather than
encyclopedic.
2. Impacts shall be discussed in proportion to their significance. As in
finding of no significant impact, there should be only enough
discussion to show why more study is not warranted.
3. Environmental impact statements shall be kept concise.
4. Environmental impact statements shall include a four-season study
of the impact and effect of the operation on the environment and
shall include a twenty-year projection and impact analysis.
5. (Reserved)
6. Environmental impact statements shall serve as the means of
assessing the environmental impact of proposed applicant's
actions.
7. All factual representatives contained in the statement shall be
under oath or affirmation.
c. Timing. An applicant shall prepare and submit an environmental impact
statement with his application for renewal of a permit so that the final
removal statement is included with the permit application.
d. Writing. Environmental impact statements shall be written in plain
language and may use appropriate graphics so that decision makers
and the public can readily understand them.
e. Recommended Format. Applicants shall use a format for environmental
Impact statements which will encourage good analysis and clear
presentation of the alternatives included in the proposed action. The
following format shall be followed unless there is a compelling reason
to do otherwise:
1. Cover sheet.
2. Summary.
§ 22-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-6
AO:339
3. Table of contents.
4. Purpose of report.
5. (Reserved)
6. Affected environment.
7. List of unavoidable adverse Impacts.
8. List of preparers.
9. Index.
10. Appendixes (If any).
f. Cover Sheet. The cover sheet shall not exceed one page. It shall
include:
1. The title of the proposed action that is the subject of the statement.
2. The name, address and telephone number of the person who can
supply further Information.
3. A designation of the statement as a draft, final or draft or final
supplement.
4. A one paragraph abstract of the statement.
g. Summary. Each environmental Impact statement shall contain a
summary which adequately and accurately summarizes the statement.
The summary shall stress the major conclusions, adverse impacts,
include what impacts are to be addressed but not limited to air, noise,
water supply and quality, wildlife, vegetation, soil erosion, adjacent
uses, traffic, etc. and the issues to be resolved. The summary should
normally not exceed 10 pages.
h. (Reserved)
i. (Reserved)
j. Affected Environment. The environment impact statement shall
succinctly describe the environment of the areas to be affected. Data
and analysis in a statement shall be commensurate with the importance
of the impact, with less important material summarized, consolidated or
simply referenced. Verbose descriptions of the affected environment
are themselves no measure of the adequacy of an environmental Impact
statement.
k. Unavoidable Adverse Impacts. This discussion shall include the
environmental impacts of the proposed action, any adverse
environmental effects which cannot be avoided should the proposal be
implemented, the relationship between short-term impacts on the
immediate site environs and the maintenance and enhancement of longterm
productivity and any irreversible or irretrievable commitments of
§ 22-6 PINE HILL CODE § 22-6
AO:340
§ 22-7. FEES.
Each application for soil removal/resource extraction shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500. Said fee shall
cover the cost of investigating and examining the application and
information therein, legal services, notices, hearings, and other processing
costs.
§ 22-8. ESCROW ACCOUNT.
resources, which would be involved in the proposal should it be
implemented. It shall include discussions of:
1. Direct effects and their significance.
2. Indirect effects and their significance.
3. Possible conflicts between the proposed action and the objectives
of local land use plans, policies and controls for the area
concerned, including a discussion of possible conflicts between the
proposed action and the objectives of the New Jersey Pinelands and
Wetlands Commissions.
4. (Reserved)
5. Energy requirements and conservation potential of various
alternatives and mitigation measures.
6. Natural or depletable resource requirements and conservation
potential of various alternatives and mitigation measures.
7. Means to mitigate adverse environmental impacts.
l. List of Preparers. The environmental impact statement shall list the
names, together with their qualifications (expertise, experience,
professional disciplines), of the persons who were primarily responsible
for preparing the environmental impact statement or certain
background papers, including basic components of the statement.
Where possible, the persons who are responsible for a particular
analysis, including analyses in background papers shall be identified.
m. Appendix. If an applicant prepares an appendix to an environmental
impact statement, the appendix shall:
1. Consist of material prepared in connection with an environmental
impact statement.
2. Normally consist of material which substantiates any analysis
fundamental to the impact statement.
3. Normally be analytic and relevant to the decision to be made.
a. The Borough Engineer shall issue a report to the applicant and to the
borough council 10 days prior to the hearing, regarding an escrow
§ 22-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-8
AO:341
§ 22-9. APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
§ 22-10. PUBLIC HEARING.
account to be provided by the applicant to cover the costs of
professional services to be engaged by the borough council for the
purposes of reviewing applicants and issuing reports hereon. The
Borough Engineer's report shall include the following if the inspection
is to be performed by other than the Borough Engineer or a member of
his staff:
1. The minimum qualifications and scope of duties of said
professionals and defining specific areas which will be addressed
by each professional.
2. The frequency of inspections and reports which the Borough
Engineer feels is necessary to determine compliance with Township
ordinances.
b. The professional services mentioned in paragraph a. above shall
include the Borough Engineer and any other planning or environmental
professionals deemed necessary by the council.
a. The application, other required documents and the following
accompanying documents shall be filed with the borough Clerk:
1. Fee.
2. The report of the Borough Engineer and any other professionals
selected by the council.
3. A copy of the resolution of final approval of any other appropriate
board or agency which may be necessary.
4. A copy of the Camden County Soil Conservation District approval.
b. Within 10 days of the receipt of all of the above required reports and
recommendations, the borough Clerk shall fix the time, place and date
of public hearing to be conducted by the council upon the application
and shall notify the applicant thereof. The public hearing shall be held
within 30 days of the date of the issuance of notice to the applicant to
the borough Clerk.
c. Also, in the event of such hearing, the applicant shall cause public
notice of the application and the time, place and date of public hearing
to be published in a legal newspaper of the borough at least 10 days
prior to the date of the hearing. Said publication shall also indicate the
premises for which the permit is sought by plate, block, and lot number,
as well as by street address or general location. An affidavit of
advertisement shall be provided to the borough Clerk prior to said
hearing. Written notice, with proof of receipt shall be given to all
property owners within 200 feet.
§ 22-8 PINE HILL CODE § 22-10
AO:342
a. At the public hearing, the applicant shall have the right to present
testimony and further evidence and the council may receive testimony
and further evidence or information from any interested person and
reports from any borough official or employee relevant to the
application and the issuance of a permit.
b. In considering and reviewing the application and in arriving at its
decision, the council shall be guided and take into consideration the
reports and evidence adduced at the public hearing and the effect of the
issuance of the permit on the public health, safety and general welfare
and particularly, but not in limitation hereof, the following factors:
1. Soil erosion by water and wind.
2. Drainage and sewer problems.
3. The effect on the water table and/or aquifer which may be affected.
4. Soil fertility.
5. Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting roads and lands.
6. Past and/or present violations of the applicant regarding violation
of any federal, state or municipal law, ordinance or administrative
regulation.
7. Land value and uses of subject parcels.
8. Past and/or present violations of the applicant regarding violations
of any federal, state or municipal law, ordinance or administrative
regulation.
9. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the borough and
any environmental impact thereon.
c. If the council is of the opinion and determines that the proposed
excavations of soil removal will not have an adverse effect on the above
considerations and will not create conditions inimical to the public
health, safety and welfare and will not result in soil erosion or fertility
problems and will not adversely affect the water table and/or existing
aquifers, will not create any drainage or sewage problems or other
conditions of danger to life, personal safety or property, then the
council by resolution, shall approve the application and accompanying
documents subject to such reasonable conditions or restrictions
designed to meet the engineering recommendations or other adverse
objections to the application or proposed excavations or soil removal as
the council may impose. If any application is so approved by the council
and the applicant complies with all other provisions of this article, and
further complies with any and all conditions imposed by the council
within 30 days of the imposition of said conditions or within such other
time limits as the council may impose, then the borough Clerk within 10
days thereafter, shall issue a permit in accordance with such approval
§ 22-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-10
AO:343
§ 22-11. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; TERM.
The permit shall be on a form approved by council. It shall be dated as
of the date it is actually issued by the borough Clerk and shall be signed
by the borough Clerk. The term of the permit shall be two years. No
permit shall be issued until copies of all other necessary permits, from all
other applicable review agencies have been submitted and reviewed by the
Borough Engineer.
§ 22-12. REGULATION OF OPERATION.
No excavation shall be made or soil removed, nor shall any operation be
conducted so as to violate any of the conditions set forth in this article
unless otherwise approved by council.
§ 22-13. INSPECTIONS.
§ 22-14. (RESERVED)
and pursuant to the provisions of this article. If the application is not
approved by the council, then the borough Clerk, within 10 days of
such determination shall notify the applicant in writing of such denial,
together with the reasons therefor.
The council's resolution either approving or denying the permit shall
be in writing and shall set forth the council findings of fact and
conclusions.
d. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, it shall be a condition
precedent to the approval of any application or the issuance of any
permit under this article that an application for soil removal be first
filed with the Camden County Soil Conservation District and that the
Camden County Soil Conservation District approve such soil removal.
a. The permittee shall permit inspection of the premises for the purpose of
determining whether or not the permittee is in full compliance with all
applicable ordinances, statutes and relevant administrative rules and
regulations. Said inspections of the premises shall be permitted to any
reasonable time by such person or persons assigned to conduct such
inspections as set forth in the Borough Engineer's report. Such
inspections may include the depth of the pit. The permittee shall pay
the cost thereof, which costs shall be included as part of the escrow fee
which is deposited with the borough.
b. The inspector shall Issue an inspection report in writing to both the
council and to the permittee within 10 days of any inspection pursuant
to paragraph a. above.
§ 22-10 PINE HILL CODE § 22-15
AO:344
§ 22-15. REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
Upon 10 days' notice and an opportunity to be heard before the council, the
permit of any person may be revoked or suspended for such time or period
as the council may determine for any violation of the terms hereof or the
terms and conditions of any permit granted or issued hereunder or issued
by other authority.
The hearing conducted pursuant to this section shall be held not less than
10 days from the date the permittee receives written notice of said hearing.
The permittee shall be permitted to present evidence at such hearing, and
a verbatim transcript will be kept of the proceedings. Upon the close of the
hearing, the borough council shall set forth by written resolution its findings
of facts and conclusions.
The permittee shall be given a reasonable amount of time to be set by
the council to correct any violations during a period of suspension. If said
violations are not corrected within the time period allotted, the permit may
be revoked.
Appeal may be taken to the New Jersey Superior Court by the permittee in
accordance with the applicable rules of the court.
§ 22-16. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article and/or engages
in excavating, extracting or mining soil or other natural resources within
the Borough of Pine Hill shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000
and/or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or both,
per day for each day of violation.
§ 22-17. SEVERABILITY.
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph. subdivision
or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order or judgement shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or
clause of this article and, to this end, the provisions of each article, section,
subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article are hereby
declared to be severable. In the event that § 179-3 hereof shall be judged
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then all new applicants for
resource extraction permits shall meet all criteria set forth in the remaining
sections.
§ 22-18. CONSTRUCTION OF PROVISIONS.
This article being necessary for the welfare of the Borough of Pine Hill and
its inhabitants shall be considered liberally to effect the purposes thereof.
§ 22-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-19
AO:345
§ 22-19. REPEALER; PROVISIONS SAVED FROM REPEAL.
All ordinances and provisions thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this
article shall and are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency
only.
§ 22-20. ADDITIONAL PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
§ 22-21. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR MINING.
The following performance standards are required for mining:
a. Application for such permits shall be made in writing to the borough
council and shall contain the following information:
1. A plan for the eventual rehabilitation and use of the site covered by
the permit after the resources have been removed, which conforms
to the terms of this chapter. Such a plan, at a scale of not less than
one inch to 400 feet, should be adaptable to the particular
surroundings and in general agreement with the borough master
plan, when adopted. The plan shall show the proposed treatment of
the channel and any adjacent wooded areas considered vital to the
function of the rehabilitated area.
b. The application for a permit or the renewal of a permit shall be
accompanied by a promise by the applicant to faithfully conform and
comply with all applicable performance standards set forth in this
chapter at the time of the application. The borough council shall
require, as a condition of granting the permit, that the applicant
deposit, pledge or place in escrow or in some other satisfactory form,
with the right of substitution, including the possible use of a surety
bond, certain reasonable amounts of security with rights of substitution
for the faithful performance of and compliance with all the performance
standards set forth in the rehabilitation plan. Security shall be provided
in an amount determined by the Planning Board engineer in accordance
with the plan of rehabilitation submitted to the borough council.
Security required shall be held or shall continue for the term of the
permit while the land is rehabilitated. Any promise of security herein
shall be terminated 10 days after the applicant or others on his behalf
shall have delivered to the borough council the certificate of a
registered professional engineer or licensed surveyor setting out that
area upon which release of the security is sought has been rehabilitated
in substantial compliance with the requirements of the rehabilitation
plan or some amended or alternative plan mutually satisfactory to the
Zoning Officer. Any security shall be so drafted so that if the permit
expires as provided herein and the site is not rehabilitated within 18
months thereafter, the security shall be forfeited to pay for the
rehabilitation of the site according to the rehabilitation plan. In the
Pinelands area of the borough, a performance guarantee shall be
required for all resource extraction operations.
§ 22-19 PINE HILL CODE § 22-21
AO:346
a. Standards Relating to Property.
1. All equipment used for mining shall be constructed, maintained and
operated in such a manner as to reduce, as far as is practical, noise,
vibration and dust.
2. Setbacks. Extraction shall not be conducted closer than 200 feet to
the boundary of any zone where such operations are not permitted,
nor shall such extraction be conducted closer than 200 feet to the
boundary of an adjoining property line, unless the written consent
of the owner of such adjoining property is first secured. Extraction
shall be conducted closer than 200 feet to the center of the right-ofway
line of any dedicated and accepted street, road or highway.
3. Buildings shall conform to the schedule of minimum requirements
for established districts as set forth In the Zoning Ordinance of the
Borough of Pine Hill.
4. Restriction of access. For any excavation within a one-fourth mile
radius of which there are any residential units and which
excavation results in or produces, for a period of at least one
month, collections of water or slopes at least as steep as 1 1/2 feet
horizontal to one foot vertical, there shall be placed a gate or full
time guard across all access roads to public highways.
5. Roads. All access roads from extraction operations to public
highways, roads or streets to adjoining property shall be paved,
treated or watered so far as is practicable to minimize dust
nuisances.
b. Standards Relating to Production and Processing.
1. All mining operations shall be conducted in a manner not
inconsistent with the rehabilitation plan and in such a manner that
the objectives of the plan may be realized after the sand and gravel
have been removed.
2. If overburden is stockpiled in either windrows or concentrated
piles, it shall be stabilized in a manner so that it does not become a
source of dust and dirt to adjacent property owners. Topsoil, when
practicable, shall be stockpiled separately from the rest of the
overburden.
3. No operation shall accumulate or discharge beyond the property
lines any waste matter In violation of the applicable standards of
the New Jersey State Department of Health.
c. Standards Relating to Land Rehabilitation:
1. The parties to the permit for extraction mining are responsible for
the rehabilitation of the area in substantial compliance with the
rehabilitation plan on file with the borough council.
§ 22-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-21
AO:347
2. Dry pit rehabilitation. The dry pit may be backfilled with sand,
gravel, overburden, topsoll or other nonnoxious, nonflammable,
noncombustible solids. For excavations backfilled and
rehabilitated, the following requirements shall be met:
(a) The graded or backfilled area shall not permit stagnant water
to collect or remain therein.
(b) The finished topography and surface of the area shall be in
such a manner as to not be uncomplimentary with the
surrounding area.
(c) The finished final condition of the area shall be in substantial
compliance with the rehabilitation plan.
3. Wet pit rehabilitation. Like dry pit rehabilitation, the wet pit may be
filled. Filling must be accomplished in accordance with the
conditions set for the dry pit rehabilitation. In the alternative, the
wet pit may be converted into a lake, in accordance with the
rehabilitation plan approved by the borough council.
(a) All banks shall be sloped to the water line at a slope which shall
not be steeper than four feet horizontal to one foot vertical.
(b) All banks shall be stabilized unless otherwise called for on the
approved rehabilitation plan.
(c) Stabilization shall be accomplished by surfacing with soil of a
thickness of at least four inches.
(d) The finished condition of the rehabilitated area shall be in
substantial conformance with the rehabilitation plan.
d. Within the borough, the following standards for the operation and
restoration of mining or resource extraction operations shall apply.
Resource extraction activities shall:
1. Be designed so that no area of excavation, sedimentation pond,
storage area, equipment or machinery or other structure or facility
is closer than:
(a) Two hundred feet to any property line.
(b) Three hundred feet to any residential or nonresource
extraction related commercial use which is in existence on the
date the permit is issued.
2. Be located on a parcel of land at least 20 acres.
3. Provide that all topsoil that is necessary for restoration will be
stored on the site and will be protected from wind or water erosion.
4. Be fenced or blocked so as to prevent unauthorized entry into the
resource extraction operation through access roads.
§ 22-21 PINE HILL CODE § 22-21
AO:348
5. Provide ingress and egress to the resource extraction operation
from public roads by way of gravel or porous paved roadways.
6. Be designed so that the surface runoff will be maintained on the
parcel in a manner that will provide for onsite recharge to ground
water.
7. Not involve excavation below the seasonal high water table unless
the excavation will serve as a recreational or wildlife resource or a
water reservoir for public, agricultural or industrial uses or for any
other use authorized in the zoning district in which the site is
located, provided that in no case shall excavation have a depth
exceeding 65 feet will result in no significant adverse impact
relative to the proposed final use or on off-site areas.
8. Be carried out in accordance with an extraction schedule which
depicts the anticipated sequence as well as anticipated length of
time that each 20 acre unit of the parcel proposed for extraction
will be worked.
9. Not Involve clearing adjacent to ponds in excess of 20 acres or an
area necessary to complete scheduled operations or will not
Involve unreclaimed clearing exceeding 100 acres or 50% of the
area to be mined, whichever is less for surface excavation at any
time.
10. Involve restoration of the disturbed areas at the completion of the
resource extraction operation in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) Restoration shall be a continuous process, and each portion of
the parcel shall be restored such that the ground cover be
established within two years and tree cover established within
three years after resource extraction is completed for each
portion of the site mined.
(b) Restoration shall proceed in the same sequence and time
frame as set out in the extraction schedule required in
paragraph d, 8. above.
(c) All restored areas shall be graded so as to conform to the
natural contours of the parcel, to the maximum extent possible,
and the slope of surface of restored surfaces shall not exceed
one foot vertical to three feet horizontal except as provided in
this paragraph d, 10.
(d) Topsoil shall be restored in approximately the same quality and
quantity as existed at the time the resource extraction
operation was initiated.
(e) Drainage flows, including direction and volume, shall be
restored, to the maximum extent practical to those flows
§ 22-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-21
AO:349
§ 22-22. WAIVER OF COMPLIANCE; ADVISORY BOARD.
In recognition of the fact that there may arise In connection with this
chapter problems of such a nature that some degree of expertise is required
in order to best evaluate such problems in light of the purpose of this
chapter and the public interest, said responsibility shall be delegated to the
Planning Board of Pine Hill, which body shall consider such problems as
may arise under this chapter, and shall, subsequent to such consideration,
make recommendations to the borough council in connection with any
action to be taken, which recommendations may include the advisability of
the granting of a waiver or waivers. The borough council shall in no way be
bound by the recommendations of this board, which shall at all times act
exclusively in an advisory capacity.
existing at the time the resource extraction operation was
initiated.
(f) Any body of water created by the resource extraction operation
shall have a graded shore line with a slope not to exceed one
foot vertical to eight feet horizontal.
(g) All equipment, machinery and structures, except for structures
that are unusable for recreational purposes or any other use
authorized in the area, shall be removed within six months
after the resource extraction operation Is terminated and
restoration is completed.
(h) Reclamation shall, to the maximum extent practical, result In
the reestablishment of the vegetation association which
existed prior to the extraction activity.
§ 22-21 PINE HILL CODE § 22-22
AO:350
Chapter 24
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
§ 24-1. USE OF PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS.
§ 24-1.1. Conduct.
While In a public park or recreation area, all persons shall conduct
themselves in a proper and orderly manner, and in particular no person
shall:
a. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
paving materials, public utilities or appurtenances thereof, signs,
notices or placards (whether temporary or permanent), monuments,
stakes, posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or
equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever,
either real or personal.
b. Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition.
c. Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs, plants or other
means.
d. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind (whether
permanent or temporary) or run or string any public service utility into,
upon, or across such lands, except on special written permit issued
hereunder.
e. Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure
the bark, or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or otherwise
disturb grassed areas, or in any other way injure the natural beauty or
usefulness of any area.
f. Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, planters,
fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not designated or
customarily used for such purposes.
g. Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
h. Hunt, molest, kill, wound, trap, abuse, shoot, pursue, or throw objects
at, or have in his/her possession any animal, reptile or bird found within
any park, nor shall their habitats be disturbed, except where
specifically designated and permitted. No person shall purchase, sell,
accept or give away any such animal, reptile, bird or eggs except as
may be specifically provided for and permitted.
i. Throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in any
park or any tributary stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing into such
§ 22-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.1
AO:351
water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which may result
in the pollution of said waters.
j. Have brought in, dump in, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass,
ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, garbage, refuse, or organic or inorganic
solid or liquid waste.
k. Drive or park any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or
parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary parking areas by the Borough of Pine Hill.
l. Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking areas
or elsewhere in the park areas. No motor vehicle shall be parked in said
park areas from 1/2 hour after sunset until sunrise, except as otherwise
permitted.
m. Ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others.
n. Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving or set against trees, or in
any place or position where a person may trip over or be injured by it.
o. Swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in any park, except in
such waters and at such places as may be specifically designated for
such activities.
p. Bring into or operate any boat, raft, or other watercraft, whether motor
powered or not, upon any waters, except at places designated for
boating by the Borough of Pine Hill. Such activity shall be in accordance
with applicable regulations as are now or will hereafter be adopted.
q. Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
r. Shooting into park areas from beyond boundaries is forbidden. No
person shall carry or possess firearms of any description, or air-rifles,
spring-guns, bow and arrows, slings or any other forms of weapons or
devices potentially inimical to wildlife or dangerous to human safety, or
any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any
kind of trapping device, except as may be specifically permitted.
s. Violate the regulation that use of individual fireplaces together with
tables and benches follows the generally accepted rule of "First come.
First served."
t. Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or structures
therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other
persons, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an
unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
u. Set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of
overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing
hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used or that could
be used for such purpose, such as a house-trailer, camp-trailer, camp-
§ 24-1.1 PINE HILL CODE § 24-1.1
AO:352
wagon, or the like except in those areas designated by the Borough of
Pine Hill for those purposes.
v. Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails, where permitted.
Horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, and ridden
with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor
shall they be hitched to any rock, tree, or shrub.
w. Bring alcoholic beverages or drink same at any time except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated and permitted
by the Borough of Pine Hill.
x. Have in his/her possession, set or otherwise cause to explode,
discharge or burn, any fireworks, firecrackers, or explosives or
flammable material, or discharge them or throw them into any such
areas from lands or highways adjacent thereto.
y. Be responsible for the entry of a dog or other domestic animal into
areas clearly marked by the Borough of Pine Hill signs bearing the
words "Domestic Animals Prohibited in this Area." All domestic animals
in those areas where such animals are permitted shall be adequately
restrained at all times.
z. Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private
except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated
and permitted by the Borough of Pine Hill.
aa. Build, or attempt to build, a fire except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated by the Borough of Pine Hill. No
person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes, cigars, tobacco, paper or other flammable material within
any park or on any highways, roads, or streets abutting or contiguous
thereto.
bb. Gamble, participate in, or abet any game of chance except in such areas
and under such regulations as may be designated by the Borough of
Pine Hill.
cc. Go onto the ice on any waters except such areas as are designated as
skating fields, and provided a safety signal is displayed.
dd. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
ee. Expose, or offer for sale, any article or thing, nor place any stand, cart
or vehicle for the transportation, sale, or display of any such article or
thing. Exception is made for any permittee or licensed concessionaire
acting by and under the authority and regulation of the Borough of Pine
Hill.
ff. Paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or
inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect, or cause to be erected,
any sign on any park lands or roads in any park.
§ 24-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.1
AO:353
gg. No person shall be permitted under the influence of intoxicating
beverages, drugs or narcotics. No person shall possess or distribute for
consumption alcoholic beverages without the required permits issued
from the borough Clerk's office, and the approval of the governing body.
No person shall possess, distribute or consume drugs, or narcotics in or
upon any borough park or recreation area.
hh. No group of 10 or more persons shall use a borough park, recreation
area or playground without first having obtained a permit approved by
the Board of recreation commission from the borough Clerk's office at
least 15 days before the proposed date of use. Group use shall be
limited to designated areas. Adult supervision of children's groups is
required at all times.
ii. No person shall call or hold any public meeting or give any concert or
public entertainment of any kind within a Borough of Pine Hill park,
recreation area or playground without first having obtained written
permission from the Board of recreation commission by applying to the
borough Clerk's office for same in writing at least 15 days before the
proposed date of use.
jj. No person shall use loudspeakers, public address systems or amplifiers
within a Borough of Pine Hill park or recreation area without first
having obtained written permission from the Board of recreation
commission by applying to the borough clerks office for same in writing
at least 15 days before the proposed date of use.
kk. 1. Dogs, horses, animals or pets, domestic or wild, are not permitted
within any Borough of Pine Hill park or recreation area at any time
either on a leash or at large.
2. No person shall ride, drive, lead or keep a saddled horse or other
animal within a Borough of Pine Hill park or recreation area except
when a permit has been issued by the borough for a special event,
such as a circus, pet show, fair, etc.
ll. 1. No person shall pick flowers, foliage, berries or fruit or cut, break,
dig up or in any way mutilate or injure any tree, shrub, plant, fern,
grass, turf, railing, seat, fence, structure or any other object within
a borough park or recreation area.
2. No person shall plant or bring into or upon any Borough of Pine Hill
park or recreation area any tree, shrub, or plant or any newly
plucked branch or portion of a tree, shrub or plant without written
permission from the governing body.
3. No person shall dig up, excavate, quarry, or remove any dirt, stone,
rock, sand or other substance whatever, or set off any blast, or
cause or assist in doing any of said things within a Borough of Pine
Hill park or recreation area.
§ 24-1.1 PINE HILL CODE § 24-1.1
AO:354
§ 24-1.2. Public Use And Availability Of Park And Recreation Areas.
4. No person shall build, construct, tear down, improve or alter any
buildings or recreation fields or borough property without written
permission from the governing body.
5. No person who is not a borough employee or approved volunteer,
shall perform field maintenance in any Borough of Pine Hill park or
recreation area without written permission from the governing
body prior to any work being performed.
mm.No person shall build, light or maintain a fire within a Borough of Pine
Hill park or recreation area except in a permanent grill installed,
maintained or designated for that purpose by the Borough of Pine Hill.
Portable grills and camp stoves are prohibited.
nn. No person shall coast with hand sleds, bobsleds, skis, carts,
skateboards or other vehicles on wheels, or runners within a Borough of
Pine Hill park or recreation area, except in areas so designated and
posted for that purpose.
oo. No person shall throw, cast, catch, kick, or strike any baseball, golf ball,
football, basketball or any other object within a Borough of Pine Hill
park or recreation area except in areas designated and posted for that
purpose.
pp. No person shall use motorized or powerless flying objects or devices,
either for landing or taking off, within a Borough of Pine Hill park or
recreation area except in areas designated and posted for that purpose.
a. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during designated hours. The opening
and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted therein for
public information and shall be determined from time to time by
resolution of the Borough of Pine Hill.
1. Designated hours for opening and closing of parks and
playgrounds. Parks and playground areas of the Borough of Pine
Hill shall be open to the public from dawn to dusk only except in
those areas lighted for night activities; provided, however, that all
lights shall be extinguished at 9:30 p.m. prevailing time, Sundays to
Thursdays, and at 10:30 p.m. prevailing time, Fridays and
Saturdays. In the event there is a special occurrence held by the
controlled youth organizations within the municipality, lights may
be on later than 9:30 p.m. prevailing time, but only until such
activities have been completed and visitors have left the area.
2. No person shall enter upon any parks or play areas at any other
time except for emergency purposes, unless by permit of the
Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 24-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.2
AO:355
§ 24-1.3. Permits For Special Events/Activities.
Permits for special events/activities in parks must be obtained by
application to the Borough of Pine Hill in accordance with the following
procedures:
b. No person shall, on the grounds of race, color, national origin, religion,
age, sex, or handicap be excluded from participation in, be denied the
benefits of, or be otherwise subjected to discrimination in, any park
facility, program, or activity.
c. Discrimination on the basis of residence, including preferential
reservation, membership, or annual permit systems is prohibited except
to the extent that reasonable differences in admission and other fees
may be maintained on the basis of residence in any park.
d. Subsection 24-1.2 shall apply to all public parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas owned or leased by the Borough of Pine Hill, including
Veteran's Park.
a. Definition. Special events/activities: Is any event or activities other than
normal daily use activities; i.e. tournaments or any sports event
controlled by the Youth Organizations or of persons, organizations or
corporations for use of facilities by permit.
b. Permit Applications Procedures:
1. Permit applications shall be picked up and returned to the office of
the Clerk with a certificate of insurance, 15 days before the
proposed date of use.
2. Permit applications will be forwarded to the Board of recreation
Commissioners for approval.
3. Board of recreation Commissioners shall approve or deny within a
period of seven days from the receipt of the permit application and
shall return application to the office of the Clerk for issuing a
permit. From time of receipt of approval or denial of the permit
application from the Board of recreation Commissioners, the Clerk
shall have three working days to issue the permit or to comply with
subsection 24-1.3b.
4. Application will be on a form approved by the governing body.
5. Liability insurance. The applicant for a permit is required to
provide a certificate of insurance for comprehensive general
liability with a minimum combined bodily injury and property
damage limit of $1,000,000 and shall include the Borough of Pine
Hill be named as an additional insured.
6. Appeal process. In the event the Board of recreation
Commissioners deny a permit application the applicant has the
right to appeal to the governing body of the Borough of Pine Hill in
§ 24-1.2 PINE HILL CODE § 24-1.3
AO:356
§ 24-1.4. Enforcement.
writing to the borough Clerk. The borough Clerk shall present the
appeal to the governing body; appeal may be heard at the next
regular council meeting.
c. Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Borough of Pine Hill shall
include the following findings:
1. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with, or detract from, the general public enjoyment of the
park.
2. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with, or detract from, the promotion of public health, welfare,
safety and recreation.
3. That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated
will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
4. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the date and hour requested in the application.
d. Within 10 days after the receipt of an application for permit, the
Borough of Pine Hill shall apprise an applicant in writing of its reasons
for refusing a permit, and provide for an appeal process.
e. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances fully as though the same were inserted in said
permits.
f. The person(s) to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for all loss,
damage, or injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the
negligence of the person(s) to whom such permit shall have been
issued. The Borough of Pine Hill shall have the right to require any
permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to
members of the general public arising as a result of such permitted
activities in such amounts as may be from time to time determined by
the Borough of Pine Hill prior to the commencement of any activity or
issuance of any permit.
g. Revocation. The Borough of Pine Hill shall have the authority to revoke
a permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon
good cause shown.
a. The Borough of Pine Hill or its designated agents shall, in connection
with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of
this ordinance.
b. The Borough of Pine Hill or its designated agents shall have the
authority to eject from the park any person(s) acting in violation of this
ordinance.
§ 24-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.4
AO:357
§ 24-1.5. Fees.
c. The Borough of Pine Hill or its designated agents shall have the
authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing, or device in the
park, or used, in violation of this ordinance.
d. This section shall also be enforced by the Borough of Pine Hill Police
Department of the municipality.
e. Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance or any rule
or regulation promulgated pursuant hereto, shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the replacement, repair or restoration of any damaged park
property and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 and in default
of payment thereof may be sentenced to imprisonment in the County
Jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
a. The Board of recreation Commissioners upon approval from the
governing body, may restrict the use of a park area for an exclusive
purpose and may charge fees accordingly for upkeep, improvement and
supervision of same. Fees may be developed for each individual project
and will be considered on an individual case basis. All fees shall be
reasonable and nonrestrictive.
b. A fee schedule shall be prepared by the Board of recreation,
Commissioners to be approved by the governing body by resolution.
The schedule may include the following categories:
1. Yearly, seasonal, monthly, weekly, daily; individual, group or family;
2. Resident, nonresident, handicapped, senior citizens,
disadvantaged;
c. Fees collected shall be used only for the operation, maintenance and/or
for capital expenses related to the recreation facility or program as a
whole provided, however, that priority shall be given to the facility for
which the fee revenues were taken. A trust account shall be established
by the Borough of Pine Hill for this purpose.
d. Fees collected for revenues from facilities leased for an approved
temporary use (see N.J.A.C. 7:36-6.9) shall be used only for the
operation, maintenance and/or for capital expenses related to the
recreation facility or program as a whole.
e. Any payments, fees or rental shall be charged and collected directly by
the Borough of Pine Hill and shall be used to offset the operating cost of
the recreation programs as a whole in accordance with N.J.A.C.
7:36-1.8(e)
f. On parks/recreation areas considered Green Acres, no fee shall be
charged over $2 per person, unless approved by the State Department
of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Green Trust Management.
§ 24-1.4 PINE HILL CODE § 24-1.5
AO:358
§ 24-1.6. Signs.
§ 24-1.7. Green Acre Lands Designated As Recreation And Open
Space Inventory.
g. No change in the approved fee schedule for Green Acres parks or
recreation areas over $2 shall be made without prior approval by the
State Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Green Trust
Management.
a. In areas where appropriate, signs indicating the accessibility of the
facility to the handicapped shall be posted.
b. Permanent commercial billboards or any other type of displayed
advertising or promotion of products or services is prohibited.
c. Posting of political campaign signs on the site is prohibited.
d. Posting of signs shall be placed at the entrance of each park,
playground or recreation area designating the hours of operation
according to subsection 24-1.2a,1.
e. Posting of signs shall be placed at the entrance of each park,
playground or recreation area designating "Domestic Animals
Prohibited In Park, Playground or Recreation Area."
f. Posting of signs shall be placed at the entrance of each park,
playground or recreation area designating "Rules and Regulations" to
comply with this section.
g. At Green Acres parks/recreation areas, a sign available from the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Green Trust
Management, shall be in a prominent place indicating that the site was
acquired and/or developed with State of New Jersey Green Acres
Financial Assistance.
h. At Green Acres parks/recreation areas, posting of signs that restrict
public access or use shall be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Green Trust Management, in
advance of posting.
a. Green Acre Lands designated for recreation and open space purposes
are identified on the following list and may not be disposed of, or
diverted for any other use than recreation or conservation purposes
without prior written approval of the Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Green Trust Management and have been
recorded with the Office of the Camden County Clerk.
1. Little Mill Road, Block 1.01, Lot 5;
2. Davis Avenue, Mills Lane and Hillside Avenue, Block 80, Lot 1-6
and 15-23;
§ 24-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.7
AO:359
Chapter 25
TAX ABATEMENT FOR HOME IMPROVEMENTS
§ 25-1. DEFINITIONS.
ASSESSOR — Shall mean the officer of a taxing district charged with the
duty of assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMPLETION — Shall mean substantially ready for the intended use for
which a building or structure is constructed, improved or converted.
CONDOMINIUM — Shall mean a property created or recorded as a
condominium pursuant to the "Condominium Act", P.L. 1969, c.257
(C.46:8B-1 et seq.).
DWELLING — Shall mean a building or part of a building used, to be used or
held for use as a home or residence, including accessory buildings located
on the same premises together with the land upon which such building or
buildings are erected and which may be necessary for the fair enjoyment
thereof, but shall not mean any building or part of a building, defined
as a "multiple dwelling" pursuant to the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling
Law," P.L. 1967, c.76 (C.55:13A-1 et seq.). A dwelling shall include, as
they are separately conveyed to individual owners, individual residences
within a cooperative, if purchased separately by the occupants thereof, and
individual residents within a horizontal property regime or a condominium,
but shall not include "general common elements" and "common elements"
of such horizontal property regime or condominium as defined pursuant to
the "Horizontal Property Act," P.L. 1963, c. 163 (C.46:8A-1 et seq.), or the
"Condominium Act." P.L. 1969, c.257 (C.46:8B-1 et seq.), or a cooperative, if
the residential units are owned separately.
EXEMPTION — Shall mean that portion of the Assessor's full and true value
of any improvement, conversion alteration, or construction not regarded as
increasing the taxable value of a property pursuant to this act.
IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean a modernization, rehabilitation, renovation,
alteration or repair which produces a physical change in an existing
building or structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or
attractiveness of the building or structure as a place for human habitation
and which does not change its permitted use. In no case shall it include the
3. Open Space adjacent to Penn Reading Seashore Line, Block 131,
Lot 16;
4. DeCou Road Playground, Block 4, Lots 18, 20, 22, and 24;
5. Joey Green Recreation Area, Block 112, Lot 5 and 6, Turnerville/
Hickstown Road; and
6. Charles Bowen Recreation Complex, Block 142, Lots 10, 11, and
12; Block 145, Lots 14 and 15; Block 146, Lots 15-21; Block 147,
Lots 14-27; Block 148, Lots 1-13; and Block 149, Lots 1 and 3.
§ 24-1.7 PINE HILL CODE § 25-1
AO:360
repair of fire or other damage to a property for which payment of a claim
was received by any person from an insurance company at any time during
the three-year period immediately preceding the filing of an application
pursuant to this act.
§ 25-2. DETERMINATION OF VALUE OF PROPERTY.
In determining the value of real property for the purpose of taxation, the
first $15,000 in the Assessor's full and true value of improvements for each
dwelling unit primarily and directly affected by the improvement in any
dwelling more than 20 years old, shall not increase the value of the property
for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the value of the property to
which the .' improvements are made is increased thereby.
§ 25-3. ASSESSMENTS DURING EXEMPTION PERIOD.
During the exemption period for dwellings, the assessment on the property
shall not be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately prior to
the improvements, unless there is damage to the structure through action
of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.
§ 25-4. BASIS FOR TAXATION.
The Assessor shall determine, on October 1st of the year following the date
of the completion of an improvement, the true taxable value thereof. The
amount of tax to be paid for the first full tax year following completion shall
be based on the assessed valuation of the property for the previous year.
The property shall continue to be treated in the appropriate manner for
each of the five full tax years subsequent to the original determination by
the Assessor.
§ 25-5. ADDITIONAL IMPROVEMENTS.
Additional improvements completed on a property granted a previous
exemption during the period in which such previous exemption is in effect,
shall be qualified for an exemption just as if said property had not received
a previous exemption. In such case, the additional improvement shall be
considered as separate for the purpose of calculating the exemption,
provided however, that in any tax year the total exemption for any dwelling
or commercial structure shall not exceed the amount set forth in section
25-3 of this chapter.
§ 25-6. TAXES TO BE PAID.
No exemption shall be granted, pursuant to this chapter with respect to any
property for which property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid, or for
which penalties for non-payment of taxes are due.
§ 25-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 25-7
AO:361
§ 25-7. APPLICABILITY OF EXEMPTIONS.
The exemption of real property taxes provided pursuant to this chapter shall
apply to property taxes levied for municipal purposes, school purposes,
county government purposes, and for the purposes of funding any other
property tax exemption or abatements.
§ 25-8. GRANTING OF EXEMPTIONS.
No exemption shall be granted pursuant to this chapter except upon written
application therefor filed with and approved by the Assessor of the Borough
of Pine Hill. Every application shall be on a form prescribed by the Director
of the Division of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, and provided
for the use of claimants by the governing body and shall be filed with the
Assessor within 30 days, including Saturdays and Sundays, following the
completion of the improvement. Every application for exemption, which
is filed within the time specified, shall be approved and allowed by the
Assessor to the degree that the application is consistent with the provisions
of this chapter, provided that the improvement for which the application is
made qualifies as an improvement pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
The granting of an exemption shall be recorded and made a permanent part
of the official tax records of the borough, which record shall contain a notice
of the termination date thereof.
§ 25-9. TIME LIMIT FOR FILING APPLICATIONS.
No application for exemption shall be filed for exemptions to take initial
effect for the sixth full tax year commencing after the tax year in which
this chapter is adopted30 or any tax year thereafter, unless this chapter is
readopted by the governing body pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40a:21-4.
Chapter 26
TAX EXEMPTION AND ABATEMENT FOR COMMERCIAL AND
INDUSTRIAL IMPROVEMENTS
§ 26-1. PREAMBLE; GENERAL AUTHORIZATION.31 [Ord. No.
2018-960]
a. P.L. Chapter 441, and N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq., enables "qualified
municipalities" to abate from local property taxes certain industrial and
commercial properties. The Department of Community Affairs has
determined that the Borough of Pine Hill is a "qualified municipality"
and has been granted that status. The Mayor and Borough Council of
the Borough of Pine Hill have determined that the best interest of the
Borough is served by encouraging the renovation and rehabilitation of
30.Editor's Note: This chapter was adopted September 16, 1996 and was thereafter readopted
September 18, 2000 and again readopted October 24, 2005.
31.Editor's Note: Prior history includes Ord. Nos. 96-614, 2003-728 and 2005-753.
§ 25-7 PINE HILL CODE § 26-1
AO:362
§ 26-2. SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 2018-960]
To be considered for tax abatement a new commercial or industrial
structure must contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet of floor space for
use. The commercial or industrial structure may be divided into ownership
interests of less than 5,000 square feet as long as the structure itself is at
least 5,000 square feet. In this type structure the initial applicant must seek
tax abatement for the lesser ownership interests, as may be approved by
the Borough Planning Board, and any future owner of the lesser interest
shall meet the conditions which initially qualified the property for tax
abatement to continue to receive this benefit. An enlargement of an existing
commercial or industrial structure must be more than 30% of the existing
volume of the structure as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-9. An improvement to
an existing commercial or industrial structure must meet the requirements
as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-3n.
§ 26-3. APPLICATION PROCEDURE. [Ord. No. 2018-960]
existing commercial and industrial structures and the construction of
new commercial and industrial structures. The Mayor and Borough
Council of the Borough of Pine Hill have determined that it is in
the best interest of the municipality to enter into agreements with
qualified applicants for Tax Abatement on commercial and industrial
construction projects pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et
seq., as may be amended, providing an abatement from real property
taxation on said projects for a period of up to five years, and further
providing for payments in lieu of taxes to be made to the Borough.
The Mayor and Borough Council previously approved a Tax Abatement
Ordinance as codified in Chapter 26 of the Borough Code and Tax
Abatement ordinances are to be Readopted every 10 years. Upon
review of the existing Chapter 26 it has been determined that
Amendments should be made to said Chapter as part of the readoption
process.
b. The Borough of Pine Hill may enter into agreements with applicants for
tax abatement on commercial and industrial projects which satisfy the
article requirements hereinafter set forth. The agreement shall provide
for an abatement from real property taxation on these projects for a
period of not more than five years. During such five-year period, the
agreement shall provide for payments to the Borough of Pine Hill in lieu
of full property taxes, which payment shall be calculated as set forth
hereinafter in this article. Applications for abatement from taxation
may be filed to take effect for the first full year commencing after the
tax year in which the authorizing ordinance is adopted, and upon
completion of the project for tax years thereafter as set forth in P.L.
1991, C. 441 (N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.), but no application for tax
abatement shall be filed for an abatement to take initial effect for the
11th full tax year or any tax year occurring thereafter unless this article
is readopted by the governing body of the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 26-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-3
AO:363
a. A preliminary application is required to be filed with the Borough of
Pine Hill, with a copy to the Borough governing body, prior to the
issuance of a construction permit for the project. No construction
permit shall be issued to an applicant seeking tax abatement until such
time as the preliminary application has been filed in accordance with
the Borough ordinance requirements and the Construction Office
advised of same in writing by the Borough Tax Assessor. If a preliminary
application is not filed, said property will not be eligible for tax
abatement. In the event a construction permit is not issued within one
year from the date the preliminary application is filed, the preliminary
application shall be deemed null and void.
b. Upon the filing of a preliminary application, the Borough Tax Assessor
will review said application to determine if it meets the requirements of
the Borough ordinance for abatement and a tax abatement agreement.
The Tax Assessor shall provide this determination to the Borough
governing body within 60 days of receipt of a properly completed
preliminary application. In the event the Tax Assessor determines that
the application meets the ordinance requirements, then the Borough
Committee shall adopt an ordinance authorizing a tax abatement
agreement with the applicant, subject to the following conditions:
1. That the applicant shall file a final application for tax abatement
with the Tax Assessor in the form prescribed, within 30 days,
including Saturdays and Sundays, following completion of
construction. A copy of the final application shall also be filed with
the governing body. Failure to file shall automatically void the
preliminary application approval.
2. Completed construction shall be in accordance with the original
Borough approvals on which the tax abatement agreement was
initially authorized based on the preliminary application.
3. The applicant has continued to meet the requirements of the
Borough ordinance for tax abatement.
c. Every properly completed final application for abatement shall be
evaluated for approval by the Borough Tax Assessor within 30 days of
filing. The Tax Assessor shall notify the governing body in writing of the
approved determination. Upon receipt of the written approval from the
Borough Tax Assessor a Resolution shall be adopted for the appropriate
Borough officials to then proceed to execute the tax abatement
agreement previously authorized by the specific ordinance adopted as
part of the preliminary application approval process. The applicant
shall be required to sign this tax abatement agreement prior to the
Borough signatories.
d. Separate applications must be filed for each building involved in phased
projects.
e. In the event the use listed on the preliminary application is changed
subsequent to the issuance of the construction permit for the project,
§ 26-3 PINE HILL CODE § 26-3
AO:364
§ 26-4. FORM OF PRELIMINARY AND FINAL APPLICATION. [Ord.
No. 2018-960]
The preliminary and final application must be on a form prescribed by the
Borough Tax Assessor and by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the
Department of Treasury, and shall provide the following information:
Borough Council shall adopt an ordinance authorizing a tax abatement
with the applicant, provide that the new one is of a type listed in
this chapter as a qualifying project, that the applicant has submitted
a revised preliminary application listing the new use, and that the
Borough Tax Assessor determines that the revised preliminary
application meets the requirements of this chapter.
a. A general description of this project for which abatement is sought;
b. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
c. Plans and drawings including a site layout on the total lot area, and
other documents as may be required by the governing body to
demonstrate the structure and design of the project;
d. A description of the number, classes, types of employees and average
estimated wages and salaries by employee class, to be employed at the
project site within two years of the completion of the project;
e. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax abatement on the project,
and a description of the benefits to be realized by the applicant, if tax
abatement is granted;
f. Estimates of the cost of completing such project;
g. A statement showing:
1. The real property taxes currently being assessed at the project site;
2. Estimated tax payments that would be made annually by the
applicant on the project during the period of tax abatement; and
3. Estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on the
project during the first year following the termination of the tax
abatement agreement.
h. A description of any lease agreements between the applicant and
proposed users of the project, and a history and description of the
user's business;
i. Proof of payment of taxes through the current quarter;
j. Other pertinent data regarding the relationship, agreements and status
of other properties owned by the applicant within the Borough of Pine
Hill; and
k. Such other pertinent information as the governing body may require.
§ 26-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-5
AO:365
§ 26-5. PROJECTS QUALIFYING FOR PROGRAM. [Ord. No.
2018-960]
The following type projects/uses will be considered for Tax Abatement by
the Borough of Pine Hill:
§ 26-6. PAYMENTS IN LIEU OF FULL PROPERTY TAXES. [Ord. No.
2018-960]
a. Light industrial, light manufacturing and indoor warehousing facilities
which are nonpolluting and nonnoxious;
b. Scientific or industrial research engineering laboratory, testing or
experimental laboratory or similar establishment for research or
product development;
c. Administrative offices;
d. Wholesale distributorships;
e. Experimental, research testing, dental or medical laboratories;
f. Carpet or rug cleaning, laundry and dry cleaning;
g. Job printing and newspaper or book publishing;
h. Baking and food and dairy processing;
i. Corporate and professional offices;
j. General service and repair shops, including carpenter, cabinet making,
furniture repair, plumbing or similar shop;
k. Office of a builder, carpenter, caterer, cleaner, decorator, electrician,
furrier, mason, painter, plumber, roofer, upholsterer and similar
businesses, excluding open storage of materials and excluding open
storage of motor vehicles;
l. Veterinary hospital, provided that all animals are kept in a permanent
enclosed structure and are not within 150 feet of any existing
residential use or zone;
m. Businesses and instructional school, including trade school;
n. Nursing homes, philanthropic clinics, residential health care faculties
and convalescent centers;
o. General commercial establishments permitted by zoning;
p. Accessory uses on the same lot with and customarily incidental to any of
the above-permitted uses as approved by the Borough Planning Board;
and
q. Charter schools.
§ 26-5 PINE HILL CODE § 26-6
AO:366
a. All tax abatement agreements must be authorized by a separate
Ordinance for each application.
b. A tax abatement agreement shall provide for the application to pay to
the Borough in lieu of full property tax payments an amount annually to
be computed by the following formula:
Tax Phase-In Basis
The applicant must pay to the Borough in lieu of full property tax
payments an amount equal to a percentage of taxes otherwise due,
according to the following schedule:
1. In the first full calendar year after completion, no payment in lieu of
taxes otherwise due;
2. In the second full calendar year, an amount not less than 20% of
taxes otherwise due;
3. In the third calendar year, an amount not less than 40% of taxes
otherwise due.
4. In the fourth calendar year, an amount not less than 60% of taxes
otherwise due;
5. In the fifth calendar year, an amount not less than 80% of taxes
otherwise due.
c. All tax agreements entered into by virtue of this article shall be in effect
for no more than five full tax years next following the date of completion
of the project. Within 30 days of the execution of a tax abatement
agreement, the Borough shall forward a copy of said agreement to the
Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs.
d. No exemption or abatement shall be granted, or tax agreement entered
into, with respect to any property for which property taxes are
delinquent or remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment of
taxes are due.
e. If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax agreement, the
property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property, or fails to
meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would have
otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable
from the property owner as if no abatement had been granted. The
property owner shall advise the Borough of any change in use or
ownership prior to same occurring. Failure to so advise shall be cause
to declare the property owner in breach of the tax abatement
agreement. The Borough governing body shall notify the property
owner and the Tax Collector of the disqualification, and upon such
notice, the Tax Collector shall within 15 days thereof notify the owner of
the property of the taxes due and payable to the Borough. With respect
to the disposal of property, where it is determined that the new owner of
§ 26-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-6
AO:367
§ 26-7. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2018-960]
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ASSESSOR — Shall mean the officer of the Borough of Pine Hill charged
with the duty of assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure
or part thereof used for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of
material or manufactured products, or for research, office, industrial,
commercial, retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or warehousing
purposes, or for any combination thereof, which the governing body
determines will tend to maintain or provide gainful employment within
the municipality, assist in the economic development of the municipality,
maintain or increase the tax base of the municipality and maintain or
diversify and expand commerce within the municipality. It shall not include
any structure or part thereof used or to be used by any business relocated
from another qualifying municipality unless the total square footage of the
floor area of the structure or part thereof used or to be used by the business
at the new site together with the total square footage of the land used or to
be used by the business at the new site exceeds the total square footage of
that utilized by the business at its current site of operation by at least 10%;
and the property that the business is relocating to has been the subject of
a remedial action plan costing in excess of $250,000 performed pursuant to
an administrative consent order entered into pursuant to authority vested
in the Commissioner of Environmental Protection.
COMPLETION — Shall mean substantially ready for the intended use for
which a building or structure is constructed.
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean the development of a commercial or
industrial structure or the enlargement of the volume of an existing
commercial or industrial structure by more than 30%, but shall not mean
the conversion of an existing building or structure to another use.
IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean a modernization, rehabilitation, renovation,
alteration, or repair which produces a physical change in an existing
building or structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or
attractiveness of the building or structure as a place for human habitation
or work, and which does not change its permitted use. In the case of
commercial or industrial structures, it shall not include ordinary painting,
the property will continue to use the property pursuant to the
conditions which qualified the property for tax abatement, no tax shall
be due and the agreement shall remain in effect. The new owner shall
be required to submit necessary information to the Tax Assessor to
verify continuing eligibility for the tax abatement benefit.
f. At termination of the tax abatement agreement, the property shall be
subject to all applicable real property taxes as provided by law; but
nothing herein shall prohibit a project, at the termination of an
agreement, from qualifying for and receiving the full benefits of any
other tax preferences provided by law.
§ 26-6 PINE HILL CODE § 26-7
AO:368
repairs and replacement of maintenance items, or an enlargement of the
volume of an existing structure by more than 30%. In no case shall it include
the repair of fire or other damage to a property for which payment of a claim
was received by any person from an insurance company at any time during
the three-year period immediately preceding the filing of an application
pursuant to this chapter.
PHASED PROJECTS — Shall mean commercial or industrial construction
involving multiple structures that are built separately.
§ 26-8. APPLICATION FEE. [Ord. No. 2018-960]
An application filing fee of $300 shall be paid by the applicant at the time
of filing the preliminary application. The application fee will provide for
the administrative services to be undertaken by the Borough Tax Assessor,
and any other Borough official, in order to render a determination on the
applicant's eligibility for a tax abatement. The filing fee shall cover the
cost for both the preliminary application and final application review and
determination process.
§ 26-9. ESCROW FOR FIVE-YEAR TAX ABATEMENT AGREEMENTS.
[Ord. No. 2018-960]
a. Every tax abatement agreement required by this article shall be subject
to payment of a nonrefundable escrow in the amount of $500 to be paid
by the applicant at the time the applicant submits a preliminary
application to the Tax Assessor in accordance with Section 26-3 of this
chapter. The required escrow shall be used to pay the cost of
professional review by the Borough Solicitor, Engineer, or the
professionals employed by the Borough to review and make
recommendations regarding the tax abatement agreement.
b. At the time of submission of an application to the Borough Tax Assessor,
the applicant shall be required to execute an escrow agreement with
the Borough to cover all necessary and reasonable costs incurred for
the technical and professional review of the tax abatement agreement.
The amounts specified for escrow are estimates which shall be paid
prior to the Borough's review of the tax abatement application. In the
event an additional amount is required for more than the amount
specified in the escrow agreement, the applicant shall pay all additional
sums required prior to the Borough's execution of the tax abatement
agreement.
c. To the extent not otherwise inconsistent with this section, the escrow
fee required by this chapter shall be administered by the Chief
Financial Officer of the Borough in the manner and as set forth
generally in Chapter 23 Land Use of the Code of the Borough of Pine
Hill, captioned "Land Use."
§ 26-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-9
AO:369
Chapter 27
PUBLIC UTILITY POLE OR UNDERGROUND FACILITY
PLACEMENT
§ 27-1. NOTIFICATION OF MUNICIPAL OFFICIAL REQUIRED.
Before a public utility places, replaces or removes a pole or an underground
facility located in the Borough of Pine Hill, the public utility shall notify both
the municipal engineer and the municipal Clerk in writing, which may be
by fax or e-mail, at least, but not less than 24 hours before undertaking
any excavation related to the replacement or removal of the utility pole
or underground facility, which pole or underground facility is used for the
supplying and distribution of electricity for light, heat or power, or for
the furnishing of water service or telephone or other telecommunications
service on or below a public right-of-way in the municipality. The Borough
Council of the Borough of Pine Hill shall notify any public utility that
provides service in the borough of the application of the provisions of this
chapter.
For the purposes of this chapter, "underground facility" means one or more
underground pipes, cables, wires, lines or other structures used for the
supplying and distribution of electricity for light, heat or power or for
the providing of water service, or for the furnishing of telephone or other
telecommunications service.
§ 27-2. REMOVAL OF DEBRIS; RESTORATION OF PROPERTY.
After completing the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or an
underground facility pursuant to this chapter, the public utility shall remove
from such right-of-way any pole or underground facility no longer in use
as well as any other debris created from such placement, replacement
or removal and restore the property including, but not limited to, the
installation of a hot patch as needed to restore the property within the
right-of-way to its previous condition as much as possible. As used in this
section, "hot patch" means the installation of a mixture of asphalt to restore
property within the right-of-way to its previous condition subsequent to the
construction or excavation of a site required for the placement, replacement
of an underground facility pursuant to this section.
§ 27-3. POLE DEFINED.
For the purposes of this section, "pole" means, in addition to its commonly
accepted meaning, any wires or cable connected thereto, and any
replacements therefor which are similar in construction and use.
d. The Township Clerk or his/her designee shall maintain an itemized
account of the escrow on deposit for each application and shall, upon
the request of the applicant, supply a copy of said account.
§ 26-9 PINE HILL CODE § 27-4
AO:370
§ 27-4. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
In the event a public utility does not meet the requirements of section
27-2 of this chapter concerning the removal of debris and the restoring
of property including, but not limited to, the installation of a hot patch,
within a right-of-way to its previous condition within 90 days of placement,
replacement or removal of a pole or an underground facility, said public
utility will be fined up to an amount not to exceed $100 each day until the
requirements of section 27-2 are met, except that if the public utility is
unable to complete the installation of a hot patch due to the unavailability
of asphalt material during the period of time from November through April,
the public utility shall not be required to complete the hot patch installation
until 60 days immediately following the end of November through April
period. At least five business days prior to the end of the ninety-day period
established by this section, the municipality shall notify the public utility
that the penalties authorized by this section shall begin to be assessed
against the utility after the end of the ninety-day period unless the utility
complies with the requirement of section 27-2 of this chapter. Any penalty
imposed shall be collected or enforced in a summary manner, without a jury,
in any court of competent jurisdiction according to the procedure provided
by "The Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq. The
Superior Court and municipal court shall have jurisdiction to enforce the
provisions of this section. In the case of removal or replacement of a pole or
an underground facility utilized by two or more public utilities, the public
utility last removing its pipes, cables, wires, lines or other structures shall
be liable for the removal and restoration required under section 27-2 of this
section, unless a written agreement between the public utilities provides
otherwise.
§ 27-5. EXCEPTIONS IN EMERGENCY CONDITIONS.
Under emergency conditions which significantly impact the placement of
a pole or underground facility resulting from natural forces or human
activities beyond the control of the public utility, or which pose an imminent
or existing threat of loss of electrical, water, power, telephone, or other
telecommunication service, or which pose an imminent or existing threat
to the safety and security of persons or property, or both, or which require
immediate action by a public utility to prevent bodily harm or substantial
property damage from occurring, the provisions of section 27-1 of this
section shall not apply when a public utility undertakes any construction
or excavation related to the placement, replacement or removal of a pole
or an underground facility in response to such an emergency, provided
that the public utility undertaking such construction or excavation notifies
the municipal engineer and the municipal Clerk of Pine Hill at the earliest
reasonable opportunity and that all reasonable efforts are taken by the
public utility to comply with the removal and restoration requirements of
section 27-2 of this section after responding to the emergency.
Chapter 28
§ 27-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-5
AO:371
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
§ 28-1. AFFORDABLE HOUSING OBLIGATION COMPLIANCE.
§ 28-1.1. Affordable Housing Obligation. [Ord. No. 2009-832 § 1]
§ 28-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2009-832 § 2]
The following terms used in this section shall have the meanings given in
this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — Shall mean the entity responsible for the
administration of affordable units in accordance with this section, N.J.A.C.
5:96, N.J.A.C. 5:97 and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
AFFORDABLE — Shall mean a sales price or rent within the means of
low- or moderate-income household as defined in N.J.A.C. 5:97-9; in the
case of an ownership unit, that the sales price for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6, as may be amended and
supplemented, and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the
unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12, as may be
amended and supplemented.
a. This section is intended to assure that low- and moderate-income units
("affordable units") are created with controls on affordability over time
and that low- and moderate-income households shall occupy these
units. This section shall apply except where inconsistent with applicable
law.
b. The Borough of Pine Hill's Planning Board has adopted a Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law
at N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The Fair Share Plan has been endorsed by
the governing body. The Fair Share Plan describes the ways the
Borough of Pine Hill shall address its fair share for low- and moderateincome
housing as determined by the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) and documented in the Housing Element.
c. This section implements and incorporates the Fair Share Plan and
addresses the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:97, as may be amended and
supplemented.
d. The Borough of Pine Hill shall file monitoring reports with COAH in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96, tracking the status of the
implementation of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan. Any plan
evaluation report of the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and
monitoring prepared by COAH in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:96 shall be
available to the public at the Borough of Pine Hill's Municipal Building,
Municipal Clerk's Office, 45 West 7th Avenue, Pine Hill, New Jersey, or
from COAH at 101 South Broad Street, Trenton, New Jersey and on
COAH's website, www.nj.gov/dca/affiliaites/coah.
§ 27-5 PINE HILL CODE § 28-1.2
AO:372
COAH — Shall mean the Council on Affordable Housing, which is in, but
not of, the Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey,
that was established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.)
DCA — Shall mean the State of New Jersey Department of Community
Affairs.
UHAC — Shall mean the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
§ 28-1.3. (Reserved)
§ 28-1.4. (Reserved)
§ 28-1.5. (Reserved)
§ 28-1.6. Administration. [Ord. No. 2009-832 § 3]
a. The position of Municipal Housing Liaison (MHL) for the Borough of
Pine Hill is established by this section. The Pine Hill Borough Council
shall make the actual appointment of the MHL by means of a resolution.
1. The MHL must be either a full-time or part-time employee of the
Borough of Pine Hill.
2. The person appointed as the MHL must be reported to COAH for
approval.
3. The MHL must meet all COAH requirements for qualifications,
including initial and periodic training.
4. The Municipal Housing Liaison shall be responsible for oversight
and administration of the affordable housing program for the
Borough of Pine Hill, including the following responsibilities which
may not be contracted out to the Administrative Agent.
(a) Serving as the Municipality's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the State, affordable housing providers,
Administrative Agents and interested households;
(b) When applicable, supervising any contracting Administrative
Agent;
(c) Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Borough of
Pine Hill's Fair Share Plan;
(d) Compiling, verifying and submitting annual reports as required
by COAH;
(e) Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
Administrative Agents, as applicable; and
§ 28-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-1.6
AO:373
§ 28-1.7. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2009-832 § 20]
Appeals from all decisions of an Administrative Agent designated pursuant
to this section shall be filed in writing with the Executive Director of COAH.
§ 28-2. DEVELOPMENT FEE.
§ 28-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2008-826 § 1]
(f) Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH.
b. The Borough of Pine Hill shall designate by resolution of the Borough
Council, subject to the approval of COAH, one or more Administrative
Agents to administer newly constructed affordable units in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:96, N.J.A.C. 5:97 and UHAC.
c. An Operating Manual shall be provided by the Administrative Agent(s)
to be adopted by resolution of the governing body and subject to
approval of COAH. The Operating Manuals shall be available for public
inspection in the Office of the Municipal Clerk and in the office(s) of the
Administrative Agent(s).
d. The Administrative Agent shall perform the duties and responsibilities
of an Administrative Agent as are set forth in UHAC and which are
described in full detail in the Operating Manual, including those set
forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, 16 and 18 thereof, which includes:
1. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
2. Affirmative Marketing;
3. Household Certification;
4. Affordability Controls;
5. Records retention;
6. Resale and rerental;
7. Processing requests for unit owners; and
8. Enforcement, through the ultimate responsibility for retaining
controls on the units rests with the municipality.
9. The Administrative Agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities,
hereunder.
§ 28-1.6 PINE HILL CODE § 28-2.1
AO:374
§ 28-2.2. Basic Requirements. [Ord. No. 2008-826 § 2]
§ 28-2.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2008-826 § 3]
a. In Holmdel Builder's Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (the
Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-301 et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to
the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption of rules.
b. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 section 8 (C. 52:27D-329.2) and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (C. 40:55D-8.1 through
8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and promulgate regulations
necessary for the establishment, implementation, review, monitoring
and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust funds and
corresponding spending plans. Municipalities that are under the
jurisdiction of the Council or court of competent jurisdiction and have a
COAH-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
c. This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and
expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's regulations and in
accordance P.L. 2008, c.46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees collected
pursuant to this section shall be used for the sole purpose of providing
low- and moderate-income housing. This section shall be interpreted
within the framework of COAH's rules on development fees, codified at
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.
a. This section shall not be effective until approved by COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.1.
b. The Borough of Pine Hill shall not spend development fees until COAH
has approved a plan for spending such fees in conformance with
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.10 and N.J.A.C. 5:96-5.3.
a. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a
development included in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and
includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100% affordable development.
COAH OR THE COUNCIL — Shall mean the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing established under the Act which has primary
jurisdiction for the administration of housing obligations in accordance
with sound regional planning consideration in the State.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a
lot or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other
person having an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
§ 28-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-2.3
AO:375
§ 28-2.4. Residential Development Fees. [Ord. No. 2008-826 § 4;
Ord. No. 2009-839]
§ 28-2.5. Nonresidential Development Fees. [Ord. No. 2008-826 § 5]
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Shall mean money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — Shall mean the assessed value of a
property divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value
for the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined
in accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c.123 (C.54:1-35a
through C.54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Shall mean those strategies that
minimize the impact of development on the environment, and enhance
the health, safety and well-being of residents by producing durable,
low-maintenance, resource-efficient housing while making optimum use
of existing infrastructure and community services.
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Within the Borough of Pine Hill Zoning district(s), residential
developers, except for developers of the types of development
specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of 2 1/2% of the
equalized assessed value for residential development provided no
increased density is permitted.
2. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of a
maximum of 6% of the equalized assessed value for each additional
unit that may be realized. However, if the zoning on a site has
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a
variance application, the base density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest density
permitted by right during the two-year period preceding the filing
of the variance application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a
site that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1% of the
equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the specified
higher percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed value for the
two additional units, provided zoning on the site has not changed
during the two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance
application.
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2.5% of the equalized assessed value of the land
§ 28-2.3 PINE HILL CODE § 28-2.5
AO:376
and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
2. Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2.5% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from any
additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2.5%
shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e. land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for
Nonresidential Development.
1. The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2.5% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
2. The 2.5% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
3. Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption" Form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
4. A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.46 shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
5. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable
by the Borough of Pine Hill as a lien against the real property of the
owner.
§ 28-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-2.6
AO:377
§ 28-2.6. Collection Procedures. [Ord. No. 2008-826 § 6]
a. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval,
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the Construction Official or the designated municipal
official responsible for the issuance of a building permit.
b. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed
as per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
c. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local Tax Assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
d. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
e. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local Assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
f. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
g. Should the Borough of Pine Hill fail to determine or notify the developer
of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days of the
request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the amount due
and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute process set
forth in subsection b. of section 37 of P.L. 2008, c.46 (C.40:55D-8.6).
h. 50% of the development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of
the building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be
responsible for paying the difference between the fee calculated at
building permit and that determined at issuance of certificate of
occupancy.
i. Appeal of Development Fees.
§ 28-2.6 PINE HILL CODE § 28-2.6
AO:378
§ 28-2.7. Affordable Housing Trust Fund. [Ord. No. 2008-826 § 7]
1. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the Borough of
Pine Hill. Appeals from a determination of the Board may be made
to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
2. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of
Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the Director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account
by the Borough of Pine Hill. Appeals from a determination of the
Director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et
seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing
party.
a. There is hereby created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund
to be maintained by the Chief Financial Officer or the Deputy Treasurer
for the purpose of depositing development fees collected from
residential and nonresidential developers and proceeds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls.
b. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and
amount:
1. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
2. Developer contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
3. Rental income from municipally operated units;
4. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
5. Recapture funds;
6. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
7. Any other funds collected in connection with the Borough of Pine
Hill's affordable housing program.
c. Within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account, the
Borough of Pine Hill shall provide COAH with written authorization, in
§ 28-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-2.7
AO:379
§ 28-2.8. Use of Funds. [Ord. No. 2008-826 § 8]
the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the Municipality,
Audubon Savings Bank and COAH to permit COAH to direct the
disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.13(b).
d. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH.
a. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved
by COAH. Funds deposited in the Housing Trust Fund may be used for
any activity approved by COAH to address the Borough of Pine Hill's
fair share obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan
program. Such activities include, but are not limited to: preservation or
purchase of housing for the purpose of maintaining or implementing
affordability controls, rehabilitation, new construction of affordable
housing units and related costs, accessory apartment, market to
affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
existing nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with
accepted national or State standards, purchase of land for affordable
housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable housing,
extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to affordable
housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase affordability,
administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.7 through 8.9 and specified in the approved spending
plan.
b. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Borough of Pine Hill for
past housing activities.
c. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income
households in affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share
Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance portion of development
fees collected shall be used to provide affordability assistance to those
households earning 30% or less of median income by region.
1. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental
assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments, and assistance with
emergency repairs.
2. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less of median
income. The use of development fees in this manner shall entitle
§ 28-2.7 PINE HILL CODE § 28-2.8
AO:380
§ 28-2.9. Monitoring. [Ord. No. 2008-826 § 9]
The Borough of Pine Hill shall complete and return to COAH all monitoring
forms included in monitoring requirements related to the collection of
development fees from residential and nonresidential developers, payments
in lieu of constructing affordable units on site, funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls, barrier free escrow funds, rental income,
repayments from affordable housing program loans, and any other funds
collected in connection with the Borough of Pine Hill's housing program,
as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan
certified by COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms
designed by COAH.
§ 28-2.10. Ongoing Collection of Fees. [Ord. No. 2008-826 § 10]
The ability for the Borough of Pine Hill to impose, collect and expend
development fees shall expire with its substantive certification compliance
unless the Borough of Pine Hill has filed an adopted Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan with COAH, has petitioned for substantive certification,
and has received COAH's approval of its development fee ordinance. If
the Borough of Pine Hill fails to renew its ability to impose and collect
development fees prior to the expiration of substantive certification, it may
be subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal
trust fund. Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey
Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to section 20 of P.L.
the Borough of Pine Hill to bonus credits pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:97-3.7.
3. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds
from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt
from the affordability assistance requirement.
d. The Borough of Pine Hill may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
including the requirement for affordability assistance, in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:96-18.
e. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees,
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program, a
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an affirmative marketing
program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of
the revenues collected from development fees shall be expended for
such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for
income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and
rental units, and compliance with COAH's monitoring requirements.
Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or objecting to the Council's regulations and/or action are not
eligible uses of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
§ 28-2.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-2.10
AO:381
1985, c.222 (C.52:27D-320). The Borough of Pine Hill shall not impose a
residential development fee on a development that receives preliminary or
final site plan approval after the expiration of its substantive certification
or judgment of compliance, nor shall the Borough of Pine Hill retroactively
impose a development fee on such a development. The Borough of Pine Hill
shall not expend development fees after the expiration of its substantive
certification or judgment of compliance.
Table of Source Sections
Chapter TSS
TABLE OF SOURCE SECTIONS
§ TSS-1. TABLE OF SOURCE SECTIONS.
Table Of Source Sections to be used in conjunction with "Revised Code Of
The Borough Of Pine Hill, 1973"
Code Section Legislation
Adopting Ordinance Ord. #241
1-1 New
1-2 New
1-3 New
1-4 New
2-1 New
2-2
2-2.1 New
2-2.2 New
2-2.3 New
2-2.4 New
2-2.5 Ord. #358, S1
2-3 New
2-4 New
2-5 New
2-6
2-6.1 Ord. #200
2-6.2 Ord. #200
2-6.3 Ord. #200
§ 28-2.10 PINE HILL CODE § TSS-1
AO:382
Code Section Legislation
2-7 Ord. #88-472, A1-A17; Ord. #92-509, SII; Ord.
#93-524, S2; Ord. #94-573; Ord. #95-593; Ord.
#2004-733
2-7.1 Ord. #88-472, A1
2-7.2 Ord. #88-472, A2; Reserved by Ord. #93-524, S2
2-7.3 Ord. #88-472, A3
2-7.4 Ord. #88-472, A4
2-7.5 Ord. #88-472, A5
2-7.6 Ord. #88-472, A6; Reserved by Ord. #93-524, S2
2-7.7 Ord. #88-472, A7
2-7.8 Ord. #88-472, A8
2-7.9 Ord. #88-472, A9; Reserved by Ord. #93-524, S2
2-7.10 Ord. #88-472, A10; Ord. #92-509, SII; Reserved by
Ord. #93-524, S2
2-7.11 Ord. #88-472, A11
2-7A Ord. #86-418; reserved
2-7B Ord. #88-469
2-8
2-8.1 Ord. #109, S1; reserved
2-8.2 Ord. #109, S2; reserved
2-8.3 Ord. #109, S4; reserved
2-8.4 Ord. #109, S5; reserved
2-8.5 Ord. #109, S8 & 9; reserved
2-8.6 Ord. #86-422
2-8.7 Ord. #2000-677; Ord. #2009-846, S1; Ord.
#2011-872
2-8A Ord. #351; Ord. #86-417; reserved
2-9 See text
2-10 See text
2-11
2-11.1 Ord. #31
2-11.2 Ord. #31
2-11.3 Ord. #31
2-11.4 Ord. #31
2-11.5 Ord. #31
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:383
Code Section Legislation
2-11.6 Ord. #31
2-11.7 Ord. #94-552, SS1-3; Reserved
2-11.8 Ord. #2004-745
2-12
2-12.1 Ord. #363, S1
2-12.2 Ord. #363, S1
2-12.3 Ord. #363, S1
2-13 Ord. #362, S1; reserved by Ord. #2004-740, S1
2-14
2-14.1 Ord. #83, S1
2-14.2 See text
2-14.3 See text
2-14.5 See text
2-15
2-15.1 Ord. #169, A16
2-15.2 Ord. #169, A16, S2; Ord. #230
2-15.3 Ord. #169, A16, S3
2-15.4 Ord. #169, A16, S4
2-15.5 Ord. #169, A16, S5
2-15.6 Ord. #169, A16, S6
2-15.7 Ord. #169, A16, S7
2-15.8 Ord. #169, A16, S8
2-15.9 Ord. #169, A16, S9
2-15.10 Ord. #169, A16, S10
2-15.11 Ord. #169, A16, S11
2-16
2-16.1 See text
2-16.2 See text
2-17 See text
2-18 See text
2-19
2-19.1 Ord. #255
2-19.2 Ord. #255, S1
2-19.3 Ord. #255, S2
§ TSS-1 PINE HILL CODE § TSS-1
AO:384
Code Section Legislation
2-19.4 Ord. #255, S3
2-19.5 Ord. #255, S6
2-20
2-20.1 Ord. #279, S1; Ord. #97-631
2-20.2 Ord. #279, S2; Ord. #93-523, S2
2-20.3 Ord. #279, S3
2-20A
2-20A.1 Ord. #94-551, SIII
2-20A.2 Ord. #94-551, SIII
2-20A.3 Ord. #94-551, SIII
2-21
2-21.1 Ord. #295
2-21.2 Ord. #295
2-21.3 Ord. #295
2-21.4 Ord. #295
2-21.5 Ord. #295
2-21.6 Ord. #295
2-21.7 Ord. #295
2-22
2-22.1 Ord. #2011-867, S1
2-22.2 Ord. #2011-867, S1
2-22.3 Ord. #2011-867, S1
2-22.4 Ord. #2011-867, S1
2-22.5 Ord. #2011-867, S1
2-23
2-23.1 Ord. #85-398
2-23.2 Ord. #85-398
2-23.3 Ord. #85-398
2-23.4 Ord. #85-398
2-24
2-24.1 Ord. #85-400
2-24.2 Ord. #85-400; Ord. #86-419
2-24.3 Ord. #85-400
2-24.4 Ord. #85-400
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:385
Code Section Legislation
2-24.5 Ord. #85-400
2-25 Ord. #87-448
2-26 Ord. #87-457
2-27
2-27.1 Ord. #95-592, SII
2-27.2 Ord. #95-592, SIII
2-27.3 Ord. #95-592, SIV
2-27.4 Ord. #95-592, SV
2-27.5 Ord. #95-592, SVI
2-27.6 Ord. #95-592, SVII
2-28
2-28.1 Ord. #88-474
2-28.2 Ord. #88-474
2-28.3 Ord. #88-474
2-28.4 Ord. #88-474
2-28.5 Ord. #88-474
2-28.6 Ord. #88-474
2-28.7 Ord. #88-474
2-28.8 Ord. #88-474
2-28.9 Ord. #88-474
2-29
2-29.1 Ord. #88-475
2-29.2 Ord. #88-475
2-29.3 Ord. #88-475
2-29.4 Ord. #88-475
2-29.5 Ord. #98-641, SI
2-29.6 Ord. #98-641, SII
2-30
2-30.1 Ord. #88-476
2-30.2 Ord. #88-476
2-30.3 Ord. #88-476
2-30.4 Ord. #88-476
2-30.5 Ord. #88-476
2-31
§ TSS-1 PINE HILL CODE § TSS-1
AO:386
Code Section Legislation
2-31.1 Ord. #89-480, S1
2-31.2 Ord. #89-480, S2
2-31.3 Ord. #89-480, S3
2-31.4 Ord. #89-480, S4
2-31.5 Ord. #89-480, S5
2-32
2-32.1 Ord. #92-514, SIII
2-32.2 Ord. #92-514, SIII; Ord. #92-519A
2-32.3 Ord. #92-514, SIII
2-32.4 Ord. #92-514, SIII
2-33 Ord. #95-583
2-34
2-34.1 Ord. #2002-713
2-35 Ord. #2005-777
2-36
2-36.1 Ord. #2007-802, Preamble
2-36.2 Ord. #2007-802, S1
2-37 See text
2-38 See text
2-39 See text
3-1 See text
3-2
3-2.1 See text
3-2.2 See text
3-2.3 Ord. #21, S2
3-2.4 Ord. #21, S3
3-2.5 Ord. #21, S4
3-2.6 Ord. #21, S5
3-3
3-3.1 Ord. #172, S1
3-3.2 Ord. #172, S2&3
3-3.3 Ord. #172, S4; Ord. #179
3-3.4 Ord. #172, S5
3-3.6 Ord. #2006-782, SSI-VI
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:387
Code Section Legislation
3-4
3-4.1 Ord. #119, S1
3-4.2 Ord. #119, S2
3-4.3 Ord. #119, S3
3-4.4 Ord. #119, S4
3-4.5 Ord. #119, S5
3-5 Ord. #101, S1
3-6 Ord. #43, S1
3-7
3-7.1 Ord. #30, S1
3-7.2 See text
3-7.3 See text
3-8 See text
3-9
3-9.1 See text
3-9.2 See text
3-9.3 See text
3-9.4 See text
3-9.5 See text
3-9.6 See text
3-9.7 Ord. #2012-886; Ord. #892
3-9.8 Ord. #2012-886
3-9.9 Ord. #2012-886
3-9.10 Ord. #2012-886
3-9.11 Ord. #2012-886
3-9.12 Ord. #2012-886
3-10
3-10.1 Ord. #231, S1
3-10.2 Ord. #231, S2
3-10.3 Ord. #231, S3
3-10.4 Ord. #231, S4
3-10.5 Ord. #231, S5
3-10.6 Ord. #231, S6
3-11
§ TSS-1 PINE HILL CODE § TSS-1
AO:388
Code Section Legislation
3-11.1 Ord. #234, S1; Ord. #296
3-12
3-12.1 Ord. #232, S1
3-12.2 Ord. #232, S2
3-12.3 Ord. #232, S3
3-12.4 Ord. #232, S4
3-12.5 Ord. #232, S5
3-12.6 Ord. #232, S6
3-12.7 Ord. #232, S7
3-13
3-13.1 Ord. #341, S1
3-13.2 Ord. #341, S2
3-13.3 Ord. #341, S3
3-13.4 Ord. #341, S4
3-13.5 Ord. #341, S5
3-13.6 Ord. #341, S6
3-13.7 Ord. #341, S7
3-14
3-14.1 Ord. #88-466, S1; Ord. #98-649
3-14.1A Ord. #2001-689
3-14.2 Ord. #88-466, S2
3-14.3 Ord. #88-466, S3
3-14.4 Ord. #88-466, S4
3-14.5 Ord. #88-466, S5
3-15
3-15.1 Ord. #90-494; Ord. #95-596, S1; Ord. #97-630
3-15.2 Ord. #90-494; Ord. #95-596, S1
3-15.3 Ord. #90-494; Ord. #95-596, S2
3-15.4 Ord. #97-630
3-16 See text
3-17
3-17.1 Ord. #95-590, S1
3-17.2 Ord. #95-590, S2
3-17.3 Ord. #95-590, S3
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:389
Code Section Legislation
3-18
3-18.1 Ord. #2003-731
3-18.2 Ord. #2003-731
3-18.3 Ord. #2003-731
3-18.4 Ord. #2003-731
3-18.5 Ord. #2003-731
3-18.6 Ord. #2003-731
3-18.7 Ord. #2003-731
3-18.8 Ord. #2003-731
3-19 Ord. #2003-727
3-20
3-20.1 Ord. #2005-775, SI
3-20.2 Ord. #2005-775, SI
3-20.3 Ord. #2005-775, SI
3-21
3-21.1 Ord. #2005-758, SI
3-21.2 Ord. #2005-758, SII
3-21.3 Ord. #2005-758, SIII
3-21.4 Ord. #2005-758, SIV
3-21.5 Ord. #2005-758, SV
3-22 Ord. #2009-843, SS1-6
4-1
4-1.1 Ord. #115, S1; Ord. #2001-694
4-1.2 Ord. #115, S2; Ord. #2001-694
4-1.3 Ord. #115, S3; Ord. #2001-694
4-1.4 Ord. #127, S1; Ord. #2001-694
4-1.5 Ord. #115, S5; Ord. #2001-694
4-1.6 Ord. #127, S2; Ord. #2001-694
4-1.7 Ord. #115, S7; Ord. #2001-694
4-1.8 Ord. #115, S8; Ord. #2001-694
4-1.9 Ord. #115, S9; Ord. #2001-694
4-1.10 Ord. #115, S10; Ord. #2001-694
4-1.11 Ord. #115, S11; Ord. #2001-694
4-1.12 Ord. #2001-694
§ TSS-1 PINE HILL CODE § TSS-1
AO:390
Code Section Legislation
4-1.13 Ord. #2001-694
4-1.14 Ord. #2001-694
4-1.15 Ord. #2001-694
4-1.16 Ord. #2001-694
4-1.17 Ord. #2001-694
4-1.18 Ord. #2001-694
4-2
4-2.1 Ord. #44, S1
4-2.2 Ord. #44, S2
4-2.3 Ord. #44, S3
4-3 (Reserved)
4-4
4-4.1 Ord. #212, S1
4-4.2 Ord. #212, S2
4-4.3 Ord. #212, S3
4-4.4 Ord. #212, S4
4-4.5 Ord. #212, S5
4-4.6 Ord. #212, S6
4-4.7 Ord. #212, S7
4-4.8 Ord. #212, S8
4-4.9 Ord. #212, S9
4-4.10 Ord. #212, S10
4-4.11 Ord. #212, S11
4-4.12 Ord. #212, S12
4-4.13 Ord. #212, S13
4-4.14 Ord. #212, S14
4-4.15 Ord. #212, S15
4-4.16 Ord. #212, S16
4-4.17 Ord. #212, S17
4-5
4-5.1 Ord. #29, S2
4-5.2 Ord. #29, S3
4-5.3 Ord. #29, S3
4-5.4 Ord. #161, S1
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:391
Code Section Legislation
4-5.5 Ord. #29, S5
4-5.6 Ord. #29, S6
4-5.7 Ord. #147, S1
4-5.8 Ord. #29, S8
4-5.9 Ord. #87, S2
4-5.10 Ord. #29, S10
4-6
4-6.1 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.2 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.3 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.4 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.5 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.6 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.7 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.8 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.9 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.10 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.11 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.12 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.13 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.14 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.15 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.16 Ord. #0-85-409
4-6.17 Ord. #86-435
4-7
4-7.1 Ord. #396
4-7.2 Ord. #396
4-7.3 Ord. #396
4-7.4 Ord. #396
4-7.5 Ord. #396
4-8
4-8.1 Ord. #95-598, S1
4-8.2 Ord. #95-598, S2
4-8.3 Ord. #95-598, S3
§ TSS-1 PINE HILL CODE § TSS-1
AO:392
Code Section Legislation
4-8.4 Ord. #95-598, S4
4-8.5 Ord. #95-598, S6
4-8.6 Ord. #95-598, S7
4-9
4-9.1 Ord. #98-655, S1
4-9.2 Ord. #98-655, S2
4-9.3 Ord. #98-655, S3
4-9.4 Ord. #98-655, S4
4-9.5 Ord. #98-655, S5
4-9.6 Ord. #98-655, S6
4-9.7 Ord. #98-655, S7
4-10
4-10.1 Ord. #2005-752
4-11 Ord. #2007-803, S1
4-12
4-12.1 Ord. #2008-818, S1
4-12.2 Ord. #2008-818, S2
4-12.3 Ord. #2008-818, S3
4-12.4 Ord. #2008-818, S4
4-12.5 Ord. #2008-818, S5
4-13 See text
Ch. 4-A See text
Ch. 5 See text
Ch. 6 Ord. #35; Ord. #164; Ord. #333; Ord. #350; Ord.
#380; Ord. #84-436; Ord. #O-85-407; Ord.
#91-497; Ord. #92-512; Ord. #95-594; Ord.
#2001-690; Ord. #2000-716. Beginning with
Supplement No. 25, all sources may be found within
text.
7-1 Ord. #185
7-2 Ord. #185
7-3
7-3.1 Ord. #185
7-3.2 Ord. #185
7-4
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:393
Code Section Legislation
7-4.1 Ord. #185
7-4.2 Ord. #185
7-5
7-5.1 Ord. #185
7-5.2 Ord. #185
7-5.3 Ord. #185
7-6 Ord. #185; Ord. #247, S1
7-7 Ord. #185
7-8 Ord. #185
7-9 Ord. #185
7-10 Ord. #185
7-11 Ord. #185
7-12 Ord. #185
7-13 Ord. #185
7-14 Ord. #185
7-15 Ord. #185
7-16 Ord. #185
7-17 Ord. #185
Ch. 8 Sources may be found within the text
9-1
9-1.1 Ord. #355, S1; Ord. #2004-735, S2; Ord.
#2009-844, S2
9-1.2 Ord. #355, S2
9-1.3 Ord. #355, S3
9-1.4 Ord. #355, S4
9-1.5 Ord. #355, S5
9-1.6 Ord. #355, S6
9-1.7 Ord. #355, S7; New
9-2
9-2.1 Ord. #0-84-414, S1
9-2.2 Ord. #0-84-414, S2; Ord. #87-444
9-2.3 Ord. #0-84-414, S3; Ord. #99-668, S3; Ord.
#2000-671
9-2.4 Ord. #0-84-414, S4
9-2.5 Ord. #0-84-414, S5; Ord. #99-668, S4
§ TSS-1 PINE HILL CODE § TSS-1
AO:394
Code Section Legislation
9-2.6 Ord. #0-84-414, S6; Ord. #99-668, S5
9-2.7 Ord. #0-84-414, S7
9-2.8 Ord. #0-84-414, S8; Ord. #99-668, S6
9-2.9 Ord. #0-84-414, S9
9-2.10 Ord. #0-84-414, S10
9-2.11 Ord. #0-87-455, S1; Ord. #2001-693; Ord.
#2004-735, S1; Ord. #2009-844, S1
9A
9A-1 Ord. #353, SI
9A-2 Ord. #353, SII
9A-3 Ord. #353, SIII
9A-4 Ord. #353, SIV
9A-5 Ord. #353, SV
9A-6 Ord. #353, SVI
10-1 See text
10-2
10-2.1 Ord. #71, S1
10-2.2 Ord. #71, S2
10-2.3 Ord. #71, S3
10-2.4 Ord. #71, S4; Ord. #96-603, S1
10-2.5 Ord. #71, S5
10-2.6 Ord. #71, S6
10-2.7 Ord. #71, S7
10-2.8 Ord. #71, S8
10-2.9 Ord. #71, S9
10-2.10 Ord. #71, S10
10-2.11 Ord. #71, S11
10-3 (Reserved)
10-4
10-4.1 Ord. #99-663, SI
10-4.2 Ord. #99-663, SII
10-4.3 Ord. #99-663, SII
10-4.4 Ord. #99-663, SII
10-4.5 Ord. #99-663, SII
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:395
Code Section Legislation
10-4.6 Ord. #99-663, SII
10-4.7 Ord. #99-663, SII
10-4.8 Ord. #99-663, SII
10-4.9 Ord. #99-663, SIII
10-5
10-5.1 Ord. #266, S1
10-5.2 Ord. #266, S2
10-5.3 Ord. #266, S3
10-5.4 Ord. #266, S4
10-5.5 Ord. #266, S5
10-5.6 Ord. #266, S7
10-5.7 Ord. #266, S8
10-6
10-6.1 Ord. #270, S1
10-6.2 Ord. #270, S1
10-6.3 Ord. #270, S1
10-6.4 Ord. #270, S1
10-6.5 Ord. #270, S1
10-6.6 Ord. #270, S1
10-6.7 Ord. #270, S1
10-6.8 Ord. #270, S1
10-6.9 Ord. #270, S1
10-7
10-7.1 Ord. #270, S1; Ord. #305; Ord. #318; Ord.
#87-451, S1; Ord. #95-597, S3
10-7.2 Ord. #87-451, S1
10-7.3 Ord. #270, S1; Ord. #305; Ord. #318; Ord.
#87-451, S1
10-7.4 Ord. #270, S1; Ord. #305; Ord. #318; Ord.
#87-451, S1
10-7.5 Ord. #305; Ord. #318; Ord. #87-451, S1
10-7.6 Ord. #87-451, S1; Ord. #90-493
10-7.7 Ord. #87-451, S1
10-7.8 Ord. #87-451, S1
10-7.9 Ord. #87-451, S1
§ TSS-1 PINE HILL CODE § TSS-1
AO:396
Code Section Legislation
10-7.10 Ord. #95-597, S3
10-7A
10-7A.1 Ord. #2005-764, S1
10-7A.2 Ord. #2005-764, S1
10-7A.3 Ord. #2005-764, S1; Ord. #2005-769, S1
10-7A.5 Ord. #2005-769, S1
10-8 See text
10-9 See text
10-10 See text
10-11 See text
10-12 See text
10-13
10-13.1 See text
10-13.2 See text
10-13.3 See text
10-13.4 Ord. #2010-858, SIV
10-13.5 Ord. #2010-858, SV
10-13.6 Ord. #2010-858, SVI
10-14
10-14.1 Ord. #2010-859, SI
10-14.2 Ord. #2010-859, SII
10-14.3 Ord. #2010-859, SIII
10-14.4 See text
10-14.5 See text
10-14.6 See text
Ch. 11 See text
12-1
12-1.1 Ord. #168, S1&2; Ord. #262, S1
12-1.2 Ord. #168, S3
12-1.3 Ord. #167, S2
12-2
12-2.1 Ord. #121, S1
12-2.2 Ord. #121, S2
12-2.3 Ord. #121, S3
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:397
Code Section Legislation
12-2.4 Ord. #121, S4
12-2.5 Ord. #121, S6
12-3
12-3.1 Ord. #57, S1
12-3.2 Ord. #57, S2
12-3.3 Ord. #57, S3
12-3.4 Ord. #57, S4
12-3.5 Ord. #57, S5
12-4
12-4.1 Ord. #154
12-4.2 Ord. #154
12-4.3 Ord. #123, S3
12-5
12-5.1 Ord. #87-440
12-6
12-6.1 Ord. #2005-772
12-6.2 Ord. #2005-772
12-6.3 Ord. #2005-772
12-6.4 Ord. #2005-772
12A
12A-1 Ord. #343, S1
12A-2 Ord. #343, S2
12A-3 Ord. #343, S3
12A-4 Ord. #343, S4
12A-5
12A-5.1 Ord. #2005-759, SSI-VI
12A-5.2 Ord. #2005-760, SSI-V
13-1 Ord. #145
13-1.1 Ord. #145
13-1.2 Ord. #145
13-1.3 Ord. #145
13-1.4 Ord. #145
13-1.5 Ord. #145
13-1.6 Ord. #145
§ TSS-1 PINE HILL CODE § TSS-1
AO:398
Code Section Legislation
13-1.7 Ord. #145
13-1.8 Ord. #376-83
13-1.9 Ord. #376-83
13-1.10 Ord. #376-83
13-1.11 Ord. #376-83
13-1.12 Ord. #376-83
13-1.13 Ord. #376-83
13-1.14 Ord. #376-83
13-2 Ord. #376-83; Ord. #96-603, SS2, 3; Ord. #97-626,
S1
13-3 Ord. #376-83; Ord. #94-567, S1
13-4
13-4.1 Ord. #0-85-412, SS1-4
13-4.2 Ord. #0-85-412, S5
13-4.3 Ord. #0-85-412, S6; Ord. #96-603, S4; Ord.
#97-626, S2
13-4.4 Ord. #0-85-412, S7
13-5
13-5.1 Ord. #96-607, SII
13-5.2 Ord. #96-607, SIII
13-5.3 Ord. #96-607, SIV
13-5.4 Ord. #96-607, SV
13-5.5 Ord. #96-607, SVI
13-5.6 Ord. #96-607, SVII
13-5.7 Ord. #96-607, SVIII
13-5.8 Ord. #96-607, SIX
13-5.9 Ord. #96-607, SX
13-5.10 Ord. #96-607, SXI
13-5.11 Ord. #96-607, SXII
13-6 (Reserved)
13-7
13-7.1 Ord. #2005-757, SI
13-7.2 Ord. #2005-757, SII
13-7.3 Ord. #2005-757, SIII
13-7.4 Ord. #2005-757, SIV
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:399
Code Section Legislation
13-7.5 Ord. #2005-757, SV
13-8
13-8.1 Ord. #2006-784, SI
13-8.2 Ord. #2006-784, SII
13-8.3 Ord. #2006-784, SIII
13-8.4 Ord. #2006-784, SIV
13-8.5 Ord. #2006-784, SV
14-1 Ord. #122, S1
14-2 Ord. #122, S2
14-3 Ord. #122, S3
14-4 Ord. #122, S4
14-5 Ord. #122, S5
14-6 Ord. #122, S6
14-7 Ord. #122, S7
14-8 Ord. #122, S8
14-9 Ord. #122, S9
14-10 Ord. #122, S10
14-11 Ord. #122, S11
14-12 Ord. #122, S12
14-13 Ord. #122, S14
14-14 Ord. #122, S15
Ch. 15 Ord. #94-550; Ord. #141; Ord. #317. Beginning
with Supplement No. 25, all sources may be found
within text
Ch. 16 Reserved by Ord. #95-588
Ch. 17 Reserved by Ord. #95-588
Ch. 18 Reserved by Ord. #95-588
Ch. 19 Reserved by Ord. #95-588
Ch. 20 Ord. #368, 87-441; O-86-433; Ord. #2007-799.
Beginning with Supplement No. 25, all sources may
be found within the text
21-1 Ord. #85-413, SI
21-2 Ord. #85-413, SII
21-3 Ord. #85-413, SIII
21-4 Ord. #85-413, SIV
§ TSS-1 PINE HILL CODE § TSS-1
AO:400
Code Section Legislation
21-5 Ord. #85-413, SV
21-6 Ord. #85-413, SVI
21-7 Ord. #85-413, SVII
21-8 Ord. #85-413, SVIII
21-9 Ord. #85-413, SIX
22-1 Ord. #90-491
22-2 Ord. #90-491
22-3 Ord. #90-491
22-4 Ord. #90-491; Ord. #94-564, SI
22-5 Ord. #90-491; Ord. #94-564, SI
22-6 Ord. #90-491
22-7 Ord. #90-491
22-8 Ord. #90-491; Ord. #94-564, SI
22-9 Ord. #90-491; Ord. #94-564, SI
22-10 Ord. #90-491; Ord. #94-564, SI
22-11 Ord. #90-491
22-12 Ord. #90-491
22-13 Ord. #90-491; Ord. #94-564, SI
22-14 Ord. #90-491
22-15 Ord. #90-491
22-16 Ord. #90-491
22-17 Ord. #90-491
22-18 Ord. #90-491
22-19 Ord. #90-491
22-20 Ord. #90-491; Ord. #94-564, SI
22-21 Ord. #90-491; Ord. #94-564, SI
22-22 Ord. #90-491
Ch. 23 See separate Land Use Volume
24-1
24-1.1 Ord. #95-574, S1; Ord. #96-613, S1
24-1.2 Ord. #95-574, S2; Ord. #96-613, S2; Ord.
#2012-890
24-1.3 Ord. #95-574, S3; Ord. #96-613, S3
24-1.4 Ord. #95-574, S4
§ TSS-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § TSS-1
AO:401
Code Section Legislation
24-1.5 Ord. #96-613, S4; Ord. #2012-890
24-1.6 Ord. #96-613, S6; Ord. #2012-890
24-1.7 Ord. #96-613, S6; Ord. #2012-890
25-1 Ord. #96-612, S2
25-2 Ord. #96-612, S3
25-3 Ord. #96-612, S4
25-4 Ord. #96-612, S5
25-5 Ord. #96-612, S6
25-6 Ord. #96-612, S7
25-7 Ord. #96-612, S8
25-8 Ord. #96-612, S9
25-9 Ord. #96-612, S10; Ord. #2000-684, S1; Ord.
#2005-765, S1
Ch. 26 See text
27-1 Ord. #2005-755, SI
27-2 Ord. #2005-755, SI
27-3 Ord. #2005-755, SI
27-4 Ord. #2005-755, SI
27-5 Ord. #2005-755, SI
Ch. 28 All sources may be found within text
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
This Disposition List provides a list of the ordinances used in the
preparation of Code supplements. The word Special after the ordinance
description or the word NCM in the Disposition column indicates material
that is special in nature/non-Code material and has not been included in the
Code.
§ TSS-1 PINE HILL CODE § DL-1
AO:402
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code Supp. No.
2009-851 Not used — See
2010-855
26
2010-852 2-22-2010 Appropriation Special 26
2010-853 3-15-2010 Bond Special 26
2010-854 3-8-2010 CAP Bank Special 26
2010-855 4-19-2010 Salary Special 26
2010-856 11-15-2010 Snow Emergency
Parking Prohibition
8-10 26
2010-857 5-17-2010 Bond Special 26
2010-858 7-19-2010 Private Storm Drain
Inlet Retrofitting
10-13 26
2010-859 7-19-2010 Refuse Containers
and Dumpsters
10-14 26
2010-860 7-19-2010 Salary Special 26
2010-861 9-13-2010 Salary Special 26
2010-862 9-13-2010 Bond Special 26
2010-863 12-13-2010 Salary Special 26
2010-864 12-20-2010 Civilian Agent
assigned to Police
Department
2-9 26
2011-865 4-18-2011 CAP Bank Special 26
2011-866 4-18-2011 Repeal Economic
Development
Commission
2-22 26
2011-867 4-18-2011 Establish Economic
Development
Commission
2-22 26
2011-868 4-18-2011 Vacate portion of
street
Special 26
2011-869 4-18-2011 Vacate portion of
street
Special 26
2011-870 5-16-2011 Bond Appropriation Special 26
2011-871 6-13-2011 Salary Special 26
2011-872 8-8-2011 Signatories on all
municipal legal
depositories, 2-8.7
27
2011-873 Amends
Redevelopment Plan
Special 27
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:403
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code Supp. No.
2011-874 Unavailable Special 27
2011-875 $115,000 per
reconstruction of
Bramau Avenue
Special 27
2011-876 Bond Special 27
2011-877 Salary Special 27
2011-878 Salary Special 27
2011-879 Appropriation Special 27
2011-880 Vacate portion of
street
Special 27
2012-881 Release rights to
Clearview Avenue
Special 27
2012-882 CAP Special 27
2012-883 2-6-2012 Amends Construction
Code fees, 10-1.3,
10-1.4, 10-1.5, 10-1.6,
10-1.9, 10-1.10
27
2011-884 Salary Special 27
2012-885 2-6-2012 Amends Construction
Code fees, 10-1.3,
10-1.4, 10-1.5, 10-1.6,
10-1.9, 10-1.10
27
2012-886 5-7-2012 Towing and storage of
vehicles, 3-9
27
2012-887 Release rights to
Raven Avenue
Special 27
2012-888 $215,000 for
resurfacing of
Franklin Avenue
Special 27
2012-889 Clerk authorized to
issue raffle and bingo
game license
27
§ DL-1 PINE HILL CODE § DL-1
AO:404
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code Supp. No.
2012-890 7-16-2012 Parks and recreation
— public use and
availability, 24-1.2;
fees, 24-1.5; signs,
24-1.6; Green Acres
lands designated as
recreation and open
space inventory,
24-1.7
27
2012-891 Personnel policies Special 27
2012-892 8-6-2012 Towing and storage of
vehicles, 3-9
27
2012-893 8-6-2012 Stopping or standing
prohibited certain
hours, certain streets,
8-11; parking
prohibited certain
hours, certain streets,
8-15; one-way streets,
8-22
27
2012-894 8-20-2012 Parking prohibited at
all times, 8-14, 8-14.1
28
2012-895 11-5-2012 Contracts,
professional services,
2-39
28
2012-896 11-19-2012 Appropriation Special 28
2012-897 11-9-2012 Returned check fee,
2-38
28
2012-898 12-17-2012 Mercantile license,
Ch. 4A
28
2012-899 1-28-2013 Property Maintenance
Code, 10-8
28
2013-900 2-25-2013 Vacate Raven Avenue Special 28
2013-901 2-25-2013 Readopt licensing of
rental properties
10-12
28
2013-902 2-25-2013 Police Department,
2-9
28
2013-903 2-25-2013 Traffic regulations,
Bromley Estates,
8-38.3b
28
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:405
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code Supp. No.
2013-904 3-18-2013 Approving Rules and
Regulations for Police
Department, 2-9.14
28
2013-905 4-15-2013 Exceed Municipal
Budget Appropriation
Limit; Establish CAP
Bank
Special 28
2013-906 5-6-2013 Appropriation Special 28
2013-907 9-16-2013 Salary Special 29
2013-908 9-9-2013 Police Department-
Hearing Authority, offduty
employment of
police officers, rules
and regulations
2-9.4, 2-9.12,
2-9.14
29
2013-909 11-4-2013 Amend
redevelopment plan
Special 29
2013-910 11-18-2013 Appropriation Special 29
2014-911 1-27-2014 Licensing of dogs and
cats-delinquent fee
6-6.6 29
2014-912 2-24-2014 Appropriation Special 29
2014-913 3-17-2014 CAP Bank Special 29
2014-914 6-16-2014 Parking prohibited at
all times
8-14 29
2014-915 7-21-2014 Parking prohibited at
all times
8-14 29
2014-916 No action taken 29
2014-917 9-15-2014 Appropriation Special 29
2014-918 No action taken 29
2014-919 10-20-2014 Salary Special 29
2014-920 11-3-2014 Bond Special 29
2014-921 11-17-2014 Rescind curfew 3-1 29
2014-922 12-1-2014 Amends Ch. 3, Police
Regulations; creates
3-1, Curfew
30
§ DL-1 PINE HILL CODE § DL-1
AO:406
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code Supp. No.
2014-923 12-1-2014 Amends Ch. 23, Land
Use; hospitals,
medical clinics,
medical and health
centers, nursing
homes and
sanitoriums-add to
23-7.10.1, GBD
District; delete from
23-7.10.2, LBD
District; 23-7.10.3,
CBD District;
23-7.10.4, IND
District; 23-7.11.1, I
District
30
2014-924 12-1-2014 Appropriation, Special 30
2015-925 3-16-2015 CAP Bank, Special 30
2015-926 4-13-2015 Amends Ch. 3, Police
Regulations; 3-9.2,
3-9.4, 3-9.5, towing
and storage of
vehicles
30
2015-927 5-4-2015 Consent to South
Jersey Gas Company
for use of streets,
Special
30
2015-928 5-18-2015 Amends Ch. 8, Traffic;
8-37.1, handicapped
parking
30
2015-929 6-1-2015 Amends Ch. 5,
Alcoholic Beverage
Control; 5-3.4, license
fees; maximum
number
30
2015-930 7-20-2015 Bond-capital
improvements,
Special
30
2015-931 10-5-2015 Amends Ch. 8, Traffic;
8-37.2, handicapped
parking at private
residences-application
for permit
30
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:407
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code Supp. No.
2015-932 10-5-2015 Amends Ch. 2,
Administration; 2-17,
Board of Health
30
2015-933 11-2-2015 Amends Ch. 11,
Street Openings and
Excavations
30
2015-934 11-16-2015 Salary, Special 30
2015-935 12-7-2015 Amends Ch. 10,
Building and Housing;
creates 10-20, vacant
and abandoned
properties;
registration of;
maintenance
30
2016-936 2-1-2016 Appropriation, Special 30
2016-937 2-1-2016 Amends Ch. 10,
Building and Housing;
10-22 registration and
inspection of rental
property; 10-23,
Landlord
responsibility;
revocation of
registration; 10-24,
Violations, penalties
30
2016-938 Appropriation, Special 30
2016-939 CAP Bank, Special 30
2016-940 3-21-2016 Amends Ch. 6,
Licensing of Dogs and
Cats; 6-7.5, sale of
dogs and cats at pet
shops restricted
30
2016-941 4-4-2016 Amends Ch. 10,
Building and Housing;
amends Ord. No.
2016-937, Rental
properties, 10-22
30
2016-942 5-16-2016 Amends Ch. 2,
Administration; adds
2-40, Government-
Private Energy
Aggregation Program
30
§ DL-1 PINE HILL CODE § DL-1
AO:408
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code Supp. No.
2016-943 6-6-2016 Amends Ch. 11,
Street openings and
Excavations
30
2016-944 6-20-2016 Sale of Land, Special 31
2016-945 7-11-2016 Exchange of Land,
Special
31
2016-946 7-11-2016 Amends Ch. 8, Traffic;
8-14, Parking
Prohibited Between
the hours of 8:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. on
Designated Borough
Property
31
2016-947 8-1-2016 Amends Ch. 2
Administration; adds
2-41 establishes
Background Checks
for Volunteer Sports
Organizations, 2-41.1
— 2-41.10
31
2016-948 8-15-2016 Capital
Improvements,
Special
31
2016-949 8-15-2016 Salary, Special 31
2016-950 8-15-2016 Appropriation, Special 31
2017-951 1-23-2017 Amends Ch. 8 Traffic;
8-11 Stopping or
Standing Prohibited
During Certain Hours
on Certain Streets;
amends 8-14 Parking
Prohibited at All
Times on Certain
Streets
31
2017-952 3-20-2017 CAP Bank, Special 31
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:409
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code Supp. No.
2017-953 3-20-2017 Amends Ch. 10
Buildings and
Housing; amends
10-20 Vacant and
Abandoned Property;
10-20.1 Definitions;
10-20.2 Registration;
10-20.5 Fee Schedule;
adds 10-21 Defaulted
Mortgage Property
10-21.1 — 10-21.11
31
2017-954 3-20-2017 Amends Ch. 2,
Administration, 2-41
establishes Criminal
Background Checks
2-41.1 — 2-41.9;
repeals Ord. No.
2016-947
31
2017-955 3-20-2017 Sale of Boroughowned
property,
Special
31
2017-956 5-15-2017 Capital
Improvements,
Special
31
2017-957 6-5-2017 Amends Ch. 4 General
Licensing; 4-13
Charitable Clothing
Bins, 4-13.1 —
4-13.10
31
2017-958 9-11-2017 Capital
improvements,
Special
31
2017-959 10-2-2017 Amends Ch. 2
Administration;
establishes 2-42
Direct Deposit of
Compensation for
Employees, 2-42.1
31
§ DL-1 PINE HILL CODE § DL-1
AO:410
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code Supp. No.
2018-960 3-19-2018 Amends and Readopts
Ch. 26 Tax Exemption
and Abatement for
Commercial and
Industrial
Improvements; 26-1
— 26-9
32
2018-961 3-19-2018 Amends Ch. 3 Police
Regulations; rescinds
3-16, adds new 3-16
Smoking in Public
Buildings and On
Public Property 3-16.1
— 3.16.6
32
2018-962 3-19-2018 Salaries, Special 32
2018-963 4-9-2018 CAP Bank, Special 32
2018-964 5-7-2018 Sale of Property,
Special
32
2018-965 6-4-2018 Appropriation, Special 32
2018-966 8-20-2018 Amends Ch. 23 Land
Use; 23-3.2
Definitions; 23-7.4
Zoning Permits;
23-7.8.8 Utility Sheds;
adds 23-7.8.8.1 Tents
and Carports
32
2018-967 8-6-2018 Appropriation, Special 32
2018-968 8-6-2018 Amends Ch. 3 Police
Regulations; adopts
Public Health
Nuisance Code, 3-23,
adds 3-23.1 — 3-23.3
32
2018-969 8-6-2018 Amends Ch 10
Building and Housing;
10-2 Unfit Buildings,
adds 10-2.12 Adoption
of New Jersey State
Housing Code
32
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:411
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Short Title
Placement
in Code Supp. No.
2018-970 8-20-2018 Amends Ch. 10
Building and Housing;
Amends 10-1 Uniform
Construction Code
Fees, readopts 10-1.1
— 10-1.17
32
2018-971 10-1-2018 Appropriation, Special 32
2018-972 11-19-2018 Financial Agreement
for Tax Exemption,
Special
32
2019-973 2-4-2019 Appropriation NCM 33
2019-974 3-4-2019 Salaries NCM 33
2019-975 3-4-2019 Appropriation NCM 33
2019-977 4-1-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 33
2019-978 5-20-2019 General Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 4 33
2019-979 6-3-2019 Appropriation NCM 33
2019-980 7-1-2019 Licensing of Dogs and
Cats Amendment
Ch. 6 33
2019-981 10-7-2019 Appropriation NCM 33
2019-982 11-4-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 8 33
2019-983 12-16-2019 Building and Housing
Amendment
Ch. 10 33
Land Use
Chapter 23
LAND USE
Editor's Note: Chapter 23, Land Use, was adopted by Ordinance No.
95-588 on July 17, 1995.
§ DL-1 PINE HILL CODE § DL-1
AO:412
ARTICLE I
Title
§ 23-1. SHORT TITLE. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. I]
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Use Ordinance of the Borough of
Pine Hill" and also designated as Chapter 23 of the Code of the Borough of
Pine Hill.
§ 23-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-1
AO:413

ARTICLE II
Purpose
§ 23-2. PURPOSE OF REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. II]
This chapter is intended to regulate the use and development of land in the
Borough of Pine Hill, and to promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Land
Use Law of the State of New Jersey. (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.)
§ 23-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-2
AO:415

ARTICLE III
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 23-3. WORD USAGE AND TERMS ENUMERATED.
§ 23-3.1. Word Usage. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. III]
§ 23-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. III; Ord. No. 98-638 § 1;
Ord. No. 2018-966]
a. Words used in the present tense include the plural as well as the
singular.
b. The word "lot" includes the word "plot".
c. The word "building" includes the word "structure".
d. "Shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive.
e. The word "person" includes an individual, corporation or partnership.
a. Definitions contained in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 are referred to
as a specific part of this section 23-3.
b. Definitions. All such words as defined in the Municipal Land Use Law, if
not contained below, are hereby incorporated herein and declared to be
part of this chapter. The following words, terms and phrases used in this
chapter shall have the meanings hereinafter indicated.
ACCESSORY USE, STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — Shall mean the use,
structure or building which is subordinate to and serves as principal
building or a principal use; is subordinate in area, extent and purposes
to the principal structure or principal building or use served;
contributes primarily to the comfort, convenience or the necessity of
the occupants, business or industry of the principal structure or
business use served; and is located on the same parcel as the principal
structure or principal use served except as may otherwise be expressly
authorized within this chapter. In the case of an Accessory structure
or building, it shall be detached from the principal building.[Ord. No.
2018-966]
ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIVITIES — Shall mean any business function in
which there is not regular contact with the general public and where
no materials, products, goods or prepared foods are stored except for
office consumption.
AGRICULTURAL OR HORTICULTURAL PURPOSE OR USE — Shall
mean any product of plants or animals useful to man, including but not
limited to: forages or sod crops, grains and feed corn, dairy animals and
dairy products, poultry and poultry products, livestock, including the
beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats, and including
the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals; bees and dairy
products; fur; animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds,
§ 23-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.2
AO:417
including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral,
ornamental and greenhouse products; or any land devoted to and
meeting the requirements and qualifications for payments or their
compensation pursuant to a soil conservation program under any
agency of the federal government.
ALLEY — Shall mean a minor way or roadway dedicated or open to
public use which is less than 20 feet in width.
ALTERATIONS — Shall mean and include, but not be limited to, the
following:
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Planning Board of the
municipality unless a different agency is designated by ordinance when
acting pursuant to the authority of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
BARN — Shall mean any building accessory to a primary residence
used for the housing, storage or preparation for marketing of plants or
animals, provided that a "barn" is permitted only where the use of the
plants or animals to be housed, stored or prepared for marketing is an
otherwise permitted use under this chapter.
BARN, POLE — Shall mean a barn which utilizes telephone poles or
similar type poles as the support for the roof. The sides of the pole barn
may or may not be closed.
BASEMENT — Shall mean a story having a portion of its height below
grade and the finished floor level directly above the basement with
more than 1/2 the height of the basement above average ground level
around the building. A "basement" is counted as a story if the ceiling
is more than six feet above the average grade or is subdivided and
All incidental changes or replacements in nonstructural parts of
building or other structure.
1.
Minor changes or replacement in the structural parts of a building
or other structure, limited to the following examples and others of
similar character or extent:
Alteration of interior partitions to residential buildings
provided that no additional dwelling units are created thereby.
(a)
Alteration of interior partitions in all other types of buildings
or other structures.
(b)
(c) Making windows or doors in exterior walls.
Strengthening the load-bearing capacity in not more than 10%
of the total floor area to permit the accommodation of a
specialized unit of machinery or equipment.
(d)
2.
Any change in the supporting members of a building such as
bearing walls, columns, beams or girders; or in the utility system
or mechanical equipment of a structure, which change materially
alters its usability or capacity of a function.
3.
§ 23-3.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-3.2
AO:418
used for dwelling purposes, other than for a janitor employed on the
premises.
BUFFER — See Transition strip.
BUILDING AREA — Shall mean the area of a horizontal section of a
building.
BUILDING HEIGHT — Shall mean the vertical distance measured from
the main elevation of the finished grade along the front of the building
to the highest point of the roof, flat roofs, to the main height level,
between the eaves and the ridge, for gable and hipped roofs and to the
deck line for mansard roofs.
BULK — Shall mean the term used to describe the size of the buildings
or other structures and their relationship to each other, to open areas
such as yards and to lot lines includes the size, height and floor area of
building or other structures.
CAMPSITE — Shall mean any place, area, lot or tract of land so
designed and intended that persons could sleep, reside or dwell
thereon, in or under any type of shelter other than in a permanent
type of structure which conforms in all respects to the provisions of the
Building Ordinance of the Borough of Pine Hill.
CAT KENNEL — Shall mean any structure or group of structures on one
lot or group of structures on contiguous lots commonly owned which is
occupied by six or more cats.
CEMETERY — Shall mean land used or intended to be used for the
burial of the deceased, including columbariums, crematories,
mausoleums and mortuaries, when operated in conjunction with the
cemetery within the boundaries.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Shall mean a certificate issued by
the Construction Official upon completion of construction or alteration
of any building or structure. Said certificate shall acknowledge
compliance with all requirements of this chapter, such adjustment
thereto as granted by the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and/or any other
applicable requirements.
CHURCH — Shall mean a building used for public worship by a
congregation, excluding buildings used exclusively for residential,
educational, burial, recreational or other uses not normally associated
with worship.
CIRCULATION — Shall mean systems, structures and physical
improvements for the movement of people, goods, water, air and sewer
or power by such means as streets, highways, railways, waterways,
towers, airways, pipes and conduits, and the handling of people by such
means as terminals, stations, warehouses and other storage buildings
or transshipment points.
§ 23-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.2
AO:419
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean actual
construction on a parcel of land in accordance with a permit issued by
the applicable jurisdiction.
COMMON PROPERTY — Shall mean land or water or a combination,
together with improvements, within or related to a site designed as
a development, and designated and intended for ownership, use and
responsibility by the residents and owners of the development.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN (MASTER PLAN) — See Master Plan.
CONTIGUOUS LANDS — Shall mean land which is connected or
adjacent to other land so as to permit the land to be used as a functional
unit; provided that separation by lot, line, streams, roads, rights-of-way
and easements shall not affect the contiguity of land.
COUNTRY CLUB — Shall mean a club operated for profits, which may
include a golf course containing not less than 60 acres for each nine
holes of golf and/or associated recreational facilities.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Camden, State of New Jersey.
COUNTY PLANNING BOARD — Shall mean the Planning Board of the
County of Camden.
CUL-DE-SAC — Shall mean a street with access closed at one end and
with a vehicular turn around at the closed end.
DAYS — Shall mean calendar days.
DENSITY — Shall mean the number of dwelling units per adjusted
gross acre. The adjusted gross acre means the total number of
buildable acres on a tract or parcel proposed for development which
are calculated excluding land located within the one-hundred-year
floodplains, wetlands and wetland buffer areas as determined by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, N.J. DEP Office of Freshwater Wetlands,
the Borough of Pine Hill or any other entity having jurisdiction. The
maximum number of units which may be proposed for development on
a tract or parcel of land are calculated by multiplying the number of
buildable acres by the maximum number of units per acre permitted in
the zone where the land is located, as set forth in Article VII, Subsection
23-7.1. If the resulting number is a fraction of a partial unit of 0.5 or
more, the maximum number of units may be rounded off to the next
highest number.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — Shall mean a zoning ordinance,
subdivision ordinance, site plan ordinance, Official Map ordinance or
other municipal regulation of the use and development of land or
amendment thereto.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean the lands required for the
installation and/or maintenance of storm sewers or drainage ditches,
or required along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the
channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the
§ 23-3.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-3.2
AO:420
public against flood damage in accordance with Chapter 1 of Title 58 of
the New Jersey Revised Statutes.
DRIVEWAY — Shall mean the vehicular entrance and exit for a land use.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a room or series of connected rooms
containing cooking, sleeping, sanitary and general living facilities for
one housekeeping unit.
DWELLING, DETACHED SINGLE FAMILY — Shall mean a building
containing one dwelling unit detached from all other buildings or
dwelling units.
DWELLING, DUPLEX — Shall mean a building containing two dwelling
units side by side or wholly or partly one or the other, on one or more
lot(s).
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY (APARTMENTS) — Shall mean a building
on one lot containing three or more dwelling units.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED SINGLE FAMILY (TWIN) — Shall mean
a building containing two dwelling units side by side on adjoining lots
and having a common or party wall and having separate individual
sewerage and water facilities and connections.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — Shall mean a building containing three
or more attached dwelling units erected in a row on adjoining lots, each
unit separate from the adjoining unit, but attached by a common or
party wall and each unit having separate individual outside access and
individual public water and sewerage facilities and connections.
EMPLOYEES — Whenever the word "employees" or the expression
"number of employees" is herein referred to, it shall mean the greatest
number of persons to be employed in the building in question during
any season of the year and any time of the day or night.
ENLARGEMENT — Shall mean an addition to the floor area of an
existing building, an increase in size of another structure or an increase
in that portion of a tract of land occupied by an existing use.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — Shall mean a municipal advisory
body created pursuant to P.I. 1968, c. 245 (c. 40:56A-1 et seq.).
FARM BUILDING — Shall mean any building for storing agricultural
equipment or farm produce, housing livestock or poultry or processing
dairy products. The term "farm building" shall not include a dwelling.
FENCE — Shall mean an artificially constructed barrier of wood,
masonry, stone, wire, metal or any other manufactured material or
combination of materials erected for the enclosure of yard areas or
other open space.
FIRE STATION — Shall mean that portion of a building used solely for
the housing of fire-fighting auxiliary equipment and related space.
FLOOD AREA — Shall mean the sum of the habitable gross area of the
several floors of a building or buildings.
§ 23-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.2
AO:421
FLOODPLAIN — Shall mean the flood hazard areas of delineated
streams and area inundated by the one-hundred-year flood in
nondelineated areas as shown on the Borough Floodplain Map
described in Article VII, Subsection 23-7.11.3.
FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE — Shall mean an ordinance delineating and
regulating encroachments, such as but not limited to buildings.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas required to carry and discharge a flood.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — Shall mean a figure which, when multiplied by
the lot area, will determine the amount of permitted floor area. This
figure is determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on
a lot by the area of that lot.
GARAGE — Shall mean an enclosed building used or designed for
housing or storing of self-propelled vehicles or units, or portions thereof
designed for public highways.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — Shall mean a garage intended and used for the
storage of motor vehicles of the owner or resident upon the premises.
GARDEN APARTMENTS — Shall mean a group of multifamily dwellings
architecturally designed with some of the units placed on top of other
units, up to three stories in height, designed for rental or sale of
the individual housekeeping units, having common open spaces and
designed in accordance with the special requirements for such
dwellings as set forth in this chapter.
HALF-STORY — Shall mean a story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof,
the roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls
are not more than two feet nor less than one foot above the finished
floor of such story.
HIGHWAY ACCESS POINT — Shall mean the distance between any
vehicular entrance or exit to a street and the next adjoining vehicular
entrance or exit in the same street.
HOME OCCUPATION — Shall mean an activity for gain customarily
carried on in a dwelling or in a building accessory to a dwelling, clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes.
HOMEOWNERS' ASSOCIATION — Shall mean an organization in a
development under recorded agreements through which each lot owner
shall be a member and each dwelling unit is subject to a charge for
a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities
and maintenance including maintenance costs levied against the
association by the Borough of Pine Hill in accordance with N.J.S.A.
49:55D-43.
HOSPITAL — Shall mean a public institution providing public health
services primarily for inpatient medical or surgical care of the sick or
injured and including related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient
§ 23-3.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-3.2
AO:422
department, training facilities, central service facilities and staff office
which are an integral part of the facility.
HOSPITAL, VETERINARY — Shall mean a structure designed or
converted for the care and treatment of sick or wounded domestic
animals.
HOTEL — Shall mean a building having six or more rental rooms,
without individual cooking facilities, for transient guests.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — Shall mean one or more persons living as a
single nonprofit household, as distinguished from individuals or groups
occupying a hotel, club, fraternity or sorority house. The housekeeping
unit shall be deemed to include housekeeping facilities and services.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Shall mean those persons related by blood
or legal relationship in the following manner: grandparents,
grandchildren, parent, son, daughter, brothers, sisters, aunts, uncles,
and first cousins.
IMPERVIOUS OR IMPERMEABLE SURFACE — Shall mean any natural
or man-made surface which does not permit infiltration of water and
cause surface runoff.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE — Shall mean the area of a lot
covered by impervious or impermeable surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO — Shall mean a measure of the
intensity of land use as measured by dividing the total area of all
impervious surfaces within the site by the site area.
IMPROVEMENTS — Shall mean any type of structure, excavation or
paved section, excluding a driveway or curb.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — Shall mean any land owned by the Borough
of Pine Hill and land used for the following public or private purposes:
educational facilities, including universities, colleges, elementary,
secondary and vocational schools, kindergartens and nurseries,
churches and their accessory uses, cultural facilities such as libraries,
galleries, museums, concert halls, theaters and the like; hospitals,
including such educational, clinical, research and convalescent
facilities as are integral to the operation of the hospital; medical and
health service facilities, including nursing homes, supervised
residential institutions, rehabilitation therapy centers and public health
facilities, law enforcement facilities; military facilities and other similar
facilities.
JUNKYARD — Shall mean the use of any lot for the storage, keeping
or abandonment of junk, including wrecked or disabled vehicles, parts
of vehicles, scrap metals or other scrap material or building material,
or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of structures,
automobiles or other vehicles, equipment and used machinery or parts
thereof; provided, however, that this definition shall not be deemed to
include any of the foregoing uses which are accessory and incidental
to any lawful agricultural, commercial or industrial use permitted in
§ 23-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.2
AO:423
any zone. The term "junkyard" as herein defined included automobile
wrecking yards and yards or lots used for the accumulation of used
building materials. The outdoor storage, parking, keeping or deposit on
any lot of two or more vehicles without lawful license plates and current
Motor Vehicle Inspection stickers, which vehicles are not accessory
and incidental to a lawful agricultural, commercial or industrial use
permitted in any zone shall be deemed to be a "junkyard."
LANDFILL — Shall mean sites, including open dumps, where solid
waste, liquid and dry sewage sludges, and liquid and dry chemical
waste are disposed of by land application with or without the use of
management practices or soil covering.
LANDOWNERS — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of
land, including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether
or not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee, if he
is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the "landowners"
or other persons having proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPING — Shall mean the installation of plant material or seed
as a part of development.
LINE FRONTAGE — Shall mean the horizontal distance between the
side lot lines measured along the street line. The minimum "lot
frontage" shall be the same as lot width, except that on curved
alignments with an outside radius of less than 500 feet, the minimum
distance between the side lot lines measured at the street line shall not
be less than 75% of the required minimum lot width. In the case of a
corner lot, either side may be considered the "lot frontage", provided
that the minimum frontage is met for the zone in which the lot is
located.
LOADING SPACE — Shall mean an off-set berth on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings for temporary parking of a vehicle while
loading or unloading.
LOT AREA — Shall mean the total horizontal area included within lot
lines. Where the front lot line is the center line of a street or lies in part
or in whole in the street area, the lot shall include that part of the lot in
use or to be used as a street.
LOT COVERAGE — Shall mean the area of a lot covered by any
impervious surface but not including swimming pools, service walks
and driveways not in excess of 24 feet wide on residential lots.
LOT DEPTH — Shall mean the shortest horizontal distance between the
front line, or the boundary of the street right-of-way if the front lot line
lies within an area used or to be used as a street, and the rear lot line.
In case of a triangular lot having no rear line, the distance shall be
measured to a parallel to the front line which shall not be less than 10
feet in length measured between its intersection with the side lot lines.
LOT LINE, FRONT — Shall mean the line separating the lot from the
street line.
§ 23-3.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-3.2
AO:424
LOT LINE, REAR — Shall mean any lot, except a front lot line, which
is parallel to or within 45° of being parallel to, and does not intersect
any street line. In the case of a corner lot, the owner or developer may
show a different designation. See definition of "corner lot" for more
requirements.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Shall mean any lot which is not a front lot line
or a rear lot line. In the case of a corner lot, the owner or developer
may make a different designation. See definition of "corner lot" for
requirements.
LOT WIDTH — Shall mean the horizontal distance between side lot
lines measured at setback points on each side lot line an equal distance
back from the street line. The minimum "lot width" shall be measured
at the required building setback line.
LOT, CORNER — Shall mean a lot at the junction to two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of the intersection does
not exceed 120°.
LOT, INTERIOR — Shall mean a lot, the side lines of which do not abut
the street.
LOT, THROUGH — Shall mean an interior lot having frontage on two
streets or one street and an alley.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Shall mean any security other than
cash which may be accepted by the Borough of Pine Hill for the
maintenance of improvements required by this chapter pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.
MASTER PLAN — Shall mean a composite of the mapped and written
proposals recommending the physical development of the municipality
which shall have been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MEDICAL CLINIC — Shall mean a building constructed as a
professional building for the offices of three or more medical
practitioners.
MINOR SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan of one or more
lots which (i) proposes new development within the scope of
development specifically permitted by this chapter as a minor site
plan; (ii) does not involve planned development, any new street or
extension of any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant
to Section 30 of the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42; and
(iii) contains the information reasonably required in order to make an
informed determination as to whether the requirements established by
the chapter for approval of a minor site plan have been met.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a subdivision for the creation of
not more than three lots provided that such subdivision does not involve
a new street or the extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of
which is prorated pursuant to Section 30 of the Municipal Land Use
Law.
§ 23-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.2
AO:425
MIXED OCCUPANCY — Shall mean occupancy of a building or land for
more than one use.
MODULAR HOME (MANUFACTURED HOME) — Shall mean a
manufactured building or portion of a building designated for long-term
residential use.
MOTEL-HOTEL — Shall mean a building or a group of buildings having
units containing sleeping accommodations which are for a temporary
rental occupancy by transients and providing sufficient off-street
parking facilities adjacent or convenient thereto. A tourist home
containing provisions or facilities for accommodation of more than two
transient occupants not normally quartered on the premises shall be
considered a "motel-hotel" facility under the provisions of this chapter.
MUNICIPAL (MUNICIPALITY) — Shall mean of or pertinent to the
Borough of Pine Hill.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — Shall mean the Municipal Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment, or a governing body of the Borough of Pine Hill
when acting pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law and any agency
which is acting pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law.
MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Borough of Pine
Hill Municipal Utilities Authority.
NONCONFORMING LOT — Shall mean a lot, the area, dimension
or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, but fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of
such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure, the size,
dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption,
revision or amendment of the Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located
by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — Shall mean a use or activity which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the Zoning
Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment.
NURSING HOME — Shall mean any building in which more than one
room or an area exceeding 400 square feet is used for the
accommodation, reception or treatment of the aged or the sick who are
residents therein, excluding members of the resident's family.
OFF-SITE — Shall mean located outside the lot lines of the lot in
question but within the property (of which the lot is part) which is the
subject of a development application or contiguous portion of a street
or right-of-way.
§ 23-3.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-3.2
AO:426
OFF-TRACT — Shall mean located off the property which is the subject
of the development application or off a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
OFFICE — Shall mean a place for the transaction of business where
reports are prepared, records kept and services rendered, but where no
retail sales, except in connection with professional services, are offered
and where no manufacturing, assembly or fabricating takes place.
OFFICIAL COUNTY MAP — Shall mean the map, with changes and
additions thereto, adopted and established, from time to time, by
resolution of the Board of Chosen Freeholders of the county pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:27-5.
ON-SITE — Shall mean located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Shall mean located on the property which is the subject
of a development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean any parcel or area of land or water
essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designed or reserved
for public or private use for enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment
of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open
space; provided that such areas may be improved with only those
buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking and other
improvements that are designated to be incidental to the natural
openness of the land.
OWNER — Shall mean any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership or corporation, trust or other legal entity having
sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be divided to
commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same under this
chapter.
PARCEL — Shall mean any quantity of land capable of being described
with such definiteness that its location and boundaries may be
established, and which is designated by its owner as land to be used as
a unit.
PARKING AREA — Shall mean an open space, off-street land area,
including parking spaces and access and egress drives or aisles, used
or required by this chapter for parking, or automobiles or other vehicles
exclusively, and in which no gasoline or automobile accessories are sold
and no other business conducted.
PARKING SPACE, AUTOMOBILE — Shall mean that area required for
the parking or storage of one automobile, including necessary aisle
or driveway space providing access thereto. For the purpose of this
chapter, the minimum gross area per automobile parking space shall
not be less than 200 square feet, which shall be deemed to include
not less than 100 square feet for the necessary aisle or driveway space
accessory thereto.
§ 23-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.2
AO:427
PEDESTRIAN WAY — Shall mean a right-of-way easement provided for
the purpose of pedestrian access and passage.
PERSON/PERSONS — Shall mean an individual, corporation, public
agency, business, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons
having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity.
PLAT, FINAL — Shall mean the duly approved and recorded final map
of all or a portion of the subdivision as presented to the approving
authority for final approval.
PLAT, PRELIMINARY — Shall mean the map indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the Secretary for
Planning Board consideration and tentative approval and which meets
the requirements of Article VIII, Subsection 23-8.4.
PLAT, SKETCH — Shall mean a plan of sufficient accuracy and detailed,
used for the purpose of discussion and clarification of a subdivision as
provided for in this chapter.
PORCH — Shall mean a roofed open structure projection from the
front, side or rear wall of a building. A porch may be screened or glass
enclosed.
PUBLIC AGENCIES — Shall mean the government of the United States
of America; the State of New Jersey, or any other state; their political
subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities; and interstate and regional
agencies exercising sovereign powers of government.
RECREATION, ACTIVE — Shall mean intensive recreation including
facilities for physical activities, games, team sports and generally any
recreation that is not passive or low intensive.
RECREATION, PASSIVE OR LOW INTENSIVE — Shall mean recreation
with insignificant impact on surrounding areas or on the environmental
integrity of the area, such as hiking, hunting, trapping, fishing,
canoeing, nature study and bicycling.
RECREATIONAL AREA — Shall mean a private or public space,
including essential buildings and structures used for play and
recreation space for individuals.
RESOURCE EXTRACTION — Shall mean the dredging, digging,
extracting, mining and quarrying of sand, gravel, or minerals for
commercial purposes not including, however, the private or agricultural
extraction and use of extracted material by a landowner.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean an establishment in which food and drink
is to be consumed while seated at a table, counter, or booth within a
building on the premises.
RETAIL SALES — Shall mean any sale of goods and services to the
general public as distinguished from wholesale sales.
SEASONAL HIGH WATER TABLE — Shall mean the level to which
water seasonally rises in soil in most years.
§ 23-3.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-3.2
AO:428
SECRETARY — Shall mean the Secretary of the Planning Board,
Borough of Pine Hill.
SERVICE STATION — Shall mean lands and buildings where fuel,
lubricants, miscellaneous accessories and minor repair services for
motor vehicles are dispensed, but where no vehicular painting and/or
bodywork is done and where no junked or unregistered motor vehicles
are kept or stored.
SETBACK LINE — Shall mean a line within any lot, usually marking
the limits or required yard space, parallel to any street line between
which line and street line no building or portion thereof may be erected,
except as provided in this chapter.
SHOPPING CENTER — Shall mean one or more buildings or parts
thereof, designed as a unit to be occupied by one or more business
enterprises for the conduct of business or conducted as an integrated
and cohesively planned development.
SIGN — Shall mean any outdoor advertising sign or outdoor advertising
structure.
SITE PLAN, EXEMPT — Shall mean an application or development
which is exempt from site plan review and approval under the
provisions of Subsection 23-8.1 of Article VIII of this chapter.
SITE PLAN, MAJOR — Shall mean all site plans not defined as minor.
SITE PLAN, MINOR — Shall mean a development plan of one or more
lots which: (i) proposes a new development or alterations to structures,
not otherwise exempt from site plan review and approval, involving
BILLBOARD OR COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING SIGN — Shall mean
an advertising sign, structure or symbol erected and maintained by
an individual or corporation engaged in the sale or rental of space
thereon to a clientele of manufacturing, service or commercial
enterprises, upon which space there is displayed, by means of
painting, posting or other means, advertising copy describing a
wide variety of products or services which are not made, produced,
assembled or sold from the lot or premises upon which
advertisement is displayed.
1.
ENTERPRISE IDENTIFICATION SIGN — Shall mean any sign,
symbol, trademark, structure or similar device used to identify the
product or the activity being pursued by any industry, business
service or commercial enterprise, which sign is displayed upon the
lot or premises occupied by such an enterprise of the purpose of
apprising the passersby of the location of said enterprise and type
of activity in which it is engaged.
2.
TEMPORARY SIGN — Shall mean a sign which offers premises
for sale, rent or development or which advertises the services of
professionals or building trades during construction or alteration
of the premises upon which the sign is located.
3.
§ 23-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.2
AO:429
grading, clearing or disturbance of less than 5,000 square feet of land;
(ii) does not involve planned development, any new street extension
or off-tract improvement which is prorated pursuant to Section 30 of
the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42; and (iii) contains the
information required in Article VIII, Subsection 23-8.6.
SITE TRIANGLE — Shall mean a triangle area abutting two intersecting
streets where vision is unobstructed. The site triangle is formed by
the intersection street sidelines and a line connecting a point on each
sideline a set distance from the intersection.
SOIL — Shall mean both surface (topsoil) and subsoil, and shall include
dirt, stone, gravel, sand, humus, clay, loam, rock and mixtures of any of
these.
SOIL REMOVAL ORDINANCE — Shall mean an ordinance of the
Borough of Pine Hill regulating the removal of soil for sale or for use
other than on the premises from which the soil shall be taken, known as
Chapter 21, Soil Removal and Sale, of the Code of the Borough of Pine
Hill.
STATE — Shall mean the State of New Jersey or any of its agencies.
STORY — Shall mean that portion of a building included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there
is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it. No story shall be deemed to be a first story if its floor
level is more than six feet above the level from which the height of the
building is measured. A mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story if it
covers over 1/3 of the area of the floor next below it. For the purpose
of this chapter, a split-level dwelling shall be considered a one story
structure.
STREETLINE — Shall mean the edge of the existing or future street
right-of-way, whichever would result in the widest right-of-way, as
shown on the Official Map or as required by this chapter, forming the
dividing line between the street and lot.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a
construction for occupancy, use or combination having a fixed location
on, above or below the surface of the land.
SUBDIVIDER — Shall mean any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — Shall mean three members of the
Planning Board appointed by the Chairman; with the approval of the
Planning Board who are empowered to classify and approve minor
subdivisions by unanimous affirmative vote. The Subdivision Committee
shall assume any additional duties relating to land subdivision which
may be conferred upon this Committee by the Planning Board.
§ 23-3.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-3.2
AO:430
SUBDIVISION, AGRICULTURAL — Shall mean a division of lands
wherein both parcels are actually used for agricultural purposes, where
the only buildings to be erected thereon, if any, are for agricultural
purposes exclusively, are not included residential uses and where both
parcels are three acres or larger in size; said subdivision being exempt
from the subdivision requirements if no new streets or roads are
involved.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — Shall mean all subdivisions not classified as
agricultural or minor subdivisions.
SWIMMING POOL — Shall mean facilities constructed above or below
ground having a depth of more than two feet and/or a water surface
of 100 square feet or more and designed and maintained for swimming
purposes.
TOWERS — Shall mean and include water towers, antennae and similar
structures. In no event shall the height of any tower or similar structure
exceed the distance from the nearest property lot line to the base of the
tower structure.
TRACT — Shall mean a parcel or portion or other division of land which
is in whole or in part proposed for development, composed of a portion
of one lot; or one or more contiguous lots in the same ownership. Lots
separated by easements, streets or other public rights-of-way shall be
considered contiguous for the purpose of this chapter.
TRANSITION STRIP — Shall mean a concentration of masses, trees and
shrubbery not less than 10 feet wide, placed parallel to the property
line for the purpose of screening dust, noise or disparate uses. Such
strip shall be composed of evergreen plants and trees with specimens
having an initial height of not less than five feet and planted at intervals
of not more than 10 feet on center. The low-level screen shall consist of
evergreen shrubs planted in height of not more than five feet on center.
The low level screen shall be placed in alternating rows to produce a
more effective barrier.
UNDERTAKING ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean a licensed mortician
concerned with the arrangement of cremation or burial of the dead and
the overseeing of burials.
USE — Shall mean any activity, occupancy, business or operation
carried on or intended to be carried on, in a building or on a tract of
land.
USE, PRINCIPAL — Shall mean the main or primary purpose or
purposes for which land or a structure, building and/or sign or use
thereafter is designed, arranged or intended for which they may be
occupied or maintained under the Zoning Ordinance. All other
structures, buildings, signs or uses on the same lot and incidental or
supplementary thereto and permitted under the Zoning Ordinance shall
be considered accessory uses.
§ 23-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-3.2
AO:431
UTILITIES — Shall mean those services customarily rendered by
corporation or the municipality under the review of the public utilities
commission for public service such as electricity, gas, telephone, water
and sewerage including the appurtenances used in connection with the
supplying of such services.
VEGETATION — Shall mean any plant material including grasses,
shrubs and trees.
WETLANDS — Shall mean those lands which are inundated or
saturated by water at a magnitude, duration and frequency sufficient
to support the growth of hydrophytes. Wetlands include lands which
are poorly drained soils as designated by the National Cooperative
Soils Survey of the Soils Conservation Service of the United States
Department of Agriculture and as designated by the National Wetlands
Inventory; United States Department of the Interior.
YARD — Shall mean an open space extending between the closest point
of any building and lot line or street line.
YARD, FRONT — Shall mean the yard extending along the full length of
the front line, and being the minimum horizontal distance between the
front lot line (or street line) and the front yard line or building or any
projection thereof, other than steps.
YARD, REAR — Shall mean an open space extending the full width of
the lot and lying between the rear lot line and closest point of any
building or structure on the lot except for swimming pools and similar
open structures.
YARD, SIDE — Shall mean an open space extending from the front yard
to the rear yard and lying between each side or the line and closest
point of any building or structure on the lot except for swimming pools
and similar open structures.
§ 23-3.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-3.2
AO:432
ARTICLE IV
General Provisions
§ 23-4. PROVISIONS.
§ 23-4.1. Administrative Provisions. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. IV]
The Borough Council, Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may,
from time to time, adopt, revise, or amend rules and regulations for the
administration of their functions, powers and/or duties, not inconsistent
with the Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.)
or this chapter. Copies of all such rules and regulations shall be maintained
in the office of the Borough Clerk and shall be available to any person upon
request, subject to the charge of a reasonable fee as established by law.
§ 23-4.2. Meetings. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. IV]
Regular meetings of the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less than once a month. All regular meetings shall
be open to the public. Scheduled meetings may be cancelled for lack of
applications or other business to process.
A special meeting may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or at the
request of two Board members, for which notice must be provided for to all
Board members and the public as required by the Laws of the State of New
Jersey.
Executive session meetings may be called to discuss and study matters to
come before the Board. Such meetings shall be noticed to the public, but
shall be without public participation unless permitted by the Chairman of
the Board. No decisions will be rendered at an executive session meeting.
A quorum is necessary to conduct business or act on any pending
application. All action requires a majority vote of the members present at
the meeting, except as may be otherwise required by any provision of the
Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey.
A Board member absent from one or more meetings at which a hearing was
held, shall be eligible to vote, only upon certification by such Board member
that he has reviewed the transcript or recordings of all the meetings from
which he was absent.
§ 23-4.3. Minutes. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. IV]
Minutes, by recording, of every regular and special session meeting shall
be kept and shall include the names of all members present, the names and
addresses of all persons appearing before the Board, and a report of all
action taken by the Board. The recording shall be available to any interested
party for review at the office of the Board or Borough Clerk.
§ 23-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-4.4
AO:433
§ 23-4.4. Public Hearings. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. IV]
A public hearing is required on each application, development, variance and
adoption, revision or amendment to the Master Plan and as may be required
by the Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey.
All maps, surveys or other documents which make up a part of the
application shall be on file and available for public inspection not less than
10 days prior to the date set for the hearing. The applicant may produce
other documents, records and testimony at the hearing to substantiate,
support, clarify and supplement previously filed documents.
Testimony at the hearing shall be taken under oath or affirmation, and
the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all interested parties
through their attorney at law, if represented or if not represented then
direct but subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable
limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
The Chairman of the Board, or other officer presiding over the hearing, or
the Board Attorney, shall have the power to administer the oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel attendance at the hearing.
Each Municipal Board may adopt rules and regulations governing the
conduct of the public hearing, as such rules and regulations are not in
conflict with the provisions of the Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey
and this chapter.
Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable at the hearing, but the
Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence or
testimony.
The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the hearing either
by stenographer or by mechanical or electronic means. A transcript or
duplicate recording thereof shall be provided to any interested party at his/
her expense.
§ 23-4.5. Notice Requirement For Public Hearings. [Ord. No. 95-588
Art. IV]
Whenever a public hearing is required, the applicant shall comply with the
provisions of the Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey, and the applicant
shall give public notice at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing,
and the applicant shall file with the Board an affidavit of proof of service.
§ 23-4.6. Payment of Taxes. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. IV]
As a condition for Board approval, the applicant must submit proof that
no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on
the property for which any subdivision, site plan, or planned development
application is made.
§ 23-4.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-4.7
AO:434
§ 23-4.7. Fees and Escrows. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. IV]
The fees set forth in this chapter are nonrefundable and are to cover the
cost incurred by the Borough in processing the application.
Escrows are to pay for the cost of professional review by the Borough
Engineer, Planning Consultant, Attorney and other professionals employed
by the Board to review and make recommendations on the application. At
the time of the submission of the application, the applicant shall be required
to sign an escrow agreement to cover the cost of professional review. The
amount to be specified in the escrow agreement is an estimate, which is
required to be paid prior to certification of completion of application. If from
time to time, additional escrow is needed, the applicant shall be required to
pay the additional escrow prior to being permitted to take the next step in
the process, or obtain occupancy permits.
In the event that the posted escrow exceeds the amount required, the
excess will be refunded to the applicant within 14 days of the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy for the project.
§ 23-4.8. Schedule of Planning Board Fees. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art.
IV]
a. Minor Subdivision:
1. Application Fee: $100.
2. Engineer Review: $300 plus $50 per additional lot over one.
3. Legal Review/Costs: $150.
4. Publication: $25.
b. Major Subdivision (preliminary plot):
1. Application Fee: $500.
2. Engineer Review: $2,000 plus $50 per lot created.
3. Legal Review/Costs: $500.
4. Planning Review:
(a) Residential: Included in above.
(b) Nonresidential: Included in above.
5. Publication: $25.
c. Final Major Subdivision:
1. Application Fee: $200.
2. Engineer Review: $1,000 plus $50 per each lot created.
§ 23-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-4.8
AO:435
§ 23-4.9. Site Plan Review Fees. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. IV]
3. Legal Review/Costs: $300.
4. Planning Review:
(a) Residential: Included in above.
(b) Nonresidential: Included in above.
5. Publication: $100.
d. Planned Unit Development:
1. Application Fee: $1,000.
2. Engineer Review: $2,500 plus $20 each unit.
3. Legal Review/Costs: $1,000.
4. Planning Review: $1,000 plus $20 each unit.
5. Publication: $100.
e. Regional Shopping Center:
1. Application Fee: $1,000.
2. Engineer Review: $10,000.
3. Legal Review: $2,500.
4. Planning Review: $500 plus $20 per 100 square feet of floor area.
5. Publication: $100.
a. Site Plan — Minor:
1. Application Fee: $100.
2. Engineering Review: $500.
3. Legal Review: $150.
4. Planning Review:
(a) Residential: Included in above.
(b) Nonresidential: Included in above.
5. Publication: $25.
b. Site Plan — Preliminary:
1. Application Fee: $200.
2. Engineering Review:
§ 23-4.8 PINE HILL CODE § 23-4.9
AO:436
§ 23-4.10. Inspection Fee Escrow. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. IV]
(a) Residential: $1,000 plus $50 per dwelling unit.
(b) Nonresidential: $1,000 plus $100 per additional acre.
3. Legal Review: $300.
4. Planning: Included in above.
5. Publication: $25.
c. Site Plan — Final:
1. Application Fee: $150.
2. Engineering Review.
(a) Residential: $500 plus $25 per dwelling unit.
(b) Nonresidential: $750 plus $50 per additional acre.
3. Legal Review: $300.
4. Planning: Included in above.
5. Publication: $25.
d. Miscellaneous Other Fees:
1. Amended Plans: $100 plus $25 original.
2. Property Owner's List: $10.
3. Conditional Use (Without Site Plan): $250.
4. Extension: $100.
5. Street Vacation: $250.
6. Inspection Escrow: 5%.
a. Prior to the construction of any improvements required by the Planning
Board and/or Zoning Board of Adjustment and prior to final approval of
major subdivision, minor subdivision, apartment project, shopping
center or other site plan, the applicant shall deposit and maintain with
the Borough a fund of not less than 5% of the estimated costs of the
required on-and off-site improvements as determined by the Municipal
Engineer, to cover costs of inspection of improvements; provided,
however, that the minimum escrow deposit shall be $200 and the
maximum escrow deposit shall be $10,000.
b. If any time during the inspection of the construction of the said
improvements it becomes evident that the escrow deposit is or will be
insufficient to cover the costs thereof, the applicant shall make such
additional deposits in amounts to be determined by the Municipal
§ 23-4.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-4.10
AO:437
§ 23-4.11. Schedule of Zoning Board of Adjustment Fees. [Ord. No.
95-588 Art. IV]
Engineer based upon the estimated remaining costs required to
properly review and inspect the on-and off-site improvements.
a. Use Variance (applications made under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d):
Residential Commercial Industrial
1. Application $100 $200 $250
2. Engineer Review (if
applicable)
$300 $500 $750
3. Legal Review $75 $200 $200
4. Planning Review (if in
conjunction with
subdivision)
See fees per Subsection 23-4.8
b. Bulk Variance (applications made under N.J.S.A. 40:55-70(c):
Residential CommercialIndustrial
1. Application $100 $200 $250
2. Engineer Review (if
applicable)
$300 $500 $750
3. Legal Review $75 $150 $150
4. Publication Fees $25 $25 $25
c. Appeals (applications made under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a):
Residential CommercialIndustrial
1. Application $100 $200 $250
2. Engineer Review (if
applicable)
$300 $500 $750
3. Legal Review $75 $150 $150
4. Publication Fees $25 $25 $25
d. Interpretations (applications made under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b):
Residential CommercialIndustrial
1. Application $100 $200 $250
2. Engineer Review (if
applicable)
$300 $500 $750
3. Legal Review $75 $300 $300
4. Publication Fees $25 $25 $25
§ 23-4.10 PINE HILL CODE § 23-4.11
AO:438
§ 23-4.12. Miscellaneous Fees. [Ord. No. 96-619]
§ 23-4.13. Tax Map and GIS Escrow Fees and Electronic File
Submission Standards. [Ord. No. 2006-789 Art. I-IV]
e. Miscellaneous:
Residential CommercialIndustrial
1. Planning Review (if
applicable) not in
conjunction with a
subdivision)
See fees per Subsection 23-4.9
a. Zoning Permit: $20.
a. Purpose. It is the purpose of this subsection to impose upon developers
the costs incurred by Pine Hill Borough in updating the municipal Tax
Map/GIS database as a result of the approval of various subdivisions or
the creation of any new lots within Pine Hill Borough. Said costs are
directly related to the development procedure, and thereby Pine Hill
Borough determines that they should be borne by the developer/
applicant for all said subdivisions.
1. Tax Map/GIS Database Update Fees. Each applicant and/or
developer for any approval which results in the creation of any new
lots, revision of any existing lots, and/or other alterations to the Tax
Map/GIS database, shall be responsible for paying all reasonable
charges incurred by the Engineer in updating said Tax Map/GIS
database. These costs shall include, but not be limited to, update to
the GIS database, revisions to existing Tax Map plates, creation/
addition of new Tax Map plates, appropriate revisions to the Key
Map(s), reprographic services for applicable City, County and State
submission copies, as well as any reasonable shipping and handling
fees involved.
2. Electronic File Submission Standards.
(a) Required Data. In addition to any/all hardcopy submissions
already required of all map and plan materials currently being
submitted to the Borough of Pine Hill, a digital graphics file
containing the data outlined in paragraph b shall also be
submitted with each project. All files must be submitted in a
.dwg or .dxf file format.
(b) All electronic files must be created in NEW JERSEY State Plane
Coordinate System North American Datum 1983 (NAD 83), in
US Survey FEET.
(c) All linework shall connect at line end points Overlaps, gaps or
dangles are not acceptable. Polygon objects, such as parcels or
other boundaries, shall be created from line segments,
§ 23-4.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-4.13
AO:439
connecting to adjacent linework at intersections. Single, closed
polygons are not to be used where coincidental boundaries
may occur. All text shall be clearly legible and not obscured by
polygon boundaries/linework.
b. Submission Time frame. All digital files for proposed property
upgrades/changes/improvements shall be submitted to the Borough of
Pine Hill within 15 days of recordation of the Final Plat or Parcel Map.
Upon acceptance of the improvements by the Planning/Zoning Board
the digital files for all public, private and site development, upgrades,
changes and/or improvements shall be submitted by the originating
party. These digital files shall contain all information as shown on the
approved, hardcopy plans, as well as any approved changes or revision,
and any/all "As-Built" information. Any proposed deviation from these
guidelines shall be considered by the Planning/Zoning Board on a case
by case basis only.
c. Minimum Content Requirements. The following minimum information
must be provided as outlined for each type of project referenced:
1. SIGNALIZATION DATA: Striping, traffic signs, traffic signals,
legend.
2. CONTOUR DATA: Contour lines and contour elevations.
3. GRADING DATA: Street grade, top of curb elevations.
4. ROAD DATA: Right-of-way lines, street name(s), sign locations,
center line locations, median island locations, sidewalk locations,
retaining wall locations, sound barrier locations, driveway/gutter
line locations, curblines, handicap ramp locations, traffic light
locations, tree/shrub locations, legend.
5. SURFACE DATA: Water body locations, stream/drainage ditch
locations, park locations, railroad locations, bike path/trail
locations, well locations, aboveground storage tank locations,
legend.
6. SURVEY DATA: Boundary line locations, monument locations,
center line locations, lot/parcel boundaries, easement locations,
control lines, legend.
7. UTILITIES DATA: Transmission line locations, pole locations,
transformer locations, lateral locations, meter locations, valve
locations, cleanout locations, manhole locations, catch basin
locations, hydrant locations, culvert/culvert fencing locations,
water line locations, sanitary sewer line locations, stormwater
drainage facility locations, legend.
d. Fees. Fees to be escrowed by developer for mapping are as follows:
§ 23-4.13 PINE HILL CODE § 23-4.13
AO:440
Electronic Mapping Major
Subdivision
Manual Mapping Major
Subdivision
$45 per lot $55 per lot
Electronic Mapping Tax Map Manual Mapping Tax Map
$45 per lot $55 per lot
§ 23-4.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-4.13
AO:441

ARTICLE V
Planning Board
§ 23-5. PLANNING BOARD.
§ 23-5.1. Establishment and Membership. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V;
Ord. No. 2000-672]
Pursuant to the Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey, Chapter 291, Laws
of N.J. 1975 (40:55D-1 et seq.) there is hereby established in the Borough of
Pine Hill, a Planning Board consisting of nine members of the following four
classes:
§ 23-5.2. Term. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his official
tenure.
The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for
one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office
whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a member
of the Environmental Commission. The term of a Class II or a Class IV
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission shall be
for three years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the Environmental Commission, whichever comes first.
a. Class I: The Mayor or the Mayor's designee in the absence of the Mayor.
b. Class II: One of the officials of the Borough of Pine Hill other than a
member of the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided
that if there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II
member for the purpose of this chapter if there is both a member of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education
among the Class IV members.
c. Class III: A member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
d. Class IV: Six other citizens of the municipality to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
except that one member may be a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and one may be a member of the Board of Education. A
member of the Environmental Commission who is also a member of the
Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV
member unless there be among the Class IV members of the Planning
Board both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member
of the Board of Education, in which case the member common to the
Planning Board and the Environmental Commission shall be deemed to
be the Class II member of the Planning Board.
§ 23-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-5.2
AO:443
The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate when he is no longer
a member of such other Board or at the completion of his Class IV term,
whichever occurs first.
The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this chapter
shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration
of such term shall be evenly distributed over the first four years after their
appointment as determined by resolution of the governing body; provided,
however, that no term of any member shall exceed four years and further
provided that nothing herein shall affect the term of any present member of
the Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion
of the term for which they were appointed. Thereafter all Class rv members
shall be appointed for terms of four years except as otherwise herein
provided. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the
appointment was made.
§ 23-5.3. Vacancies. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
If any vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term,
it shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 23-5.4. Alternate Members. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
There is hereby provided for the appointment to the Planning Board of not
more than two alternate members. Alternate members shall be appointed
by the Mayor, and shall meet the qualifications of Class IV members, except
that one such member may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment as
Alternate No. 1, and Alternate No. 2. The term of alternate members shall
be for two years, except that the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any one year, provided that in no instance shall
the terms of the first appointed alternate members exceed two years. A
vacancy created otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the
Mayor for the unexpired term only. Alternate members may participate in
discussion of the proceedings, but shall not vote except in the absence or
disqualification of a regular member of any class. A vote shall not be delayed
in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate member. In
the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member shall
vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
§ 23-5.5. Organization. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
a. Organization. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from the members of Class IV, and shall select a Secretary
who may or may not be a member of the Planning Board or other
municipal employee. A municipal employee selected as Secretary must
be also designated by the Mayor or Administrative Officer to the
Planning Board if one has been created by the Code of the Borough.
§ 23-5.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-5.5
AO:444
§ 23-5.6. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
§ 23-5.7. Ancillary Powers of the Planning Board. [Ord. No. 95-588
Art. V]
When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site plans
or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
b. Attorney. There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney.
The Planning Board may annually appoint, fix or agree upon the
compensation, which shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the
governing body, for the Planning Board Attorney, who shall be other
than the Municipal Attorney.
c. Experts and Staff. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for
the services of experts and other staff and services as it may deem
necessary. The Board shall not, however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or
grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for its use.
a. The Planning Board shall follow the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq. and shall accordingly exercise its power in regard to:
1. The Master Plan pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
2. Subdivision control and site plan review pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-37 through 59.
3. The Official Map pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 through 36.
4. The Zoning Ordinance including conditional uses pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29 through 31.
b. The Planning Board may:
1. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulation.
2. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous
planning process.
3. Perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by
ordinance or resolution of the governing body for the aid and
assistance of the governing body or other agencies or officers.
a. Variances, pursuant to Section 57c of Chapter 291 of the Law of 1975.
b. Direction, pursuant to this chapter, for issuance of permit for a building
or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainage way, flood
control basin or public area reserved pursuant to this chapter.
c. Direction, pursuant to this chapter, for issuance of a permit for a
building or structure not related to a street. Whenever relief is required
pursuant to this chapter, notice of a hearing on the application for
§ 23-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-5.7
AO:445
§ 23-5.8. Referral Powers. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
Prior to the adoption of a development regulation, revision, or amendment
thereto, the Planning Board shall make and transmit to the Borough
Council, within 35 days after referral a report including recommendations
concerning the proposed development regulation, revision or amendment.
The Borough Council, when considering the adoption of a development
regulation, revision or amendment thereto, shall review the report of the
Planning Board and may disapprove or change any recommendation by a
vote of a majority of its full authorized membership and shall record it in
its minutes the reasons for not following such recommendations. Failure of
the Planning Board to transmit its report within the thirty-five-day period
provided herein shall relieve the Borough Council from the requirements of
this subsection in regard to the proposed development regulation, revision
or amendment thereto referred to the Planning Board.
§ 23-5.9. Time Limits for Approval of Minor Subdivisions and
Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
§ 23-5.10. Time Limits for Preliminary Approval of Site Plans and
Major Subdivisions. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
development shall include reference to the request for a variance or
direction for issuance of a permit, as the case may be.
a. Minor Subdivisions. The approval of a minor subdivision, as defined in
this chapter, shall be granted or denied within 45 days of the
submission of a complete application, pursuant to this chapter, to the
Planning Board or within such further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days
from the date of the Planning Board approval, unless within such period
a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions of the Map
Filing Law or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision
is filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer, the
Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat or
deed must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board.
b. Conditional Uses. The review by the Planning Board of conditional use
shall include any required site plan review pursuant to this chapter. The
time period for action by the Planning Board on conditional uses
pursuant to this chapter shall apply to such site plan review.
a. Site Plans. Upon the submission of the administrative officer or Board
of a complete application for a site which involves 10 acres of land or
less and 10 dwelling units or less pursuant to this chapter, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such subdivision or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Upon the submission of a complete
application for a site plan which involves more than 10 acres, or more
§ 23-5.7 PINE HILL CODE § 23-5.10
AO:446
§ 23-5.11. Failure to Reach a Decision. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
Failure of the Planning Board to reach a decision within the specified time
period or extensions thereof shall result in the approval of the subdivision
and/or site plan and/or conditional use as submitted. A certificate of the
administrative officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be
issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein required, and
shall be so accepted by the County Recording Officer for the purpose of
filing subdivision plats.
§ 23-5.12. Exercise of Ancillary Powers. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to exercise its ancillary powers
before the granting of a variance as set forth in this chapter, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny approval of the application within 95 days after
submission by the developer of a complete application or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval
of the application, and a certificate of the administrative officer designated
in this chapter as to the failure of the Planning Board to act, shall be issued
as required to the applicant.
§ 23-5.13. Public Hearings. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
A public hearing shall be held at the preliminary approval stage for minor
subdivisions and site plans, pursuant to this chapter.
than 10 dwelling units, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such submission or
within further time as may be consented to by the developer. Otherwise,
the Planning Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary
approval to the site plan.
b. Major Subdivisions. Upon submission of a complete application
pursuant to this chapter, for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the
Planning Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days
of the date of such submission or within such further times as may be
consented to by the developer.
c. Upon submission of a complete application, pursuant to this chapter, for
a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board shall grant or
deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of such
submission or within such further time as may be consented to by the
developer.
§ 23-5.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-5.14
AO:447
§ 23-5.14. Rights under Preliminary Approval. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art.
V]
Preliminary approval of a major subdivision or site plan shall confer upon
the applicant the following rights for a three-year period from the date of
the preliminary approval:
a. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval
was granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to use
requirements, layout and design standards for streets, curbs, and
sidewalks, lot size, yard dimensions and off-tract improvement; and, in
the case of a site plan, existing natural resources to be preserved on the
site, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading,
screening, landscaping and location of structures, exterior lighting both
for safety reasons and streetlighting, and conservation of energy and
use of renewable energy sources, except that nothing herein shall be
constructed to prevent the Borough from modifying by ordinance such
general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as related to
public health and safety.
b. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration of preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections of
the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan.
c. That the applicant may apply for the Planning Board to grant extensions
on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at least one year
but not to exceed a total extension of two years, provided that if the
design standards have been revised by ordinance, such revised
standards may govern.
d. In the case of a subdivision or a site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in
paragraphs a, b and c above for such period of time, longer than three
years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable,
taking into consideration:
1. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval;
2. Economic conditions; and
3. The comprehensiveness of the development.
The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Planning Board
may thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for such
additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning
Board to be reasonable taking into consideration (i) the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval, and (ii) the potential number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area of the section or sections
awaiting final approval, (iii) economic conditions and (iv) the
§ 23-5.14 PINE HILL CODE § 23-5.14
AO:448
§ 23-5.15. Final Approval of Site Plans and Major Subdivisions.
[Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
§ 23-5.16. Effect of Final Approval. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first
granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer pursuant to this
chapter, whether conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date of final approval, provided that in the
case of major subdivision the rights conferred by this chapter shall expire
if the plat has not been duly recorded within the time period provided in
this chapter. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval, and in the case of a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as
required in this chapter, approving authority may extend such period of
protection for extensions of one year but not to exceed three extensions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the chapter, the granting of final
approval terminates the time period of preliminary approval pursuant to
this chapter for the section granted final approval.
§ 23-5.17. Procedure for Filing Applications. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art.
V]
Applications for development with the jurisdiction of the Planning Board,
pursuant to the provision of P.L. 1975, c. 291, shall be filed with the
comprehensiveness of the development; provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.
a. The Planning Board shall grant final approval if the detailed drawings,
specifications and estimates of the applicant for final approval conform
to the standards established by this chapter for final approval, the
conditions of preliminary approval, and in the case of a major
subdivision, the standards prescribed by the "Map Filing Law", P.L.
1960 c. 14, provided that in the case of a residential cluster, the
Planning Board may permit minimal deviations from the conditions of
preliminary approval necessitated by change of conditions beyond the
control of the developer since the date of preliminary approval without
the developer being required to submit another application for
development for preliminary approval.
b. Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or denied
within 45 days of subdivision of a complete application to the
administrative officer or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant.
c. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing the plat, unless within such period that plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the County Recording Office. The
Planning Board may for good cause, extend the period for recording an
additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of signing of the
plat.
§ 23-5.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-5.17
AO:449
administrative officer of the Planning Board. The applicant shall file all
applications at least 15 days prior to the regular meeting of the Board,
and the submissions of all applications shall be in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Article VIII, Subdivision and Site Plan, of this
chapter, except for such changes in procedure as may be required under
the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975. At the time of filing the application,
but in no event less than 10 days prior to the date set for hearing, the
applicant shall also file plot plans, maps or other papers required by virtue
or any provisions of this chapter or any rule of the Planning Board. The
applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the administrative officer of
the Planning Board. The administrative officer of the Planning Board shall
inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of
the regular meeting dates of the Board.
§ 23-5.18. Advisory Committee; Environmental Commission. [Ord.
No. 95-588 Art. V]
§ 23-5.19. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. V]
The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In
the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony,
the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Laws of 1953
(N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
a. The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties,
but such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other
action required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
b. Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted
to the Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment an index of the
natural resources of the municipality, the Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment shall make available to the Environmental Commission an
informational copy of every application for development submitted to
either Board. Failure of the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment to
make such informational copy available to the Environmental
Commission shall not invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
§ 23-5.17 PINE HILL CODE § 23-5.19
AO:450
ARTICLE VA
Additional Planning Board Powers
§ 23-5A. PLANNING BOARD AUTHORIZED TO ASSUME ZONING
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT POWERS. [Ord. No. 95-600 § 1]
All powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be assumed by the
Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25.
§ 23-5A ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-5A
AO:451

ARTICLE VI
Zoning Board of Adjustment32
§ 23-6. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 23-6.1. Establishment and Composition; Terms of Office;
Vacancies. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
a. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven residents of the Borough of Pine
Hill, appointed by the Borough Council, to serve for terms of four years
from January 1 of the year of their appointment.
b. There shall be two alternate members. Alternate members shall be
designated by the Chairman of the Zoning Board of Adjustment as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2" and shall serve in rotation
during the absence or disqualification of any regular member or
members. The term of each alternate member shall be two years.
Alternate members shall be appointed by the Borough Council.
c. The terms of the members first appointed shall be so determined to the
greatest practicable extent that the expiration of such terms shall be
distributed, in the case of regular member, evenly over the first four
years after their appointment, provided that the initial term of no
regular member shall exceed four years and that the initial term of no
alternate member shall exceed two years. Thereafter, the term of each
regular member shall be four years, and the term of each alternate
member shall be two years. Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be
construed to affect the term of any present member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion
of the term for which they were appointed.
d. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
e. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
f. No member shall be permitted to act on any matter in which he has,
either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial interest.
g. A member may, after public hearing if he requests it, be removed by the
Borough Council for cause.
h. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be permitted to act
on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal
or financial interest. A member may, after public hearing if he requests
it, be removed by the governing body for cause.
32.Editor's Note: See Article VA for assumption of powers by the Planning Board.
§ 23-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-6.2
AO:453
§ 23-6.2. Officers. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman
from its members. The Administrative Officer or Secretary shall be
appointed by the Mayor and may or may not be a Board member or
municipal employee.
§ 23-6.3. Attorney. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint and
fix or agree upon the rate of compensation which shall not exceed that
appropriated by the governing body, for the Zoning Board of Adjustment
Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 23-6.4. Experts and Staff. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body
for its use.
§ 23-6.5. Powers. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
a. The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. and amendments and supplements thereto
and with the provisions of this chapter to:
1. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal
made by an administrative official or agency based on or made in
the enforcement of this chapter.
2. Hear and decide request for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
this chapter or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which such Board is authorized to pass by this chapter.
3. Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or slope
of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation in this chapter would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and
undue hardship upon the owner of such property, grant, upon an
application or an appeal relating to such property, a variance from
such strict application so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship,
including a variance for a conditional use, provided however, that
no variance shall be granted under this subsection to allow a
structure or use in a district restricted against such structure or
use, and further provided that the proposed development does not
§ 23-6.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-6.5
AO:454
§ 23-6.6. Additional Powers. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers specified in
this chapter, have power given by law to:
require approval by the Planning Board of subdivision, site plan or
conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning Board shall
review a request for a variance pursuant to this chapter.
4. In particular cases and for special reasons, grant a variance to
allow departure from any regulations pursuant to this chapter,
including but not limited to, allowing a structure or use in a district
restricted against such structure or use, but only by the affirmative
vote of at least five members of the Board.
b. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section, unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and this chapter. Any
application under any subsection of this section may be referred to any
appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
a. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building
or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainage way, flood
control basin or public area reserved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55-32.
b. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a building
or structure not related to a street.
c. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Article 6 of Chapter 291 of
the Laws of 1975 or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67 whenever the proposed development requires approval by
the Board of Adjustment of a variance pursuant to this chapter. The
developer may elect to submit a separate application requesting
approval of the variance and subsequent application for any required
approval of the subdivision, site plan, or conditional use. The separate
approval of the variance shall be conditioned upon grant of all required
subsequent approvals by the Board of Adjustment. No such subsequent
approval shall be granted unless such approval can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial
impairment of the intent and purpose of the Zone Plan and Zoning
Ordinance. The number of votes of Board members required to grant
any subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter
for the approval in question, and the special vote pursuant to this
chapter.
§ 23-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-6.6
AO:455
§ 23-6.7. Applications and Appeals to the Board of Adjustment.
[Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
d. Whenever an applicant for development requests relief pursuant to
paragraph c of this subsection, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
act in accordance with the following provisions:
1. The Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny approval of the
application within 120 days after submission by a developer of a
complete application to the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment or
within such other time as may be consented to by the applicant. In
the event that the developer elects to submit separate consecutive
applications, the aforesaid provision shall apply to the application
for approval of the variance. The period for granting or denying any
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Failure of the Board of Adjustment to act within the period
prescribed shall constitute approval of the application, which shall
be noted on a certificate by the Secretary of the Board of
Adjustment as to the failure of the Board of Adjustment to act and
which shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of
approval, herein required, and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
2. Whenever review or approval of the application by the County
Planning Board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, c. 285 in the
case of subdivision, or Section 8 of P.L. 1968, c. 285, in the case of a
site plan, the Board of Adjustment shall condition any approval that
it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report of the application
by the County Planning Board or approval by the County Planning
Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time.
3. An application under this section may be referred to any
appropriate person or agency for its report; provided that such
reference shall not exceed the period of time within which the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
a. A developer may file an application for development with the Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application
to any administrative officer.
b. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any interested
party affected by any decision of an administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning
Ordinance or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 20 days by
filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal was
taken. Said notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for said appeal.
The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
§ 23-6.6 PINE HILL CODE § 23-6.8
AO:456
§ 23-6.8. Application Procedures. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
a. If an application for development is filed with the Board of Adjustment,
whether or not an appeal from a decision of an administrative officer is
also taken, the applicant shall submit three copies of his completed
application to the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. At the
time of filing the appeal or application, but in no event less than 10 days
prior to the date set forth for hearing, the applicant shall also file all
plot plans, maps of the papers required by virtue of any provisions of
this chapter or any rule of the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall
obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Secretary of the Board shall inform the applicant of
the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the regular meeting
dates of the Board.
b. The time for the Board's review shall not begin to run until the
submission of a complete application with the fee specified in this
chapter. Unless the applicant is informed in writing by the Secretary of
the Board of Adjustment within 45 days of the actual submission of the
application that it is incomplete, said application shall be deemed
complete as of the date it was submitted.
c. A complete application for development under this article shall consist
of the following:
1. A properly completed variance information application form.
2. The required fee, as per this chapter.
3. If any of the following types of approvals are also sought as part of
an application for a variance pursuant to Article VIII of this chapter,
the applicant shall also include the information and documents
required pursuant to the provisions of Article VIII of this chapter:
(a) Subdivision approval.
(b) Site Plan approval.
(c) Conditional use approval.
(d) Building permit in the bed of a mapped street.
(e) Permit for a building or structure not related to a street.
d. The Secretary of the Board of Adjustment shall distribute the
application for review and report, and where required, approval as
follows:
1. The Board of Adjustment.
2. The Planning Board.
3. The Borough Engineer.
§ 23-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-6.8
AO:457
§ 23-6.9. Time Limit for Decision. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
§ 23-6.10. Modification on Appeal. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
In exercising the above mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm wholly or partly or modify
the order, requirements, decision or determination as ought to be made, and
to that end shall have the powers of the administrative officer from whom
the appeal was taken.
§ 23-6.11. Stay Proceedings by Appeal. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect of
which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from whom
the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice
of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated
in certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such cases proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by
order of the Superior Court of New Jersey on notice to the officer from
whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
§ 23-6.12. Denial. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
Any application which is denied by the Board of Adjustment shall not be
again considered by the Board except as provided herein and pursuant to
Chapter 291 of Laws of 1975, until two years' time lapses from the date of
the Board's resolution of denial.
4. The Municipal Utilities Authority.
5. Health Officer.
6. Police Chief.
7. Fire Chief.
8. Environmental Commission.
a. The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120
days after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an
administrative officer or 120 days after the submission of a complete
application for development to the Board pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72.
b. Failure of the Board to render a decision within such 120-day period or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall
constitute a decision favorable to applicant.
§ 23-6.8 PINE HILL CODE § 23-6.13
AO:458
§ 23-6.13. Expiration of Variance. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VI]
Any variance from the terms of this chapter with conditions attached which
is hereafter granted by the Board of Adjustment permitting a specified
use of any premises shall expire by limitation, unless such construction or
alteration shall have been actually commenced on each and every structure
permitted by said variance or unless such permitted use has actually been
commenced within two years from the date of entry of the judgment or
determination of the Board of Adjustment, except, however, that the
running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the
date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Board of Adjustment to the
governing body or to a court of competent jurisdiction until the termination
in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 23-6.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-6.13
AO:459

ARTICLE VII
Zoning
§ 23-7. ZONING REGULATIONS.
§ 23-7.1. Establishment of Districts. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII; Ord.
No. 97-625 § 1; Ord. No. 2003-718, §§ II, V; Ord. No. 2003-722, § I]
To further the purpose and intent of this chapter, the area of Pine Hill is
divided into zones or districts as follows:
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
R-Rural
Low Density Residential consisting of 2 or more acres per
lot.
150 feet width, 50 feet front yard, 40 feet rear yard, 20 feet
min. 50 feet AGG side yard, 25% building lot coverage, 35
feet building height, 2 parking spaces per unit.
R-Low Low Density Residential consisting of 1/3 to 1/2 acres per
lot. A minimum lot size is 15,000 square feet (NOTE: old R
"A").
100 feet width, 30 feet front yard, 25 feet rear yard, 15 feet
min. 30 feet AGG side yard, 30% building lot coverage, 35
feet building height, 1 parking space per unit.
R-Med Medium Density Residential consisting of 0.258265 acres
per lot. A minimum lot size is 11,250 square feet (NOTE: old
R "B").
75 feet width, 30 feet front yard, 25 feet rear yard, 10 feet
min. 25 feet AGG side yard, 30% building lot coverage, 35
feet building height, 1 parking space per unit.
R-Multi 2 or more units in a structure. A minimum lot size per
dwelling unit is 4,000 square feet and the total minimum
tract area is 1 acre. (NOTE: old R "C" and R "D").
Each lot 20 feet width, 30 feet front yard, 30 feet rear yard,
side lots nonapplicable (End Units Only 20 feet side yard),
40% building lot coverage, 40 feet or 3 story building height,
1.5 parking spaces per unit.
R-SenCit Residential parcel or tract designed for the development and
construction of single family housing for the elderly. 5
residential dwelling units per 1 acre. A minimum lot size is
6,000 square feet. (NOTE: old R "E").
a. 20 feet width, 30 feet front yard, 30 feet rear yard, side
lots nonapplicable (End Units Only 20 feet side yard),
40% building lot coverage, 1.5 parking spaces per unit.
§ 23-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.1
AO:461
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
b. Single Family Detached. Sixty feet width, 20 feet front
yard, 25 feet rear yard, 10 feet minimum, 25 feet
aggregate side yard, 30% building lot coverage, 1.5
parking spaces, 17 feet building height or one story.
c. Single Family Attached (Quad Units). Sixty feet width,
20 feet front yard, zero feet rear yard, zero feet
minimum, 20 feet aggregate side yard, 30% building lot
coverage, 1.5 parking spaces, 17 feet building height or
one story.
TRADE ZONES
GBD General Business District consisting of lot size of 20,000
square feet or more. 100 feet minimum lot width, 100 feet
front yard, 10 feet rear yard if back up to commercial and 25
feet rear yard if back up to residential, 25 feet side yard,
30% building and 75% impervious coverage, 50 feet all over
building height, 1 parking space for every 200 square feet of
building.
LBD Limited Business District consisting of a minimum lot size of
20,000 square feet or more. 100 feet minimum lot width, 50
feet front yard, 10 feet rear yard if back up to commercial
and 25 feet rear yard if back up to residential, 25 feet side
yard, 30% building and 75% impervious coverage, 35 feet all
over building height, 1 parking space for every 200 square
feet of building.
CBD Central Business District consisting of a minimum lot size of
7,500 square feet. 75 feet lot width, 25 feet front yard, zero
feet rear yard if back up to commercial and 25 feet rear
yard if back up to residential, zero feet side yard if adjoins
commercial, 15 feet single and 30 feet combined side yard if
adjoins residential, 30% building and 75% impervious
coverage, 40 feet or 3 story of total building height, 1.5
parking spaces for each unit.
IND Industrial District consisting of a minimum lot size of 1 acre.
150 feet lot width, 60 feet front yard, 40 feet rear yard, 40
feet side yard, 40% total lot coverage, 50 feet or 3 story of
total building height, 1 parking space for every 200 square
feet of building or 1.5 for every employee, whichever is
greater.
SPECIAL USE ZONES
I Institutional District
A Agricultural District
FP Floodplain District
§ 23-7.1 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.1
AO:462
SPECIAL USE ZONES
PRC Planned Recreation and Conservation District
§ 23-7.2. Zoning Map and Boundaries. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII;
Ord. No. 2008-830; Ord. No. 2009-838]
§ 23-7.3. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art.
VII]
a. Adoption of Zoning Map. The areas within the Borough limits as
assigned to each zone, and the location of boundaries of each zone
established by this article are shown upon the map entitled "Zoning
Map of the Borough of Pine Hill", which Zoning Map is hereby adopted
and declared to be a part of this chapter and shall be kept on file with
the Borough Clerk.33
b. Zone Boundary Lines. The zone boundary lines shall be as shown on the
Zoning Map. Figures indicating numbers of feet appearing on said map
between a road, street, avenue or railroad right-of-way and boundary
line of a zone mean that the boundary line of the zone at such location
runs parallel with the center line of the road, street, avenue or railroad
right-of-way at the distance therefrom indicated by the number of feet
marked. Where said map indicates a zone boundary approximately in a
street, the center line of such street shall be construed to be the
boundary. In case of doubt or disagreement concerning the exact
location of the boundary line, the determination of approving authority
shall prevail.
c. Encroachment into Adjacent Zone. When a zone boundary line other
than one located in a street, avenue, road or railroad right-of-way,
divides a tract of land upon which a single use is proposed, the use
permitted in the zone in which the majority of the area of the tract lies
may encroach a maximum of 50 feet into the adjacent zone, in effect,
extending the width of the zone in question by a maximum of 50 feet
into the zone in which the smaller part of the tract lies.
d. Zoning Map Amendments.
1. Pursuant to Ordinance No. 2008-830, the zoning classification for
Block 48, Lot 94.01 is hereby changed from Institutional to
Residential Medium.
2. Pursuant to Ordinance No. 2009-838, the zoning classification for
Block 75, Lot 59 is hereby changed from Institutional to Residential
Medium.
a. Zoning Officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and
enforced by the Zoning Officer of the Borough of Pine Hill. The Zoning
33.Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map referred to herein is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 23-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.3
AO:463
Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the general salary ordinance.
b. Duties and Responsibilities of Zoning Officer.
1. The Zoning Officer shall prepare all forms required for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter. He shall keep a
record of all applications for permits or certificates submitted to
him and the action taken by him; and he shall keep and maintain
proper files and other records pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this chapter.
2. The Zoning Officer shall receive, review, process and file all
applications and plans for zoning permits and certificates of
conformity and shall issue permits and certificates only in
accordance and conformity with the provisions and regulations of
this chapter.
3. Except as otherwise authorized under the terms and conditions of
an order or decision of an approving authority the Zoning Officer
shall not permit, nor issue any permit or certificate for any use,
change of use, extension of a nonconforming use, erection,
construction, alteration, repair, remodeling or conversion of any
building or structure, or portion thereof; removal or destruction of
any building or structure for location, relocation, replacement or
erection on any lands in the Borough of Pine Hill which does not
conform to or comply with the terms and provisions of this chapter
or which would be in violation of any provision thereof.
4. The Zoning Officer shall make and perform such inspections as may
be necessary for the administration and enforcement of this
chapter and for the issuance of zoning permits and certificates of
zoning conformity, and for such purposes, he shall have the right to
enter any building or premises during the daytime in the course of
his duties. All inspections made by the Zoning Officer shall be
logged in a book and kept for such purposes.
5. Any nonconforming uses, buildings, structures or signs found upon
inspection by the Zoning Officer to be in violation of the terms and
provisions of this chapter shall be logged and reported in writing.
6. In the event any condition is found to exist in violation of any
regulation, term or provision of this chapter the Zoning Officer
shall issue a written order to immediately remedy or correct such
violation or to stop work and/or prosecute the violation in the
Municipal Court.
7. In the event the Zoning Officer shall receive a complaint or notice
alleging the existence of a violation of the provisions of this
chapter, he shall investigate the alleged violation, and if a violation
exists, he shall take action as provided by this chapter. The source
and identity of the person or persons making such complaint or
§ 23-7.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.3
AO:464
providing such notice shall be held and maintained in confidence
until it shall be deemed necessary to divulge the same in the course
of any action or proceeding for the enforcement or prosecution of
a violation of the terms of this chapter.
8. The Zoning Officer shall attend all meetings of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment and respond to questions presented to him by the
members of the Board. He shall also be prepared to testify and
produce his records, if so required, during any hearing before the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. Upon request, the Zoning Officer shall
also attend meetings of or hearings before the Borough Council or
Planning Board for the purpose of responding to questions, giving
testimony or producing records.
9. The Zoning Officer shall provide a copy of all zoning permits issued
by him to the Construction Code Official and a copy of all
Certificates of Zoning Conformity to the Construction Code Official
and Tax Assessor.
c. Fees. The Borough Council, from time to time, shall determine and
establish all fees, charges and expenses for all permits, certificates and
other matters pertaining to this article. Such fees shall be collected by
the Zoning Officer as provided herein and turned over to the Borough
Treasurer before the close of each business day.
d. Temporary Use Permits.
1. It is recognized that it may be in accordance with the purpose of
this chapter to permit temporary activities or uses for a limited
period of time, which activities or uses may be prohibited by
provisions of such a nature, and are so located at the time of
application, they will:
(a) In no way exert a detrimental effect upon the uses of land
activities normally permitted in the zone.
(b) Contribute materially to the health, safety or welfare of the
Borough, particularly in a state of emergency, under conditions
peculiar to the time and place involved.
2. Temporary use permits may be issued by the Borough Council by
resolution after written application therefore, for a period of time
not to exceed 30 days. Such period may be extended by the
Borough Council for an additional 30 days. For good cause shown
by applicant, the Borough Council may further extend the period of
time of the temporary use permit with conditions, including
submission of periodic reports.
e. Violations.
1. Except as otherwise provided, it shall be a violation of this chapter
to fail to secure a zoning permit prior to the commencement of (i)
§ 23-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.3
AO:465
§ 23-7.4. Zoning Permits. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII Ord. No.
2018-966]
any use, change of use, extension of nonconforming use; (ii) the
erection, construction, alteration, repair, remodeling, conversion of
any building, structure or addition; (iii) the removal or destruction
of any building or structure or (iv) the moving of a building or
structure into or within the Borough of Pine Hill for storage,
location, relocation, placement or erection on any lands or
premises within the Borough of Pine Hill.
2. Failure to secure a Certificate of Zoning Conformity prior to the use
and/or occupation of any building, structure or land within the
Borough of Pine Hill shall be a violation of this chapter.
3. Failure to discontinue a violation after written notice of such
violation has been served by the Zoning Officer shall be a violation
of this chapter.
f. Fines and Penalties. Any person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before the Borough of Pine
Hill Municipal Court, be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days or both such fine and
imprisonment. All fines collected for the violation of this chapter shall
be paid over to the Borough. Whenever such person has been officially
notified by the Zoning Officer or by the service of a summons in
prosecution, or in any other official manner that he is committing a
violation, then each day after that violation is continued said violation
shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable by a like fine and
penalty.
a. Requirement of Zoning Permit.
1. The issuance of a zoning permit shall be required prior, and as a
condition of precedent to the commencement of:
(a) Any use, change of use or extension of a nonconforming use of
lands and premises within the Borough of Pine Hill;
(b) The installation, erection, construction, alteration, repair,
remodeling or conversion of any building, structure or
accessory use, or any portion thereof, on any lands and
premises within the Borough of Pine Hill. [Ord. No.
2018-966]
(c) The removal or destruction of any building or structure;
(d) The moving of a building or structure of whatsoever kind or
nature, or any portion thereof, into or within the Borough for
storage, location, relocation, placement or erection on any
lands and premises within the Borough of Pine Hill; and it shall
§ 23-7.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.4
AO:466
be unlawful for any person to commence any of the foregoing
without first having obtained a zoning permit therefor.
2. Prior Approval for Construction Permit. The issuance of a zoning
permit shall be a required "prior approval" and condition precedent
to the issuance, by the Construction Code Officials, of a
construction permit for the erection, construction, alteration,
repair, remodeling, removal or destruction of any building,
structure or portion thereof.
All applications shall contain a statement by applicant of all
existing and proposed uses of the lot and premises and such other
information as may be requested by the Zoning Officer and
reasonably necessary for said official to ascertain whether the
proposed use, change of use, erection, construction or alteration
complies with the provisions of this chapter. Applications shall
be fully completed and signed by the applicant and the applicant
shall certify as to the truth of the information submitted in the
application and accompanying documents so that any willful
misstatements shall be considered a violation of this provision and
subject the offender to the penalties provided herein.
All applications shall be numbered in sequence and submitted to
the Zoning Officer in triplicate. Upon receipt, the Zoning Officer
shall date each copy, maintain the original in his file, distribute
one copy to the applicant and the other copy to the Department of
Economic Development.
b. Application for Zoning Permit. Applications for zoning permits and
temporary zoning permits (valid only for a period of 30 days) shall be
made by the applicants in writing on forms provided by the Zoning
Officer and submitted to the Zoning Officer together with two copies of
a plot plan or sketch plat showing all existing and proposed buildings,
structure and uses on the lands and premises for which application is
made and setting forth on said plan or plat all proposed front, rear and
side yard setback distances, total lot coverage and all parking area
dimensions, and said plot plan or sketch plat shall be part of the
application.
c. Issuance of Permits.
1. An application for a zoning permit shall be granted or denied by the
Zoning Officer within 30 days of the date of filing a complete
application. If any application is granted or approved, written
permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer. Said permit shall be
numbered in sequence, dated and signed by the issuing officer, and
among other information, shall contain: a brief description of the
use and/or work to be commenced or performed thereunder; the
block and lot number and address of the property on which the use
or work is to be commenced or performed; the names of the
applicant and owner to whom the permit is to be issued, notice of
§ 23-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.4
AO:467
the date of expiration of the permit and notice that the use or work
must be commenced, performed and completed in accordance with
the application upon which the permit issued and all applicable
approvals, law, ordinances, rules and regulations of the federal,
state and local governments, boards, agencies or authorities. If an
application for permit is denied or rejected by the Zoning Officer,
he shall state the reason or reasons for such denial in writing and
provide the applicant with a copy of same.
2. No zoning permit shall be issued by the Zoning Officer for any use,
change of use, extension of a nonconforming use, erection,
construction, alteration or moving of a building or structure, or any
activity which does not comply with or conform to their terms,
provisions and regulations of this chapter, statute or the order of
decisions of an approving authority or court of competent
jurisdiction.
3. No zoning permit shall be issued in instances wherein subdivision
or site plan approval is required unless and until the applicant has
secured final subdivision or site plan approval and has complied
with all the terms and conditions of such approval and terms and
provisions of the applicable development regulation, including
payment of required fees, escrow deposits and posting of
performance guarantees.
4. No zoning permit shall be issued for any use, change of use,
extension of nonconforming use, erection, repair, remodeling,
conversion, removal, destruction, replacement, relocation,
construction, alteration or moving of a building or structure for
which an approval has been granted by an approving authority if
said approval has expired, been revoked or determined to be
invalid.
5. No zoning permit shall be issued if taxes or assessments for local
improvements are due or delinquent on the property for which a
zoning permit application is made. Submission of proof that no
taxes or assessment for local improvements are due or delinquent
shall be required as a condition precedent to the issuance of a
zoning permit.
d. Expiration of Permits. No zoning permit shall be valid or effective for
more than one year from the date of issuance thereof, and shall
thereafter be null and void unless the use, change of use, extension of
nonconforming use, erection, construction, repair, remodeling,
conversion, removal, destruction or moving, alteration or relocation of a
building or structure authorized by such permit shall have been
substantially commenced within one year from the date of issuance and
proceeded with due diligence.
e. Exceptions.
§ 23-7.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.4
AO:468
§ 23-7.5. Certificate of Zoning Conformity. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. II]
1. Existing Residential Structures. Notwithstanding any provision in
this chapter to the contrary, no zoning permit shall be required for
the following work on existing residential structures:
(a) Installation, replacement or repair of siding (involving no
additional square footage added to the structure).
(b) Replacement or repair of existing roof or existing roof shingles
(involving no additional square footage added to structure).
(c) Installation, replacement or repair of windows.
(d) Installation, replacement or repair of doors.
(e) Installation or repair of existing porch or patio (involving no
additional square footage added or enclosure of same).
(f) Replacement or repair of existing steps (involving no increase
in size of steps, width or length).
2. Conditions. There shall be no exception from the requirement of a
zoning permit for existing residential structures if the work
involves any one or more of the following:
(a) Change in setback, front, side or rear.
(b) Change in lot coverage.
(c) Change in use such as from single family to multiple-family.
(d) Need for a variance.
(e) Expansion for a nonconforming use.
(f) Structural changes, addition of square footage to the structure
or roof or the enclosure of existing open porch or patio.
3. Certification Statement. No exception shall be granted unless the
applicant fully completes, signs and files a Certification Statement
of Work form provided by the Construction Office.
4. Construction Permits. In cases of an exception although no fee for a
zoning permit shall be required, applicant shall be required to
obtain all necessary construction permits and pay the fee therefor.
f. Non Waiver. In no case shall the issuance or nonissuance of a zoning
permit be construed as a waiver of the provisions of this chapter or any
other ordinance of the Borough of Pine Hill; nor shall it be construed as
a waiver of the terms or provisions of any state statute, rule, regulation,
approval or decision of any approving agency.
a. Requirement of Certificate of Zoning Conformity.
§ 23-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.5
AO:469
1. The issuance of a certificate of zoning conformity shall be required
prior to, and as a condition precedent of the use or occupancy of
any building, structure or land; and no person shall use or occupy
or permit, suffer or cause the use or occupancy of any building,
structure or land without first having obtained a certificate of
zoning conformity therefor.
2. Prior approval for Certificate of Occupancy. The issuance of a
certificate of zoning conformity shall be required "prior approval"
for a condition precedent to the issuance by the Construction Code
Official of a certificate of occupancy.
b. Application for Certificate of Zoning Conformity. Application for a
certificate of zoning conformity and temporary certificate of zoning
conformity (valid only for a period of 30 days) shall be made by
applicants in writing on forms provided by the Zoning Officer and
submitted to the Zoning Officer together with two copies of an "as-built"
plot plan sketch plat showing, upon completion, all building, structures
and additions constructed, erected or relocated on the lands and
premises for which a zoning permit application was made. Said plan or
sketch shall show all "as-built" front, rear and side yard setback
distances, total lot coverage and all parking area dimensions. In the
case of new construction where the property lines of the lot cannot be
readily determined by the Zoning Officer on a site inspection, the
Zoning Officer may require that two copies of an "as-built" survey,
certified by a New Jersey land surveyor, be submitted by applicant in
lieu of the sketch plat or plot plan. All applications shall be fully
completed and signed by the applicant and the applicant shall certify as
to the truth of the information submitted in the application and
accompanying documents so that willful misstatements shall be
considered a violation of this provision and subject the offender to the
penalties provided herein. All applications shall bear the number of the
zoning permit and shall be submitted in triplicate to the Zoning Officer.
Upon receipt of the same, the Zoning Officer shall date each copy of the
application, and distribute one copy to the applicant, one copy to the
Department of Economic Development, and maintain one copy for his
file.
c. Issuance of Certificate of Zoning Conformity.
1. An application for a certificate of zoning conformity shall be
granted or denied by the Zoning Officer within 10 days of the date
of filing a complete application. If an application is granted or
approved, a certificate of zoning conformity shall be issued by the
Zoning Officer. Each certificate shall be numbered in sequence and
bear the number of the zoning permit, and each certificate issued
shall be dated and signed by the Zoning Officer. The certificate,
among other information, shall contain: the block and lot number
and address of the property to which it relates: the name and
address of the applicant and owner; the date of inspection by the
Zoning Officer pursuant to the application, a brief description of
§ 23-7.5 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.5
AO:470
§ 23-7.6. Application of Regulations. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
the nature of use and buildings or structures for which the
certificate is issued; and a statement that such use and building
or structures comply with the zoning permit issued therefore and
conform with all the terms, conditions, provisions and regulations
of this chapter.
If an application for a certificate of zoning conformity is denied or
rejected by the Zoning Officer, he shall state the reason for such
denial in writing and provide the applicant with a copy of same.
2. No certificate of zoning conformity shall be issued until the
building or structure for which the zoning permit was issued has
been completed and the Zoning Officer shall have inspected the
same for conformity.
3. No certificate of zoning conformity shall be issued for any use,
building or structure which does not conform to the terms of the
zoning permit issued therefor and to the terms, provisions,
regulations and conditions of this chapter or to the order or
decision of any approving authority or court of competent
jurisdiction.
4. In cases where variances are granted to an applicant by an
approving authority, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the
Zoning Officer to assure the compliance with the conditions, terms
and provisions of such grant and approval prior to the issuance of a
certificate of zoning conformity.
d. No certificate of conformity shall be required for any work excepted
from the requirement of a zoning permit as in this chapter; nor shall a
certificate of conformity be required as a prior approval or condition
precedent to the issuance by the Construction Official of a certificate
for such work.
a. Minimum and Uniform Regulations. The regulations set by this chapter
within each zone shall be minimum regulations and shall apply
uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land.
b. Use of Land. On or after the effective date of this chapter, no person
shall occupy or use any land or construct or locate any building within
the bounds of the Borough, except in conformity with the restrictions
and regulations established by this chapter for the zone in which such
land or building is located and in conformity with all other pertinent
terms and provisions of this chapter.
c. Aiding or Assisting in Use of Land; Construction of Buildings. On or
after the effective date of this chapter, no person, whether acting as
manager, agent, architect, engineer, contractor, artesian, mechanic,
laborer or otherwise, shall aid or assist any person in the occupation or
use of any land or in the construction or location of any building within
§ 23-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.6
AO:471
§ 23-7.7. Nonconforming Structure and Uses. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art.
VII]
the bounds of the Borough, unless such occupation or use of land
or unless such building is in conformity with the restrictions and
regulations established by this chapter for the district in which such
land or building is located and in conformity with all other pertinent
terms and provisions of this chapter.
d. Existing Uses and Structures. In all zones, after the effective date of
this chapter, any existing building or other structure or any tract of land
or use which is not in conformity with the regulations for the zone in
which it is located shall be deemed as nonconforming and subject to the
appropriate regulations of this chapter governing such nonconformity
uses, lots and structures.
e. Failure to Comply. Any building that shall have been constructed or
located on or after the effective date of this chapter in violation of the
restrictions and regulations established thereby for the zone in which
such building is located and/or in violation of any of the other pertinent
terms or provisions of this chapter shall be changed, altered, corrected
and/or relocated by the person who constructed or located such
building or by the owner of the land on which such building is situate so
that such building and the premises of which it is a part shall thereafter
conform with the restrictions and regulations established by this
chapter for the district in which such building is located and shall
conform with all other pertinent terms and provisions of this chapter.
Such change, alteration, correction and/or relocation of the building
shall be made and effected within 30 days next after making and service
of such order, which order the Zoning Officer may serve or cause to be
served by delivering the same or a duplicate thereof to the person to
whom such order is directed or by forwarding the same or duplicate
thereof by first-class mail to the last known post office address of such
person and by posting a duplicate of such order on the building or
premises mentioned therein.
f. Interpretation of Regulations. The interpretation of the regulations of
this chapter is intended to be such that, whenever these requirements
are at variance with any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations,
ordinances, deed restrictions or covenants, as particularly refer to area
and bulk regulations and impose higher standards, that most restrictive
requirements shall govern.
a. Continuation. Any nonconforming use or structure existing on the
effective date of this chapter may be continued upon the lot or in the
structure so occupied, and any such structure may be restored or
repaired in the event of partial destruction thereof. Any nonconforming
building, structure or use which has been condemned or damaged by
fire, explosion, flood, windstorm, or act of God shall be examined by the
Construction Official. If in the opinion of the Construction Official, the
cost of repair is greater than 50% of the value of replacing the entire
§ 23-7.6 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.7
AO:472
§ 23-7.8. General Regulations.
§ 23-7.8.1. Required Open Spaces and Recreation Facilities. [Ord.
No. 95-588 Art. VII]
structure, it shall be considered completely destroyed and may be
rebuilt to the original specifications only upon approval of a variance. If
the cost of repair is less than 50% of the value of replacing the entire
structure, it may be rebuilt and used for the same purpose as before,
provided it is built in one year and is used for the same purpose as
before, provided it is rebuilt in one year and does not exceed the height,
area volume of the original structure. The percent of damage shall be
the current replacement costs of the portion damaged or condemned,
computed as a percentage of the current total replacement cost of the
entire structure, neither to include the cost of the foundation unless the
foundation is involved in the repair.
b. Discontinuance.
1. If a nonconforming use or structure ceases operations for a
continuous period or more than one year then this shall be deemed
to be an intent to abandon such use and any subsequent use shall
conform to the regulations of this chapter.
2. If abandonment occurs involuntarily, the owner may request that
the discontinuance be continued beyond the one-year period,
provided that application for extension is made within the initial
one-year period.
a. Objectives. In order to protect and preserve the open space of the
Borough and to further the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare, the following statement of objectives is set forth:
1. To encourage innovations in residential development so that the
growing demands of the population may be met by greater variety
in type, design and layout of buildings and by the conservation and
more efficient use of open space ancillary to said building.
2. To encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services, or
private services in lieu thereof.
3. To provide for a continuous and integral open space system.
4. To conserve the value of the land.
5. To encourage more flexible land development that will preserve
and enhance natural resources, such as streams, lakes, floodplains,
groundwater, wooded areas, steeply sloped areas and areas of
importance to natural ecosystem.
6. To provide that open space within developments shall be planned
and designed to achieve the Borough goal of insuring that adequate
§ 23-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.8.1
AO:473
recreation areas are set aside in suitable locations to provide for
the recreation needs of the residents and owners of the
development; and that those portions of the Borough which,
because of their natural features, constitute important visual
amenities and environmental resources; and that common open
space configuration within a development may be evaluated in
terms of inventories of the natural features of the site recreation
demand projections prepared by the applicant and a plan may be
prepared indicating the general location of common open space
areas for natural preserves and for active recreational purposes.
7. To provide for various densities, lot sizes, street patterns and
aesthetic factors that are suitable to the land and aesthetics factors
that will enhance each development.
b. Open Space.
1. Open space areas in residential subdivision shall be reserved in
accordance with the requirements for individual zones listed in this
chapter and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
2. One-half the total area of any reserved open space must be used for
active recreation in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
3. The open space requirement shall be waived only when
enforcement of this requirement would prevent the construction of
low and moderate-income housing.
c. Dedication of Open Space to the Borough.
1. Prior to final subdivision approval, the applicant shall agree in
writing to dedicate all open space areas within a proposed
subdivision to the Borough, unless the Borough specifically
declines to accept dedication of such areas pursuant to the
recommendation of the approving authority, and the approval of
the governing body.
2. In the event that the Borough declines to accept the dedication of
open space within a subdivision, such open space shall be
dedicated to a homeowner's association created pursuant to this
chapter.
d. Schedule of Development of Recreational Facilities. All recreational
improvements shall be installed in accordance with a schedule
prepared by the Recreation Commission and as approved by the Mayor.
The schedule shall be reviewed and approved by the approving
authority at the time of preliminary approval.
As a minimum requirement, no less than 50% of all recreation
improvement shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for more than 75% of the total approved dwelling units.
§ 23-7.8.1 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.8.1
AO:474
§ 23-7.8.2. Homeowner's Association. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
Homeowner's association may be established for the purposes of owning
and assuming responsibilities for the common open space and common
property designed within a development provided the approving authority is
e. Contribution in Lieu of Construction of Active Recreation.
1. In lieu of construction of the active recreation required by this
chapter, the developer may elect, with approval by the approving
authority to make a contribution of $500 per unit to a Recreation
Trust Fund maintained by the Borough specifically for the periodic
purchase price, lease, acquisition and/or maintenance of active
recreation lands and improvements for the use of the Borough
residents. Said contribution shall be paid as follows: 1/2 at the time
of final approval, and the balance per unit at the time of each
building permit, in addition to the regular building permit fees. The
land required to be used for active recreation pursuant to this
chapter shall thereafter be used for passive recreation, unless the
Borough elects to constitute active recreation facilities thereon at
Borough expense.
(a) Standards.
(1) The minimum tract size shall be two acres.
(2) The common or public open space shall be landscaped,
planted or left wooded in accordance with the plan as
approved by the approving authority.
(3) The overall density, minimum buildable lot size and zoning
requirements of the zone in which the tract is located shall
not be exceeded.
(b) Open Spaces. Any lands proposed as open space as required
above shall be located and be of a size that will best suit the
purposes for which such lands are intended. Said lands shall be
conveyed to the Borough in accordance with this chapter,
unless the Borough specifically declines to accept dedication of
such areas, in which case the open space shall be dedicated to
the homeowner's association in accordance with this chapter.
Acceptance by the Borough shall be subject to approval by the
governing body, who shall be guided by the Master Plan, the
ability to assemble and relate such lands to an overall plan,
accessibility of such land, and such existing features as
topography, soils, wetlands and tree cover as these features
may enhance or detract from the intended use of lands. The
recreation requirements of the particular zone shall be met
and any active recreation improvements for the open space
shall be completed, inspected and approved prior to
acceptance of any deed for the open space.
§ 23-7.8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.8.2
AO:475
satisfied that the organization will have a sufficient number of members to
reasonably expect a perpetuation of the organization in a manner enabling
it to meet its obligations and responsibilities in owning and maintaining any
property for the benefit of owners or residents of the development. The
organization must be established by an instrument which shall receive the
approval of the approving authority, be in recordable form and have the
following provisions:
a. Membership shall be limited to and mandatory for all property owners,
stockholders under cooperative development, and other owners of
property or interest in the project, required membership and the
responsibilities upon the members shall be in writing between the
organization and each member in the form of a covenant with each
agreeing to liability for his prorata share of the organization's cost.
b. The organization shall be responsible for liability insurance, taxes,
maintenance and any other obligations assumed by the organization,
and shall hold the municipality harmless for any liability. The
organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any open
space or property by sale or otherwise, except to an organization
conceived and established to own and maintain the open space or
property for the benefit of such development, and thereafter such
organization shall not be dissolved or dispose of any of its open space or
property without first offering to dedicate the same to the Borough of
Pine Hill.
c. The assessment levied by the organization upon each member may
become a lien on each member's property. The organization shall be
allowed to adjust the assessment to meet changing needs.
d. The organization shall clearly describe in its by-laws all the rights and
obligations of each tenant and owner, and shall include a copy of the
covenant, model deeds, and Articles of Incorporation and the fact that
every tenant and property owner shall have the right to use all common
property. These shall be set forth as a condition of approval and shall be
submitted to the Borough Attorney or the approving authority prior to
the granting of final approval.
e. The Articles of Incorporation, covenants, by-laws, model deeds, and
other legal instruments shall insure that control of the organization
shall be transferred to the members based on a percentage of the
dwelling units sold and/or occupied and shall further provide that if
either the developer or the Association shall fail to maintain the
common open space or common property in reasonable order and
condition, the Zoning Officer may serve written notice upon such
organization and shall follow the procedures set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-43b and if it becomes necessary for the Borough to provide
maintenance, the imposition of a lien as set forth in N.J.S.A. 49:55D-43
shall be followed.
§ 23-7.8.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.8.3
AO:476
§ 23-7.8.3. Interpretation of Measurements and Computations.
[Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
§ 23-7.8.4. Exceptions to Height Limitations. The height limitations
of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, domes,
monuments, chimneys, smokestacks, flagpoles, masts and aerials,
barns and silos. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
§ 23-7.8.5. Fences, Hedges and Walls. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
a. General Rules. Measurements from rights-of-way or watercourses shall
be taken from the edge of the right-of-way rather than from the center.
b. Specific Area and Bulk Measurements. The following regulations shall
prescribe the manner in which distances are measured:
1. Land area: a two dimensional computation using the linear
measurement of the boundary lines of the lot.
2. Building area: a two dimensional computation using the linear
measurements of the exterior surface boundary lines, taken at the
building's largest horizontal cross section.
3. Building length: the measurement shall extend in only one general
direction.
4. Distance between building: the measurement shall be at the
narrowest point.
5. Highway access points: the measurements shall be taken along the
street line.
6. Parking perimeter radius: the measurement shall extend from a
public entranceway.
7. Setback line: the measurement shall extend perpendicular to the
street line.
8. Lot width on radius: for all lots fronting on a street radius, the lot
width will be measured at the setback line including cul-de-sac
development.
9. Corner lots: front yards on the long sides of a corner lot may be
reduced to a depth of not less than 20 feet.
10. Lot sizes: in all districts, the minimum lot square footage shall be
adhered to, and one side line and the frontage must conform to the
minimum requirements.
a. Compliance with Regulations. Fences, hedges and/or walls may be
erected, altered or reconstructed in any district in accordance with the
following regulations and in accordance with all other provisions of this
chapter.
§ 23-7.8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.8.5
AO:477
b. General Regulations. Fences, hedges and walls cannot project past the
front wall of the building or the side wall of a corner building, except as
noted below.
c. Fences, Walls or Hedges at Intersections Restricted.
1. At or near an intersection of two or more streets, no fence, hedge,
wall, shrubbery or other similar matter shall be permitted to
obstruct the view of motorists traveling on either intersecting
street, regardless of the regulations specified below.
2. In the case of fences, walls or hedges in the front yards, the height
of the fence shall not be more than 36 inches, except on corner lots
where it shall not be more than 30 inches.
These height limitations shall be applicable for a distance of only
100 feet from the point where the center lines of the intersecting
streets meet.
d. Other Height Restrictions.
1. Fences, hedges, walls and/or shrubbery running parallel to the
front property line may be erected, altered or reconstructed to a
height not to exceed six feet above ground level.
2. Fences, hedges, walls and/or shrubbery running parallel to side or
rear yard lines may be erected, altered or reconstructed to a height
not to exceed six feet above ground level.
3. In no case shall the six-foot fence project past the required or
existing front setback line of the building. The purpose of this
requirement is to maintain clear sight distance for the safety of
vehicular traffic movements in and out of driveways.
4. In no case shall a fence, hedge or wall be permitted, unless the
Zoning Officer determines that such fence, hedge or wall does not
impair the necessary visibility required for safe traffic movement.
e. Open Wire Fencing on Public Premises. The foregoing restriction shall
not be applied so as to prevent the erection of an open-wire fence not
exceeding eight feet above ground level anywhere within a public park,
public playground, school premises, or utility operation, or in the rear
or side of a business or industrial zone.
f. Erection within Property Lines; Encroachment. All fences, hedges,
walls and/or shrubbery must be erected within the property lines, and
no fence, hedge, wall and/or shrubbery shall be erected so as to
encroach upon a public right-of way.
The finished side of all fencing shall face outwardly and no fencing shall
be installed so as to change or add to the natural flow of surface water
onto adjoining or adjacent property.
§ 23-7.8.5 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.8.5
AO:478
§ 23-7.8.6. Visibility at Intersection. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
On the corner lot or any point of entry on a public road, nothing shall
be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner which
obscures the vision above the height of 2 1/2 feet and below 10 feet,
measured from the center line of the intersecting streets or driveways and
within the area bounded by the street lines of such corner lots and a line
joining points on these street lines 100 feet from their intersection along
the lot lines.
§ 23-7.8.7. Private Garages. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
g. Maintenance. All fences, hedges, walls and/or shrubbery shall be
maintained in a safe, sound and upright condition.
h. Unsafe Fences and Walls; Notice to Remove or Repair. If the
Construction Official, upon inspection, determines that any fence, wall
or any portion of any fence or wall is not being maintained in a safe,
sound or upright condition, he shall notify the owner of such fence or
wall, in writing, of his findings and state briefly the reasons for such
findings and order such fence or wall or portion of such fence or wall
repaired or removed within 15 days of the date of the written notice.
i. Walls for Retaining Earth Excepted. These restrictions shall not be
applied so as to restrict the erection of a wall for the purpose of
retaining earth.
a. A private garage in a residential district shall be permitted only when
used as an accessory building to a dwelling on the same lot and for the
storage of not more than three motor vehicles. A private garage may be
either a separate building or it may be attached to or be an integral part
of the dwelling to which it is accessory. A detached private garage shall
be single story and shall not exceed 14 feet in height nor shall it exceed
720 square feet in area.
b. Attached garages shall conform to all regulatory requirements of the
district in which they are located including all setbacks and other bulk
and area regulations. Detached garages shall be located in a rear yard
behind the rear building line and shall be set back a minimum of five
feet from the rear and side property lines. A detached garage may be
located in the side yard provided it does not extend beyond the front
building line and conforms to all regulatory requirements of the district
in which it is located including all setbacks and other bulk and area
requirements.
c. All garages on corner lots must maintain the side yards stipulated in the
applicable district, except that garages must be set back the same as
the dwellings located on adjacent lots.
d. All living units are prohibited over attached garages, except those
garages attached to residential dwellings other than by a breezeway.
§ 23-7.8.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.8.8
AO:479
§ 23-7.8.8. Utility Sheds.
a. Definition.
UTILITY SHEDS — A Utility Shed is a storage shed other than a garage.
A truck trailer or any other object that was or is driven or pulled by
a motorized vehicle is not included in this definition and such use of
trailers or similar objects are specifically prohibited for storage use
in all residential zones. A POD is not a Utility Shed, however, one is
permitted to be placed on a residential property in a driveway or similar
location in close proximity to the dwelling for temporary storage of the
dwelling's contents for a period not to exceed 30 days. A Pod shall not
be placed on a public sidewalk, in a public right-of-way or obstruct
vehicular line of sight.
b. Regulations.
1. A Utility Shed is an Accessory Use.
2. A Utility Shed shall only be used for the purpose to function for
storage of objects owned by residents of the property where the
shed is located.
3. A Utility Shed shall not be used for any commercial purpose or used
for any type of human habitation.
4. A Utility Shed may not be used for the keeping of any type of
animal, domestic or otherwise.
5. A Utility Shed may not be used as a children's playhouse.
6. A Utility Shed shall not exceed at its highest point 12 feet and no
shed shall be more than one story in height.
7. The maximum size of a Utility Shed on a Lot shall not exceed 140
square feet. No more than two Utility Sheds may be placed on a
property which shall not exceed 200 square feet in total.
8. A Utility Shed may be constructed of wood, metal, vinyl and/or a
combination thereof and may or may not be placed on a foundation
or other containing type flooring.
c. Location.
1. Utility Sheds may not be placed on any property line.
2. A Utility Shed shall not be located nearer than 10 feet to a principal
building on the property.
3. A Utility Shed shall be placed at a distance of no less than five feet
from any side yard and no less than five feet from any rear yard.
4. A Utility Shed may not be located in any front yard as defined in
this chapter, however, a Utility Shed may be located to the existing
principal structure's building line.
§ 23-7.8.8 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.8.8
AO:480
§ 23-7.8.8.1. Tents and Carports. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII; Ord. No.
98-653 § 1; Ord. No. 2018-966]
§ 23-7.8.9. Swimming Pools. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
5. A Utility Shed may not be placed in a location as to restrict
vehicular sight distances at roadway intersections.
6. No Utility Shed shall be permitted in any easement, right-of-way or
portion of a street.
7. No part of any Utility Shed shall protrude beyond all setback
restrictions as set forth herein.
8. No Utility Shed shall be placed on any Lot without first obtaining a
Zoning Permit and, when applicable, a Construction Permit. A
dimensioned Plot Plan or Survey shall be provided to the Zoning
Office to identify the location of the Shed on the property.
a. Definition: Tents and Carports.
1. A temporary and portable non-structural protective canvas, fabric,
or plastic tent like protective device.
b. Regulations.
1. No canvas or plastic tent or tent like protective device shall be
located in any front yard, but may be constructed/installed to the
existing principal structure's building line. The structure shall not
be constructed so as to restrict the vehicular sight distances at
roadway intersections. These temporary design items, excluding
structural garages, shall not be located any closer than five feet to
any property line.
2. No Tent or Carport shall be placed on any Lot without first
obtaining a Zoning Permit. A dimensioned Plot Plan or Survey shall
be provided to the Zoning Officer to identify the location of the Tent
or Carport on the property.
3. Residential party or event tents erected for a period of three days
or less do not require Zoning Permits.
a. Definition. Any constructed pool which is used or intended to be used as
a swimming pool in connection with a single-family residence and
available only to the family of the householder and his private guests
shall be classified as a private swimming pool. Any swimming pool other
than a private swimming pool shall be classified as a public or semipublic
swimming pool. A portable pool is included within the terms of
this definition.
b. Applicability. All pools hereinafter erected shall be subject to the
regulations of this chapter. Compliance with these provisions is
required. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or
§ 23-7.8.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.8.9
AO:481
§ 23-7.8.10. Keeping of Horses. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
The keeping of horses shall be permitted in only the Industrial, Agricultural
Zoning Districts subject to the following standards.
create a swimming pool in the Borough of Pine Hill without first having
complied with the provisions of this chapter and all other regulations of
the Borough.
c. Location and Distance Requirements.
1. A swimming pool of a permanent or stationary type of construction
shall not be constructed, installed or located within 10 feet of any
property line or structure nor nearer to any street line upon which
the residence fronts than the existing setback line of said residence
building, but in no case, regardless of the building setback line,
shall a pool be located less than 30 feet from the front street line.
2. A swimming pool shall not be constructed, installed or located on
any land unless a residence building is also located thereon.
d. Fencing.
1. All fencing shall be in accordance with the fencing requirements
specified herein.
2. All above ground pools 24 inches or more in depth which have a
decking consisting of a rail or fencing two feet or more in height
above the deck with a fold-up safety ladder when not in use shall be
considered as being in compliance with the fencing requirement of
the Borough.
e. Certificates of Occupancy. Certificates of Occupancy shall be required
for all swimming pools.
f. Other Regulations. Swimming pools shall be subject to all of the
regulations of the Borough of Pine Hill Code and the Construction Code.
a. Not more than one horse or pony may be kept on a lot of at least one
acre, provided that a pen or corral containing at least 800 square feet is
included, and that a stable under a roof of at least 100 square feet is
provided, and further provided that the pen, corral, fences or similar
enclosures are not closer than 20 feet to the adjacent property lines or
10 feet to the adjacent property lines with proper screening, but in no
case closer than 50 feet to any existing neighboring dwelling.
b. Not more than two horses or ponies may be kept on a lot of at least 1 1/
2 acres, provided that they are enclosed in a pen or corral containing at
least 800 square feet per animal, including a stable under a roof of at
least 100 square feet per animal, and further provided that the pen,
corral, fences or similar enclosures are not closer than 20 feet to the
adjacent property lines or 10 feet to the adjacent property lines with
§ 23-7.8.9 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.8.10
AO:482
proper screening, but in no case closer than 50 feet to an existing
neighboring dwelling.
c. Not more than three horses or ponies may be kept on a lot of two acres,
provided that they are enclosed in a pen or corral containing 800
square feet for the first horse or pony and 400 square feet for each
additional horse or pony, including a stable under a roof containing at
least 100 square feet per animal, and further provided that the pen,
corral, fences or similar enclosures are not closer than 20 feet to the
adjacent property line or 10 feet to the adjacent property lines with
proper screening, but in no case closer than 50 feet to any existing
neighboring dwelling. The maximum number of horses under single
ownership shall not exceed three horses, regardless of the number of
acres exceeding two acres.
d. The stable shall be defined as a structure on a tract qualifying as a farm
for housing horses or ponies and products used for the keeping and
handling of horses and ponies. No structure housing horses or ponies
shall be located nearer than 20 feet to any adjacent property line
without proper screening, or 50 feet to any neighboring dwelling.
Stables must be built so as not to create offensive odors, fly-breeding or
other nuisances.
e. A planted buffer screen may be required along the dividing line
between an applicant's property and that of his neighbor.
f. The animals shall be for the private use of the occupants of the
residence. No commercial use, such as the letting of horses for hire,
shall be engaged in on the property.
g. Manure from stabled horses or other livestock must be removed from a
stable or similar housing structure three times each week. Manure
must be stored a minimum of 25 feet from a stable and 50 feet from the
nearest neighboring dwelling. Any stockpile of manure shall not exceed
100 square feet. All stockpiles of manure shall be limed at least once
every week.
h. Fences must be constructed of such materials and in such a manner as
to prevent and preclude the escape of horses. Any application for a
building permit for a fence to pen horses must include, in addition to
any other information required, the height, the span between fence
posts, a sketch of the proposed fence, the type of materials to be used
and whether the same has been treated. The Construction Official shall
issue a building permit for any such fence only when in his discretion
the proposed fence shall adequately prevent the escape of horses. A
barbed wire fence shall not be permitted.
§ 23-7.8.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.8.11
AO:483
§ 23-7.8.11. Agricultural, Farm Houses and Farm Buildings. [Ord.
No. 95-588 Art. VII]
Agricultural, farm houses and usual farm buildings shall be permitted
without restriction, except as follows:
a. Permitted farm uses shall consist of the following:
1. The tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, fruits and vegetables,
greenhouses and nurseries.
2. The storage, packing and marketing of fruits and vegetables
produced on the premises.
3. The hatching and raising on a commercial scale of poultry, rabbits,
fish and dairy farming.
4. The raising and grazing of horses, cattle, sheep and goats,
including supplementary feeding of such animals, provided that
such raising or grazing is not a part of, nor conduct in conjunction
with, a livestock slaughterhouse or animal by-products business.
5. Dairy.
6. Public and private stables and riding academies.
7. Beekeeping.
b. The keeping or raising of livestock and poultry on parcels of land less
than 10 acres in area shall be limited to the keeping and raising of two
head of livestock or 100 fowl per 40,000 square feet. No fowl or
livestock may be kept on parcels of land less than one acre in area.
c. Farm buildings shall not be constructed closer than 85 feet to a front
property line nor closer than 100 feet to a side or rear property line.
d. No farmhouse shall be constructed closer than 75 feet to such lines.
e. No barn or manure storage shall be established closer than 100 feet to
any property line.
f. All other new construction, including structures for temporary storage
of feeds, shall conform to setback requirements.
g. The display and sale of farm products shall be permitted provided that:
1. At least 50% of such products shall have been produced on the
property on which they are offered for sale.
2. Parking space for at least three cars shall be provided behind the
highway right-of-way line. Parking spaces shall be provided behind
the highway right-of-way line at a ratio of one space for each 300
square feet of building floor area.
§ 23-7.8.11 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.8.11
AO:484
§ 23-7.8.12. Performance Standards. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
3. Sale of farm products shall be conducted from a portable stand
dismantled at the end of the growing season, or from a permanent
building under the following conditions.
(a) Such building shall be located at least 40 feet from the right-ofway
line of the road.
(b) Such building will be in character with other buildings on the
site.
h. All farm buildings are to be approved by the Construction Official as to
structural safety.
i. All such uses shall be approved as to the safety of the traffic patterns
and ingress and egress locations.
a. Fire and Explosive Hazards. All activities and all storage of flammable
and explosive material at any point shall be provided with adequate
safety devices against the hazards of fire and explosion and adequate
fire fighting and fire suppression equipment and devices.
b. Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbances. There shall be no activities
which emit radioactivity at any point. There shall be no electrical
disturbances adversely affecting the operation at any point of any
equipment, other than that of the creator of the disturbances.
c. Smoke. There shall be no emission at any point from a chimney or
otherwise, for longer than five minutes in any hour, of visible gray or
visible smoke of any color with a shade darker than No. 3 on Standard
Ringelmann Chart as issued by the United States Bureau of Mines.
d. Smoke, Ash, Dust, Fumes, Vapor, Gases, and Other Forms of Air
Pollution. There shall be no emission at any point from any chimney or
otherwise which can cause any damage to health, to animals or
vegetation or other forms of property, or which causes any excessive
soiling at any point.
e. Liquid and Solid Wastes. There shall be no discharge at any point into
any private sewer system or stream or into the ground of any materials
in such a way or of such a nature or temperament as can contaminate or
otherwise cause the emission of hazardous materials.
f. Resource Extraction Operations. There shall be no resource extraction
operations without approval of the Mayor and Council.
g. Noise and Vibration. There shall be no vibration or noise level at the
property line greater than the average noise level occurring on adjacent
streets.
h. Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from
a high temperature process, shall be visible from adjoining public
§ 23-7.8.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.8.12
AO:485
§ 23-7.8.13. Prohibited Uses. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
The following uses are prohibited in every district:
§ 23-7.8.14. Home Offices. [Ord. No. 2000-673]
Home office use, meaning an office activity carried on for the gain by a
resident in a dwelling unit, shall be permitted accessory use in residential
zone districts, provided:
streets or adjacent lots, when viewed by a person standing on the
ground level.
i. Odor. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous
matter in such quantities as to be offensive on adjoining streets or
adjacent lots.
j. Operation. All primary operations shall be conducted entirely within
closed buildings.
a. Automobile graveyards.
b. All recreational vehicles and trailers which are occupied are prohibited.
All recreational vehicles and trailers and boats which are unoccupied
must be parked or stored in the rear of homes, but no closer than five
feet to the rear or side property lines. No such uses shall be hooked up
to utility services. Also, no such uses, including boats, shall be parked
or stored in common areas or parking lots of multifamily housing
projects.
c. Airfields.
d. Sanitary landfills or trash dump operations, except upon land owned by
the Borough.
e. Outdoor storage of any type shall not be permitted unless such storage
is a part of the normal operations conducted on the premises subject to
design and performance standards for the prevailing zoning districts.
Junkyards as defined by this chapter are expressly prohibited.
f. Roadside stands and sales from vacant lots are prohibited in all districts
except agriculture, where they are permitted in accordance with the
regulations of this chapter. However sales from open lots will be
permitted only in institutional and agricultural districts.
a. The use is limited solely to office use;
b. The use is operated by or employs in the residence only a resident or
residents who are permanent full-time residents of the dwelling unit,
and no other persons;
c. No nonresident employees, customers, or business invitees or guests
shall visit the dwelling unit for business purposes;
§ 23-7.8.12 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.8.14
AO:486
§ 23-7.9. Residential Districts.
§ 23-7.9.1. R-Med Residential District. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
d. The use shall be located in only one room of the dwelling unit, which
shall not be served by an entrance separate from the household;
e. Interior storage of materials shall only consist of office supplies;
f. There shall be no change to the exterior of buildings or structures
because of the use, and no outside appearance of a business use,
including, but not limited to, parking, storage, signs or lights;
g. The use operates no equipment or process that creates noise, vibration,
glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or electronic interference, including
interference with telephone, radio or television reception, detectable by
neighboring residents;
h. The use does not require any increased or enhanced electrical or water
supply;
i. The quantity and type of solid waste disposal is the same as other
residential uses in the zone district;
j. The capacity and quality of effluent is typical of normal residential use,
and creates no potential or actual detriment to the sanitary sewer
system or its components;
k. Delivery trucks shall be limited to U.S. Postal Service, United Parcel
Service, Federal Express, and other delivery services providing regular
service to residential uses in the zone district;
l. All vehicular traffic to and from the home office use shall be limited in
volume, type and frequency to what is normally associated with other
residential uses in the zone district.
a. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of this district to provide for the
continuation of existing residential development patterns in areas of
the Borough which have the following characteristics:
1. Proximity to areas of existing high density development.
2. Availability of municipal services.
3. Environmental suitability.
b. Permitted Uses. In any R-Med residence district, land, buildings or
premises shall be used by right, only for one or more of the following:
1. Detached single-family dwellings.
2. Municipal tower, water storage tank, water reservoir, water
pumping station and water treatment plant subject to the following
special requirement:
§ 23-7.8.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.9.1
AO:487
The architectural design of the exterior of any building shall be in
keeping with other structures in the neighborhood.
3. Substation electric and gas facilities, sewage lift station, water
pumping station, transmission lines and gas regulator stations
subject to the following special requirements:
(a) No storage of materials and trucks and no repairs facilities or
housing of repair crews, except within completely enclosed
buildings.
(b) The architectural design of the exterior of any building shall be
in keeping with other structures in the neighborhood.
(c) Screening to be developed as defined in this chapter. All plants
not surviving two years after planting must be replaced.
4. Model homes or sales offices within a subdivision shall be allowed,
but only during the period necessary for the sale of new homes
within such subdivision. Such uses shall not be considered a
business use.
5. Agricultural uses, provided that:
(a) The use will not injure or detract from the use of neighboring
property.
(b) The use will not detract from the character of the
neighborhood.
(c) The use of property adjacent to the area included in the plan is
adequately safeguarded.
(d) The property is suitable for the intended use.
(e) The use will serve the best interests of the Borough.
(f) The use will not adversely affect public sewers and facilities,
such as water, sewer, police and fire protection.
(g) The use will not adversely affect the drainage facilities in the
adjacent neighborhood.
(h) Chemical and fertilizer usage will not be detrimental to people,
animals and plants in the neighborhood.
6. Churches, chapels, convents or similar religious institutions,
including rectories or parish houses, provided that:
(a) The minimum lot size will not be less than 1/2 acre.
(b) The coverage will not exceed 35%.
(c) The lot width will not be less than 100 feet.
§ 23-7.9.1 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.9.1
AO:488
§ 23-7.9.2. R-Low Residential District. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
§ 23-7.9.3. R-Rural Residential District. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
(d) The lot depth and yard areas will conform to the standards set
forth in this chapter.
(e) The parking requirements shall be in accordance with all the
regulations set forth in this chapter.
7. Accessory Uses. Only the following accessory uses shall be
permitted:
(a) Customary accessory residential uses, including private
garages, and utility sheds.
(b) Private swimming pools.
(c) Private greenhouses.
a. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of this district to provide for low
density residential development in all environmentally suitable areas of
the Borough, in order to provide a balanced mix of housing within the
Borough in accordance with the goals and policies of the Master Plan.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. Detached single-family dwellings.
2. Those uses permitted in this chapter for R-Med Residential Zone.
c. Conditional Uses. All conditional uses of the R-Med District shall be
allowed provided however, the conditions set forth thereunder shall be
complied with.
d. Accessory Uses. Only the following accessory uses shall be permitted:
1. Customary accessory residential uses, including private garages,
and utility sheds.
2. Private swimming pools.
3. Private greenhouses.
e. Water and Sewerage Facilities Requirements.
1. The development of all permitted and conditional uses in the R-Low
District shall be serviced by public water and public sewerage
facilities.
a. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of this district to provide for low
density residential development in areas of the Borough whose
environmental characteristics present constraints to development.
b. Permitted Uses.
§ 23-7.9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.9.3
AO:489
1. Detached single-family dwellings.
2. Those uses permitted in this chapter for the R-Med Residential
Zone.
c. Conditional Uses.
1. All conditional uses of the R-Med District set forth in this chapter
shall be allowed provided however, the conditions set forth
thereunder shall be complied with.
2. All uses and accessory uses of the Light Industrial Zone set forth in
this chapter, provided they meet the following criteria:
(a) The site must be served by public water and sewerage.
(b) A 100-foot wide vegetated buffer must be provided along all
property lines adjoining a residential zone.
(c) No lots shall back up to a dedicated roadway without providing
a deed restricted buffer of at least 50 feet and a planted berm
with an approved landscape plan.
(d) No construction may occur on soils whose depth to seasonal
high water table is less than five feet.
(e) No construction may occur within 100 feet of a wetland or any
body of surface water.
(f) There shall be no increase in erosion resulting from
sedimentation in a wetland.
(g) There shall be no loss of wetland habitat, reduction in wetland
habitat diversity, change in wetland species composition or a
significant disturbance of areas used by indigenous or
migratory wildlife for breeding, nesting or feeding.
(h) Development occurring upon the following excessively drained
soils must observe vegetation clearing limits, and all new
landscaping must utilize native species in order to reduce
potential groundwater contamination by nutrients from
fertilizers.
(i) All provisions for the Design and Performance Standards in
Article IX of this chapter must be met.
d. Accessory Uses. All accessory uses permitted by this chapter in the RMed
District.
e. Density Requirements. The maximum density of the entire tract shall
not exceed one dwelling unit per adjusted gross acre.
§ 23-7.9.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.9.3
AO:490
§ 23-7.9.4. R-Multi Residential District. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
§ 23-7.9.5. R-SenCit Residential District. [Ord. No. 2003-718, § III]
f. Recreation and Open Space Requirements. A minimum of 10% of the
entire tract shall be set aside for open space in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
a. General Provisions. The maximum density of the entire tract shall not
exceed three dwelling units per acre, and shall include twins,
townhouses, and apartments. All development shall provide the
following:
1. Public water and sewer.
2. Recreation and open space requirements. A minimum of 15% of the
entire tract shall be set aside for open space in accordance with the
requirements of Subsection 23-7.8.1. Areas designated for
recreation shall be of adequate size and environmental suitability
to provide recreation.
(a) Of the 15% required space, no greater than 1/2 shall be
allowed as classified wetlands.
3. A minimum tract size of 10 acres.
4. Area and bulk requirements.
(a) There shall not be more than 16 dwelling units per structure,
nor shall the structure exceed 160 feet in width or length.
a. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of this district to provide for moderate
density residential development, designed for persons 55 years of age
and older, in specifically designated areas of the Borough, in order to
provide a balanced mix of housing within the Borough in accordance
with the goals and policies of the Master Plan.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. Single family detached house, one story in height.
2. Pump stations, subject to the following regulations: Regulations as
promulgated by the Borough of Pine Hill Municipal Utilities
Authority.
(a) There shall be no storage of materials and trucks and no repair
facilities or housing of repair crews except within completely
enclosed buildings.
(b) The architectural design of the exterior of any building shall be
in keeping with other structures in the neighborhood and shall
be reviewed and approved by the Planning Board.
§ 23-7.9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.9.5
AO:491
(c) Screening shall be developed as defined in this chapter. All
plants not surviving one year after planting must be replaced.
3. Model homes or sales offices within a subdivision, but only during
the period necessary for the sale of new homes within such
subdivision. Such uses shall not be considered a business use.
c. Accessory Uses. Only the following accessory uses shall be permitted.
1. Customary accessory residential uses, including private garages
and utility sheds.
2. Private swimming pools.
3. Private greenhouses.
4. Private gardens.
d. Water and Sewerage Facilities Requirements.
1. The development of all permitted and conditional uses in the RSenCit
District shall be serviced by public water and public
sewerage facilities.
e. Design Features. Among the more important aspects of adult
communities is the need to have a social focal point. Therefore, the
following design features shall be implemented:
1. Under 300 units: Use of outdoor features, such as gazebos and
sitting areas.
2. Over 300 units: Day center, clubhouse, recreation center with
facilities such as saunas, exercise rooms, card rooms, library,
woodworking shop, photo lab, billiard room, arts and crafts,
lounge, auditorium, kitchen, swimming pool.
f. Open Space and Recreation.
1. There shall be designated open space for active and passive
recreation activities equal to 10% of the total area of the project.
The clubhouse facility, if any, may be included in the open space
area.
2. The recreation facilities specified in Subsection 23-9.18 shall not be
followed, but shall be replaced with other recreation facilities
designed specifically for each project, as approved by the Planning
Board.
g. Age and Occupancy Requirements.
1. Permanent residents of a Senior Citizen District must be at least 55
years of age, except that the spouse or an immediate member of the
family, other than a child of such permanent resident, or a live-in
domestic, companion or nurse, may be a permanent resident
§ 23-7.9.5 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.9.5
AO:492
§ 23-7.9.6. Exception to Residential Density Standards. [Ord. No.
95-588 Art. VII; Ord. No. 2003-718, § IV]
In the case of any subdivision which has received preliminary approval from
the approving authority for construction of housing at a density higher than
that permitted in its zone district as established by this chapter, completion
of development shall be permitted only under the following conditions:
§ 23-7.10. Trade Districts.
§ 23-7.10.1. GBD General Business District. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art.
VII; Ord. No. 98-638 § 2; Ord. No. 2014-923 § 1]
regardless of his/her age. Permanent residents are defined as
people who live in the units more than 25% of the time.
2. A maximum of one child, age 19 or older, may also reside as a
permanent resident with his/her parent or parents.
3. In no event, however, shall there be more than three permanent
residents in any one residential dwelling unit.
a. At least 35% of the proposed development must have received final
approval from the Planning Board as of the date of adoption of this
chapter.
b. Approval of the final subdivision plat shall occur prior to the expiration
of the three-year time limit on preliminary approvals or any extension
thereof according to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
a. Specific Intent. The purpose of this district is to provide for the
development of commercial shopping center activities within the
Borough.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. General retail merchandise store, including department stores,
variety stores, merchandise discount stores, drug and sporting
goods stores.
2. Retail apparel and accessories store, including shoe stores,
clothing stores.
3. Retail furniture stores, including home furnishings and equipment,
household appliances, hardware, paint, radio and television sales
and service.
4. Supermarkets, bakeries and confectionery shops.
5. Eating establishments, including restaurants, lunch counters,
delicatessens, cafes and taverns.
§ 23-7.9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.10.1
AO:493
6. Retail gift shops, including camera shops, bookstores, stationery
stores, antique and music stores, cosmetic, candy, cigarette and
tobacco shops, flower, hobby, jewelry, leather and luggage stores.
7. Professional offices, banks.
8. Dry cleaners, barber and beautician shops.
9. Government offices servicing the public, including post office.
10. Theaters, bowling alleys and other indoor recreational facilities.
11. New and used car dealers, sales and service; no outside storage of
materials is permitted.
12. Mortuaries, libraries and museums.
13. Motel, hotel and related faculties.
14. General service and repair shops; plumbing, furniture, small
electric and cabinet repair.
15. Pet shop, veterinary hospital, provided that all animals are kept in
enclosed structure and not within 150 feet of any residential use.
16. Cat kennels.
17. Hospitals, medical clinics, medical or health centers, nursing
homes and sanatoriums. [Ord. No. 2014-923 § 1]
c. Conditional Uses. Certain conditional uses may be permitted by the
Planning Board in accordance with the specifications and standards
listed as follows:
That the use will not injure or detract from the use of the neighboring
property, or detract from the character of the neighboring property.
That the property is suited for the intended use, and that the use will
serve the best interest of the Borough.
That the use will not adversely affect public sewers and other facilities,
such as water, police and fire services, and will not adversely affect
drainage in adjacent neighborhoods.
That the use will not adversely affect the flow of traffic and that
adequate roadways are present.
d. Prohibited Uses. It is determined that the Borough has limited area
suitable for large commercial shopping development, and it is the
desire to prohibit uses that would detract and prevent the development
of large commercial shopping areas. Therefore, it is determined that
certain uses be prohibited in the General Business District:
1. Schools, both private and public; lower, middle or high school
levels; full or part time; and day-care centers.
§ 23-7.10.1 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.10.1
AO:494
§ 23-7.10.2. LBD Limited Business District. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art.
VII; Ord. No. 2014-923 § 2]
2. All residential uses.
3. All resource recovery operations.
a. Specific Intent. The purpose of this district is to provide areas of
general commercial and professional activities within the Borough.
b. Permitted Uses. Those uses permitted under Subsection 23-7.10.1
above that are determined compatible with the limited area established
in this zone, and provide a sufficient buffer to the existing residential
uses, specifically including the following:
1. Professional offices.
2. Banks and financial institutions.
3. (Reserved) [Deleted by Ord. No. 2014-923 § 2]
4. Churches, synagogues and similar places of religious assembly,
including meeting halls, social halls.
All uses in the Limited Business District may contain residential
uses, provided that a sufficient buffer exists between the business
use and the residential use.
c. Conditional Uses. Certain conditional uses may be permitted by the
Planning Board in accordance with the specifications and standards
listed as follows:
That the use will not injure or detract from the use of the neighboring
property, or detract from the character of the neighboring property.
That the property is suited for the intended use, and that the use will
serve the best interest of the Borough.
That the use will not adversely affect public sewers and other facilities,
such as water, police and fire services, and will not adversely affect
drainage in adjacent neighborhoods.
That the use will not adversely affect the flow of traffic and that
adequate roadways are present.
d. Prohibited Uses. It is determined that the Borough has limited area
suitable for commercial development, and it is the desire to prohibit
uses that would detract and prevent the development of commercial
areas. Therefore, it is determined that certain uses be prohibited in the
Limited Business District:
1. Schools, both private and public; lower, middle or high school
levels; full or part time; and day-care centers.
§ 23-7.10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.10.2
AO:495
§ 23-7.10.3. CBD Central Business District. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art.
VII]
2. All resource recovery operations.
a. Specific Intent. The purpose of this district is to provide areas of
general commercial and professional activities that are located within
the center of the Borough and make up a blend of commercial and
residential uses.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. General retail merchandise store, including variety stores,
merchandise discount stores, drug and sporting goods stores.
2. Retail apparel and accessories store, including shoe stores,
clothing stores.
3. Retail furniture stores, including home furnishings and equipment,
household appliances, hardware, paint, radio and television sales
and service.
4. Supermarkets, bakeries and confectionery shops.
5. Eating establishments, including restaurants, lunch counters,
delicatessens, cafes and taverns.
6. Retail gift shops, including camera shops, bookstores, stationery
stores, antique and music stores, cosmetic, candy, cigarette and
tobacco shops, flower, hobby, jewelry, leather and luggage stores.
7. Professional offices, banks.
8. Dry cleaners, barber and beautician shops.
9. Government offices servicing the public, including post office.
10. General service and repair shops; plumbing, furniture, small
electric and cabinet repair.
All uses in the Central Business District may contain residential,
first and/or second floor, residential uses.
c. Conditional Uses. Certain conditional uses may be permitted by the
Planning Board in accordance with the specifications and standards
listed as follows:
That the use will not injure or detract from the use of the neighboring
property, or detract from the character of the neighboring property.
That the property is suited for the intended use, and that the use will
serve the best interest of the Borough.
§ 23-7.10.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.10.3
AO:496
§ 23-7.10.4. IND Industrial District. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
That the use will not adversely affect public sewers and other facilities,
such as water, police and fire services, and will not adversely affect
drainage in adjacent neighborhoods.
That the use will not adversely affect the flow of traffic and that
adequate roadways are present.
d. Prohibited Uses. It is determined that the Borough has limited area
suitable for commercial and professional development, and it is the
desire to prohibit uses that would detract and prevent the development
of a commercial and professional area. Therefore, it is determined that
certain uses be prohibited in the Central Business District:
1. Schools, both private and public; lower, middle or high school
levels; full or part time; and day-care centers.
2. All resource recovery operations.
a. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of this district to encourage industrial
development in the Borough that will provide harmony with the
surrounding nonindustrial uses, and yet encourage an efficient use of
the land and be free of offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odors, glare
and other objectionable effects.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. Public utility service yard and substation.
2. Building material sales yard, contractor's equipment storage yard.
3. Substations for telephone, gas and electric, sewer and water
facilities.
4. Warehousing and storage facilities.
5. Electronics and small parts assembly and manufacture.
6. Light manufacturing of beverages, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals,
food products, clothing goods.
7. Fire and rescue squads.
8. Municipal and government buildings and facilities.
9. Those uses contained in Subsections 23-7.10.1, 23-7.10.2 and
23-7.10.3 above provided that they are part of an overall planned
industrial development.
c. Conditional Uses. Certain conditional uses may be permitted by the
Planning Board in accordance with the specifications and standards
listed as follows:
§ 23-7.10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.10.4
AO:497
§ 23-7.11. Special Use Districts.
§ 23-7.11.1. I Institutional District. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII; Ord.
No. 2014-923 § 2]
§ 23-7.11.2. A Agricultural District. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
§ 23-7.11.3. FP Floodplain District. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
That the use will not injure or detract from the use of the neighboring
property, or detract from the character of the neighboring property.
That the property is suited for the intended use, and that the use will
serve the best interest of the Borough.
That the use will not adversely affect public sewers and other facilities,
such as water, police and fire services, and will not adversely affect
drainage in adjacent neighborhoods.
That the use will not adversely affect the flow of traffic and that
adequate roadways are present.
a. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of the institutional district to
encourage the development of institutional uses in the Borough, and to
promote the planning for the location of future institutional uses
serving the Borough population.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. (Reserved) [Deleted by Ord. No. 2014-923 § 2]
2. Church, convent, chapel or similar religious institution.
3. College, private or public school, secondary or nursery school or
other educational institution.
4. Cemetery, provided that no such development shall be located
closer than 200 feet of a residential district.
5. Borough administration building, government building, public
library, or other associated function for the health and welfare of
the general public.
a. Specific Intent. It is the purpose of this district to provide for the
continuation of agricultural uses in the Borough. This district will allow
agricultural uses as a matter of right and to preserve the rural
characteristic and scenic landscape of the Borough.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. Farming, usual farm buildings and dwellings.
2. Veterinary hospital and kennel.
§ 23-7.10.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.11.3
AO:498
a. Purpose and Policy.
1. It is hereby found that the streams, creeks and waterways of the
Borough are subject to recurring flooding, that such flooding
damages and endangers public and private property and facilities,
that this condition is aggravated by developments and
encroachments in the floodplain, and that the most appropriate
method of alleviating such condition is through regulation of such
developments and encroachments. It is therefore determined that
the special and paramount public interest in the floodplain justifies
the regulation of property located therein as provided in this
chapter, which is in the exercise of the police power of the
municipality, for the protection of the persons and property of its
inhabitants and for the preservation of the public health, safety and
general welfare.
2. The intent of this chapter shall be to protect the areas of the
floodplain subject to and necessary for the containment of
floodwaters, and to permit and encourage the retention of open
space land uses, which will be so located and utilized as to
constitute a harmonious and appropriate aspect of the continuing
physical development of the Borough.
b. Specific Objectives.
1. To combine with present zoning requirements certain restrictions
made necessary for flood prone areas to promote the general
health, welfare and safety of the Borough.
2. To prevent the erection of structures in areas unfit for human usage
by reason of danger from flooding.
3. To minimize danger to public health by protecting the quality of
surface and subsurface water supplies adjacent to and underlying
flood hazard areas and promoting safe and sanitary drainage.
4. To permit only those uses which can be appropriately located in the
floodplain as herein defined and which will not impede the flow or
storage of floodwaters, or otherwise cause danger to life, property
at, above or below their locations along the floodplains.
5. To provide sufficient drainage courses to carry abnormal flows of
stormwater in periods of heavy precipitation.
6. To protect adjacent landowners and those both upstream and
downstream from damages resulting from development within a
floodplain and the consequent construction or increase in flow of
floodwaters.
7. To protect the entire Borough from individual uses of land which
may have an effect upon subsequent expenditures for public works
§ 23-7.11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.11.3
AO:499
and disaster relief and adversely affect the economic well-being of
the Borough.
8. To maintain undisturbed the ecological balance between those
natural systems and elements, including wildlife, vegetation and
marine life, dependent upon watercourse and water areas.
9. To protect other municipalities within the same watershed from the
impact of improper development and the consequent increased
potential for flooding.
10. To require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities,
be constructed so as to be protected from flood damage in
accordance with the purpose and requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program, P.L. 93-234.
c. Definitions. As used in this section, the following shall have the
meanings indicated:
CHANNEL — Shall mean the bed and banks of a stream and waterways
in the Borough which convey the normal flow of the stream that occurs
most of the time.
DESIGN FLOOD (FLOODWAY OR FLOOD HAZARD AREA) — Shall
mean the relative size or magnitude of a flood expressed as a design
discharge in cubic feet per second, which is developed from hydrologic
criteria, represents a major flood of reasonable expectancy, reflects
both flood experience and flood potential, and is the basis of the
delineation of the floodwater and flood hazard area and the water
surface elevations thereof in floodplain reports.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Shall mean the floodway and additional
portions of the floodplain that are subject to flood flow at lesser depths
and lower velocities than the floodway, that are inundated by the flood
hazard area design flood and that are delineated in the floodplain
reports are in the "flood hazard area".
FLOOD HAZARD PROFILE (FLOODWAY OR FLOOD HAZARD AREA) —
Shall mean the elevations of the water surface of the floodwater design
flood and the flood hazard area design flood as shown on the flood map
included in the floodplain report.
FLOOD MAP — Shall mean the map identified in paragraph d of this
subsection and all subsequent maps and reports that may be prepared
from time to time are an integral part of this chapter. In the absence
of any other flood maps, the delineation of floodplains as described in
paragraph d shall be conclusive.
FLOODPLAIN — Shall mean the relatively flat area adjoining the
channel which has been or may be hereinafter covered by floodwater of
the stream based on the one-hundred-year flood.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel and portions of the adjacent
floodplain that carry the greater part of the flood flow at greater depths
§ 23-7.11.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.11.3
AO:500
and velocities than do the other parts of floodplain that constitute
the minimum area required for the passage of flood flows without
aggravating flood conditions upstream and downstream, that are
necessary to preserve the natural regimen of the stream for the
reasonable passage of the floodway design flood and that are delineated
on the flood map that are in the Borough.
d. Content and Boundaries.
1. This section consists of this text and the Floodplain Map, prepared
by the Borough as to the delineation of floodplains. Said map is on
file in the office of the Borough Clerk and is incorporated in this
chapter by reference as though fully set forth in this text.
2. All other streams and waterways in the Borough not included above
are deemed to be floodplains. Twenty feet on both sides of streams
as measured from the center line of streams are presumed to be
floodplains in absence of proof to the contrary.
3. This section shall also consist of any and all reports, maps,
revisions and amendments of these texts as may be prepared from
time to time, provided that such additional documents are in
agreement with the Borough Engineer, Corps of Engineers, Soil
Conservation Service or any agency of the United States
Government authorized to define floodplain criteria.
4. In cases of doubt, uncertainty or dispute as to the exact limits of the
floodplain, the floodwater or flood hazard area in a proposed
development, the Borough Engineer shall, upon the application and
with the consent of the landowner, determine the precise location
of a floodplain, floodway or flood hazard area limit by close
inspection, field survey or other appropriate method and cause the
same to be marked on the ground notifying the landowner, the
Construction Official, and the approving authority of the results
thereof. The cost of such engineering shall be borne by the
applicant.
e. Overlay Concept and Density.
1. The Floodplain District shall be deemed an overlay on any zoning
district now or hereafter applicable to any lot.
2. Should the Floodplain District be declared inapplicable to any
tract, the zoning applicable to such lot shall be deemed to be the
district in which it is located without consideration of this section.
In appropriate cases, the center line of the stream shall be in the
district boundary line.
3. Should the zoning of any parcel or any part hereof in which the
Floodplain District is located be changed through any legislative or
administrative actions or judicial decision, such change shall have
§ 23-7.11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.11.3
AO:501
no effect on the Floodplain District, unless such change was
included as part of the original application.
4. Lands in the floodplain shall not be used to calculate the allowable
number of units in a project, unless such areas are owned and
maintained as provided in this chapter.
f. Prohibited Uses. The following uses shall be prohibited in the
Floodplain District.
1. All freestanding structures and buildings and retaining walls, with
the exception of flood retention dams, culverts and bridges as
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
2. The filling or removal of topsoil for all floodplain lands, except as
approved under the provisions in this chapter.
3. The relocation of any watercourse without approval thereof by the
Planning Board and Soil Conservation Service, United States
Department of Agriculture or the relocation of any watercourse
without the approval of the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
4. Sanitary landfills, dumps, junkyards, outdoor storage of vehicles
and material.
5. On-site sewage disposal systems.
6. Private water supply wells.
g. Permitted Uses. The following uses and no others are permitted in the
Floodplain District.
1. Cultivation and harvesting crops according to recognized soil
conservation practices.
2. Pasture and grazing of animals according to recognized soil
conservation practices.
3. Outdoor plant nursery or orchard according to recognized soil
conservation practices.
4. Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preservation, arboretum and passive
recreation or parks, including hiking, bicycle and bridle trails, but
not including facilities subject to damage by flooding.
5. Game farms, fish hatchery or hunting and fishing reserve for the
protection and propagation of wildlife, but permitting no
structures.
6. Forestry, lumbering and reforestation according to recognized
natural resources and conservation practices.
§ 23-7.11.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.11.3
AO:502
7. Front, side and rear yards and required lot area in any district,
provided such yards are not to be used for onsite sewage disposal.
8. Normal accessory use, except enclosed structures, fences and
above ground swimming pools, permitted under the applicable
zoning district and as further restricted by Subsection 23-7.8.9.
9. Recreation use, whether open to the public or restricted to private
use, such as parks, camps, picnic areas, fishing areas, sport or
boating clubs, not to include enclosed structures, except floodproof
toilet facilities, but permitting piers, docks, floats or enclosed
shelters usually found in developed outdoor recreational areas. Any
floodproofed toilet facilities provided shall be connected to public
water and sewage systems.
10. Sewage treatment plant, outlet installations for sewage treatment
plants and sewage pumping stations with the approval of the
Borough Engineer, appropriate sewer authorities and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, when
accompanied by documentation as to the necessity for locating
within the boundaries of the Floodplain District.
11. Sealed public water supply wells with the approval of the Borough
Engineer and the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
12. Dams, culverts and bridges with the approval of appropriate
authorities with jurisdiction, such as the Department of
Environmental Protection.
13. Sanitary or storm sewers and impoundment basins, with the
approval of the Borough Engineer and the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection.
14. Utility transmission lines.
15. Roads, driveways and parking facilities.
(a) In the case of roads and driveways, no such facilities shall be
permitted if viable alternative alignments are feasible. In any
case, pervious rather than impervious materials shall be
utilized in the construction of any road or driveway situated
within a floodplain.
(b) In the case of parking facilities, no such facility shall be
permitted unless satisfactory evidence is submitted that such
parking will not be utilized during periods of flood flow, thus
posing no threat to the safety of the vehicles, their uses and/or
downstream properties. In any case, pervious rather than
impervious materials shall be utilized in the construction of
any parking facility situated within a floodplain.
§ 23-7.11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.11.3
AO:503
16. Grading or regrading of lands, including the deposit of topsoil and
the grading thereof. The application for such a use shall be
accompanied by the following:
(a) Detailed engineering studies indicating effects on drainage
and streams on all adjacent properties as well as the property
in question including the necessary data to determine whether
the boundaries of the Floodplain District would be affected if
the application was granted.
(b) An application for amending the boundaries of the Floodplain
District if the boundaries are affected by the grading or
regrading of land.
(c) A plan indicating the deposition of any fill or materials
proposed to be deposited by the grading or regrading of land,
such fill or other materials shall be protected against erosion
by the riprap, vegetation cover or bulk heading.
h. Application Procedure. For any use of land in the Floodplain District,
except uses existing as of the date of the enactment of this chapter, an
application for a floodplain permit shall be as follows:
1. The applicant shall apply to the Borough in accordance with either
the site development plan procedures or the subdivision
procedures.
2. In addition to the information required in the above noted
procedures, the applicant shall also furnish a plan certified by a
registered professional engineer showing the following data:
(a) Contour lines at intervals of not more than two feet.
(b) Exact size, shape, location and elevation of existing and
proposed buildings and structures.
(c) Floodplain, floodway and flood hazard area limits and
developments therein.
(d) Channel or storm.
(e) Proposed fill limits, regrading and elevations.
(f) Floodproofing measures.
(g) Exact dimensions and acreage of each lot or plot to be built
upon or otherwise used.
(h) The location, layout and elevation of existing and proposed
parking areas.
(i) Driveway drainage.
(j) Sewer and water facilities and connections.
§ 23-7.11.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.11.3
AO:504
(k) Plantings, seedings and signs.
(l) Such other information as shall be reasonably required for an
evaluation of the effect of the development upon flood control.
3. The following additional information may be deemed necessary by
the Borough Engineer for the evaluation of the effects of the
proposal upon flood flows and floodwater storage and to render a
decision on the proposed floodplain use.
(a) A typical valley cross-section showing the channel of stream,
the floodplain adjoining each side of the channel, crosssectional
area to be occupied by the proposed development
and high water information.
(b) Plan surface review showing elevation or contours of the
ground, pertinent structure, fill or storage elevations, size,
location and spatial arrangement of all proposed and existing
structures on the site, location and elevations of streets, water
supply, sanitary facilities and soil types and other information.
(c) Profile showing the slope of the bottom of the channel of the
flow line of the stream.
(d) Specifications for the building construction and materials,
flood-proofing, filling, dredging, grading, channel
improvements, storage or materials, water supply and sanitary
facilities.
(e) Plan or document certified by a registered professional
engineer that the floodproofing measures are consistent with
requirements for the flood protection elevation for the
particular area, including:
(1) Anchorage to resist flotation and lateral movements.
(2) Installation of water tight doors, bulkheads and shutters.
(3) Reinforcements of walls to resist water pressure.
(4) Use of paints, membranes of mortar to reduce seepage.
(5) Additions of mass or weight to structure to resist flotation.
(6) Installations of pumps to lower water level in structure.
(7) Construction of water supply and waste treatment systems
so as to prevent entrance of floodwaters.
(8) Pumping facilities for subsurface external foundation wall
and basement water pressure.
(9) Construction to resist rupture or collapse caused by water
pressure or floating debris.
§ 23-7.11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.11.3
AO:505
§ 23-7.11.4. PRC Planned Recreation and Conservation District.
[Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VII]
(10) Cutoff valves or sewer lines for the elimination of gravity
flow basement drains.
(11) Elevation of structures to reduce the likelihood of flood
damage.
i. Standards. In reviewing applications, the approving authority shall
consider and be guided by the purpose, policies and specific objectives
as set forth in this section.
1. To develop in a floodway, primary consideration shall be given to
preserving the area as defining the minimum capacity required for
passage of flood flows without aggravating flood conditions
upstream and downstream. Encroachments shall be permitted
sparingly and only in cases where the public interest will be served,
such as bridges, roads, utilities and the like, and where obstruction
is minimal, such as recreation, open space, fencing, parking.
2. As to developments outside the floodway, consideration shall be
given to the protection of person and property part of the
development. Normal accessory uses shall be permitted only where
the building or structure is not designed as a dwelling place, is of a
monetary value of less than 10% of the value of the lot or parcel of
land upon which it is being placed, is not intended to house
property of value greater than its own value, and will not have an
adverse effect upon the function of the floodway.
a. Purpose and Policy. The purpose of the Planned Recreation and
Conservation District is to conserve the value of land and to encourage
flexible land development that will preserve and enhance the natural
resources, and further to permit development only where the natural
resource inventory, soil maps and ecological study planning indicates
that development can occur without serious adverse environmental
impact.
b. Permitted Uses.
1. Recreational activities, including public or private facilities and
quasi public camp ground activities, as well as municipal facilities,
open space, parks and park land.
All recreation facilities and areas shall be designed in accordance
with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
published guidelines: Barrier Free Design Standards for Parks and
Recreation Facilities.
2. Residential single-family dwellings, detached, construction
standards shall conform with the R-Rural Zone.
§ 23-7.11.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-7.11.4
AO:506
3. Residential use in the PRC District shall reserve 75% of total area
for recreation uses and 25% of the total area may be used for
residential purposes.
c. Prohibited Uses.
1. All commercial and industrial uses are prohibited in the PRC
District.
§ 23-7.11.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7.11.4
AO:507

ARTICLE VIII
Subdivision and Site Plan
§ 23-8. SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN PROVISIONS AND
PROCEDURES.
§ 23-8.1. Approvals Required. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VIII]
§ 23-8.2. General Application Procedure. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VIII]
a. Site Plan. Except as may be exempt by law under the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37, or waived by the appropriate authority, site plan
approval by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as may
be appropriate, shall be required as a condition for the issuance of a
zoning permit, building permit, certificate of conformity or certificate of
occupancy for any development, as the word development is defined
under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, and particularly for any use, change of use
and/or extension of a nonconforming use.
b. Subdivision. Subdivision approval by the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, as may be appropriate, shall be required as a
condition for the filing of a subdivision plat with the County Recording
Office.
a. Copies. Copies of this chapter shall be made available for any person
desiring to subdivide or develop land, upon request and the payment of
a fee to cover the cost of preparation.
b. Informal Review. At the request of the developer, the Board may grant
an informal review of a concept plan of development. The developer
shall not be bound by any concept plan and the Board shall not be
bound by any such review or comments. A request for informal review
shall not take preference over any pending application and the Board
may establish a time limit for such review. No decision shall be made
and no formal action will be taken on the informal review. The applicant
should include as much information as possible so as to enable the
Board to comment sufficiently, including design concepts, and
environmentally and ecologically sensitive areas. All documents
submitted shall be clearly marked "For Informal Review".
c. Wetlands Delineation. No formal or informal application shall be
considered by the Board until the applicant has calculated and
delineated the area of wetlands based upon a wetlands delineation
approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
and Energy.
d. Amended Applications. Any development application that has been
subject to public hearing and has thereafter been substantially
amended for layout and improvements, shall be proceeded upon as a
new application.
§ 23-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.2
AO:509
§ 23-8.3. Submission Procedures For Minor Subdivision. [Ord. No.
95-588 Art. VIII]
e. Staff Review. All applications shall be submitted to the Board's
professional staff for review prior to the scheduling of any hearing.
f. Other Agency Approval. Each application for subdivision or site plan
shall be submitted to the appropriate agency for review, any approval
granted by the Board shall be conditioned upon timely receipt of any
required approval from other reviewing agencies.
g. Required Contents. Each application for subdivision or site plan shall
contain the following:
1. Location of streets with sufficient width and grade to provide for
and accommodate traffic and access by firefighting and other
emergency vehicles to buildings.
2. Protection and conservation of soil from erosion by wind and water
or excavating or grading.
3. Showing of water and sewerage facilities, drainage, trees and other
utilities essential and necessary to residents and occupants.
4. Suitable area, in shape and size, for open space for public use.
5. All on tract and off tract improvements - water, sewer, drainage,
streets.
6. All drawings of improvements must be signed and sealed by a
licensed New Jersey engineer or architect.
7. Existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements within and
adjoining tract.
8. Proposed access points and parking area on site plans.
9. All streams, lakes and floodplains based on Soil Conservation
Service data including:
(a) Direction of flow.
(b) Location of all drainage structures.
(c) Floodplain limits.
(d) Wetlands.
(e) Swamps.
a. Buildable Lots. The data to be included for a minor subdivision shall be
sufficient to enable the approving authority to determine that the
proposed lots will be buildable lots within the standards established by
this chapter.
§ 23-8.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.3
AO:510
b. Submission Requirements. The applicant shall file with the
Administrative Officer at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the
approving authority:
1. The required application forms supplied by the Administrative
Officer.
2. The application and escrow fees.
3. A signed escrow agreement.
4. Certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
5. A copy of the minor subdivision plat check list.
6. Seven copies of the minor subdivision plat as follows:
(a) Clearly and legibly drawn.
(b) Titled as "Minor Subdivision Plat".
(c) Title block containing block and lot number for the tract.
(d) Name and address of the applicant and the owner.
(e) Name, address, telephone number and signature of plat
preparer.
(f) North arrow.
(g) Scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet.
(h) The date of the original drawing.
(i) Area for the date and substance of each revision.
(j) All adjacent block and lot numbers.
(k) Zoning district(s).
(l) A key map with the North arrow showing the entire
development and its relation to surrounding areas.
(m) Area of original tract to nearest tenth of an acre.
(n) Existing lot lines to be eliminated.
(o) Existing and proposed street and lot layout, with dimensions
showing that portion proposed for development in relation to
the entire tract, together with new block and lot numbers
issued by the Tax Assessor and street addresses approved by
the Engineer.
(p) Area of each proposed lot.
§ 23-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.3
AO:511
(q) Existing structures and uses including the shortest distance
between any existing building and proposed or existing lot
lines.
(r) All setback lines.
(s) Intent for water and sewer treatment.
(1) When septic systems are proposed, supply boring and
percolation test results for each lot taken.
(2) When public sewer is proposed, supply boring for each lot
if soil maps indicate that the seasonal high water table
may exceed ordinance standards for a buildable lot.
(t) Contours based on USGS Data where appropriate.
(u) Approximate location of wooded area.
(v) Existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements within and
adjoining the tract.
(w) All streams, lakes and floodplains based on Soil Conservation
Service data including:
(1) Direction of flow.
(2) Location of all drainage structures.
(3) Floodplain limits.
(4) Wetlands.
(5) Swamps.
(6) Sight triangle easement.
(7) Limits for cross easements.
(8) Materials to be used for the construction of the common
drive.
(x) When a common drive is proposed, show:
(y) Deed restricted buffer, if required.
(z) Appropriate places for the signature of the Chairperson and
Secretary of the approving authority, the date of the official
approving authority actions and dates of the signatures.
7. A soil removal plan and a copy of the application for soil removal
permit (when soil is to be removed from the site and a permit is
required under the Soil Removal Ordinance).
§ 23-8.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.4
AO:512
§ 23-8.4. Submission Procedures for Preliminary plat of Major
Subdivision. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VIII]
a. Standards for Review. In reviewing major subdivisions, the reviewing
body shall take into consideration conformity with the adopted Master
Plan, the natural features of the Borough and the site, and the
ecological systems of the Borough, retention of trees, preservation of
historic areas, alleviation of existing problems and reasonably
anticipated problems worsened or caused by the subdivision relating to
water systems and resources, drainage, sewerage, traffic hazards and
pedestrian travel, fire and police protection, health and sanitation, and
erosion and siltation.
In reviewing major subdivision for 50 or more units of single-family
housing or 25 or more units of multifamily housing, the reviewing
body shall take into consideration methods of addressing the recycling
requirements of the Borough.
b. Submission Requirements. The applicant shall file with the
Administrative Officer at least 35 days prior to the meeting of the
approving authority:
1. The required application forms supplied by the Administrative
Officer.
2. The application and escrow fee required pursuant to this chapter.
3. A signed escrow agreement.
4. Certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
5. A copy of the completed major subdivision preliminary plat check
list.
6. Four copies of the drainage calculations and Engineer's report.
7. Four copies of an Environmental Impact Report which shall include
the requirements and elements set forth in this chapter.
(a) Geology.
(b) Aquifers.
(c) Depth to seasonal high water table.
(d) Surface hydrology.
(e) Surface water quality.
(f) Air quality.
(g) Soils.
(h) Slopes.
§ 23-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.4
AO:513
(i) Potential soil loss.
(j) Vegetation.
(k) Wildlife.
8. Four copies of the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
9. Four copies of the Traffic Impact Statement, which shall include the
following items of information:
(a) Origin and destination table.
(b) Average daily trips per household.
(c) Classification of all surrounding roadways.
(d) Intersection analysis.
(e) Traffic court.
(f) Projected traffic volume.
10. Four copies of a recycling report addressing the means of recycling
for the proposed subdivision including:
(a) Materials to be collected.
(b) Location of materials to be stored.
(c) Method for collection of materials.
(d) Who will pick up the materials.
(e) Frequency that the materials will be collected.
(f) Quantity of material to be generated.
(g) Amount of storage area required for each material.
11. Four copies of any additional reports or supporting data not
included on the preliminary plat.
12. The applicant should demonstrate that the number of proposed
dwelling units on the tract or parcel of land are in accordance with
the definition of Density in this chapter.
13. Twelve copies of the preliminary plat which shall show or be
accompanied by the information listed below and by such other
information as is reasonably necessary to make a decision as to
whether the requirements necessary for preliminary approval have
been met:
(a) Identifying and general information.
§ 23-8.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.4
AO:514
(1) Clearly and legibly drawn by a licensed New Jersey
Professional Engineer.
(2) Titled as "Preliminary plat for (name of development)."
(3) Plats shall be presented on sheets of one of the following
dimensions: 30 inches by 42 inches; 24 inches by 36
inches; 15 inches by 21 inches; or 8 1/2 inches by 13
inches.
(4) If more than one sheet is required to show the entire
subdivision, a separate composite map shall be drawn
showing the entire subdivision and the sheets on which the
various sections are shown, and each detail sheet shall
include a key map showing its relation to the whole tract.
(5) The plat shall consist of as many separate maps as
necessary to properly evaluate the subdivision and the
proposed work.
(6) A boundary survey by a licensed New Jersey Surveyor
certified on a date of submission.
(7) Title block containing block and lot number for the tract
and the name of the Borough.
(8) Name and address of the applicant and the owner,
together with owner's written consent to the application.
(9) Name, address, telephone number, signature and seal of
plat preparer.
(10) Space for the application number.
(11) North arrow.
(12) Scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet with written
and graphic scales shown.
(13) The date of the original drawing.
(14) Area for the date and substance of each revision.
(15) A key map with North arrow showing the entire
development and its relation to surrounding areas at a
scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
(16) The names, addresses, block and lot numbers of all
property owners within 200 feet of the subdivision.
(17) Locations of all existing structures and their uses within
200 feet of the tract.
(18) Zoning district(s).
§ 23-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.4
AO:515
(19) Area of original tract to the nearest 0.01 of an acre.
(20) Existing lot lines to be eliminated.
(21) Existing and proposed street and lot layout, with
dimensions correct to scale accuracy, showing that portion
proposed for development in relation to the entire tract.
(22) The names, location, right-of-way in the subdivision.
(23) The location and description of all existing or proposed
boundary control monuments and pipes.
(24) The number of lots being created.
(25) Each block shall be numbered or lettered, and the lots
within each block shall be numbered consecutively
beginning with the number one or as acceptable to the
Borough Engineer.
(26) Area of each proposed lot correct to within 1% of an acre.
(27) Existing structures and uses on the tract:
[a] The shortest distance between any existing building
and proposed or existing lot lines.
[b] An indication of those to be retained and those to be
removed.
(28) All side, rear and front setback lines with dimensions.
(29) Appropriate places for the signature of the Chairperson
and Secretary of the approving authority, the dates of the
official approving authority actions and dates of the
signatures.
(30) Area for storage and pickup of recyclables.
(b) Natural features and drainage.
(1) Two permanent bench marks based on USGS Datum.
[a] All elevations to relate to bench marks.
(2) Existing elevations and contour lines over the entire area
of the proposed subdivision.
[a] Contours shall be shown at not more than two-foot
intervals for area with less than 20% slope, five-foot
intervals for areas with slopes in excess of 20%.
(3) Proposed grades in sufficient number to illustrate the
proposed grading scheme.
§ 23-8.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.4
AO:516
(4) Locations and dimensions of man-made and/or natural
features such as:
[a] Railroad rights-of-way.
[b] Bridges.
[c] Dams.
[d] Soil types.
[e] Wood areas.
[f] Individual trees in excess of 10 inches DBH outside of
wooded areas.
(5) Locations of all existing and proposed watercourses,
including:
[a] Lakes.
[b] Streams.
[c] Ponds.
[d] Swamp or marsh areas.
[e] Underdrains.
(6) Floodplain limits as determined by Master Plan and on-site
evaluation by a licensed professional engineer.
(7) When a running stream is proposed for alteration,
improvement or relocation, or when a structure or fill is
proposed over, under, in or along such a running stream,
evidence of a result of pre-application meeting with New
Jersey Division of Water Resources or such agency having
jurisdiction shall accompany the application.
(8) The total upstream acreage in the drainage basin of any
watercourse running through or adjacent to a subdivision
including the distance average slope upstream to the basin
ridge line, where applicable.
(9) The total acreage in the drainage basin to the nearest
downstream drainage structure and the acreage of that
portion of the subdivision which drains to the structure,
including the distance and average slope downstream to
the structure and final disposition of the surface waters.
(10) For all existing or proposed lakes or ponds on or within
500 feet of the subdivision, show the:
[a] Location.
§ 23-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.4
AO:517
[b] Water level evaluation.
(11) For any storm drainage system show:
[a] Computations.
[b] Any connection by the subdivision to the existing
storm drainage systems.
(c) Circulation and utilities.
(1) Within a distance of 200 feet of the subdivision show:
[a] Names, location and dimensions of all existing streets.
[b] Existing driveways.
[c] Any connections by the subdivision to existing:
[1] Streets.
[2] Sidewalks.
[3] Bike routes.
[4] Water, sewer or gas mains.
(2) Plans for all proposed streets or road improvements,
whether on-site or off-site or off-tract, showing:
[a] Sight triangle easements at intersections.
[b] Radii of curblines.
[c] Location of:
[1] Street name signs.
[2] Traffic control devices.
[3] Streetlights.
[d] Cross-sections.
[e] Proposed grades.
[f] Center line profiles at horizontal scale not less than
one inch equals 50 feet.
[g] Standard details for:
[1] Curbing.
[2] Sidewalks.
[3] Bike paths.
§ 23-8.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.4
AO:518
(3) Plans and profiles of water and sewer layouts whether onsite,
off-site or off-tract showing:
[a] Size of pipes and mains.
[b] Slope.
[c] Pumping stations.
[d] Fire hydrants.
[e] Standard details.
(4) If private utilities are proposed, they shall comply fully
with all Borough, county and state regulations.
(5) If service is to be provided by an existing water or sewer
utility company, a letter from that company shall be
submitted, stating that service will be available before
occupancy of any proposed structures.
(6) When on-lot water and sewage disposal is proposed, the
concept plan shall be submitted, stating that service will
be available before occupancy of any proposed structure.
(7) A Traffic Impact Statement.
(d) Environmental Review.
(1) Composite Environmental Constraints. Map at the same
scale as the preliminary plat. The applicant shall, utilizing
existing map sources, present a plan indicating:
[a] The features for preservation.
[b] Features which represent any constraints for
development:
[1] Generally indicating the area most suitable for
development.
[2] The areas least suitable for development.
[3] Various degrees of suitability between these two
extremes.
(2) An Environmental Impact Statement containing data
reflecting:
[a] A statement describing and explaining the impact and
effect of proposed subdivision upon the ecological
systems and environment of Pine Hill's land and
waters, giving consideration to the applicable natural
processes and social values of:
§ 23-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.4
AO:519
[1] Geology.
[2] Aquifers.
[3] Hydrology.
[4] Depth of seasonal high water table.
[5] Stormwater runoff.
[6] Soils.
[7] Potential soil loss.
[8] Soil nutrient retention.
[9] Vegetation.
[10] Recreation value of vegetation.
[11] Historic value.
[12] Scenic features.
[13]Wildlife-high value areas.
[14]Wildlife-rare and beneficial species.
[b] Specific plans proposed by the subdivider to alter,
preserve or enhance existing vegetation, including
landscaping and topographical and natural features of
the land within the proposed subdivision.
(3) Test boring, percolation rates and water levels shall be
obtained by a licensed engineer in accordance with the
following standards:
[a] To a two acre site- one test hole.
[b] Two acre site- three test holes.
[c] Three acre site- six test holes.
[d] Five to 10 acre site- eight test holes.
[e] Eleven to 40 acre site- 10 test holes.
[f] Forty-one to 100 acre site- 16 test holes.
[g] Over 100 acre site- 20 test holes.
These borings shall be distributed over the tract to
adequately represent site conditions and shall be a
minimum depth of 10 feet.
(e) Landscaping, Recreational and Areas of Public Use.
§ 23-8.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.4
AO:520
(1) Any lot or area to be reserved or dedicated to public use
shall be identified and shall show all improvements such
as:
[a] Landscaping.
[b] Grading.
[c] Recreational facilities.
(2) Recreational facilities shall be provided in accordance
with this chapter. Supply full details including:
[a] Paving.
[b] Grading.
[c] Seeding.
(3) A landscape plan shall be submitted for:
[a] Street trees required in accordance with this chapter.
[b] Revegetation of utility easements and culs-de-sac.
[c] Buffers as required in accordance with this chapter.
[d] Screening of drainage basins.
[e] Entry plantings.
[f] Recreational planting.
[g] A standard for individual lots in unforested tracts
(subdivisions).
[h] Parking and loading areas.
[i] Recycling areas.
(4) The landscape plan shall locate each plant and shall
contain a plant schedule including:
[a] Number of plants.
[b] Plant symbol.
[c] Botanical name.
[d] Common name.
[e] Caliper.
[f] Height.
[g] Spread.
§ 23-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.4
AO:521
§ 23-8.5. Submission Procedures for Final Plat for Major
Subdivision. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VIII]
[h] Condition.
[i] Remarks.
(5) All man-made improvements shall be shown.
(6) All areas to be sodded or seeded shall be shown.
14. A soil removal plan and a copy of the application for soil removal
permit.
a. Standards for Review. In reviewing final plats, the approving authority
shall ensure that the subdivision is in conformity with the preliminary
plat approval. In the case of residential clusters, approving authority
may permit minimal deviations from the conditions of preliminary
approval, necessitated by change of conditions beyond the control of
the developer since the date of preliminary approval, without the
developer being required to submit another application for
development for preliminary approval.
b. Submission Requirements. The applicant shall file with the
Administrative Officer at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the
approving authority:
1. The required application forms supplied by the Administrative
Officer.
2. The application and escrow fees required pursuant to this chapter.
3. A signed escrow agreement.
4. Certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
5. A copy of the signed preliminary plat in conformance with the
resolution of approval.
6. A copy of the completed major subdivision final plat check list.
7. Four sets of final development plans at one inch equals 50 feet
showing all utilities and other improvements (both in the
development and off-tract) in exact location and elevation.
8. A construction schedule in accordance with this chapter for all
improvements yet to be installed.
9. A street numbering plan prepared by the Administrative Officer.
10. Seven copies of the final plat as follows:
(a) Drawn by a licensed land surveyor in compliance with the Map
Filing Law.
§ 23-8.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.5
AO:522
§ 23-8.6. Submission Procedures for Minor Site Plans. [Ord. No.
95-588 Art. VIII]
(b) Titled as "Final Plat for (name of development)" and showing
block and lot, municipality and county.
(c) Plats shall be presented on sheets of one of the following
dimensions: 30 inches by 42 inches; 24 inches by 36 inches; 15
inches by 21 inches; or 8 1/2 inches by 13 inches.
(d) Signature block required by the Map Filing Law.
(e) Tract boundary lines.
(f) Municipal boundary lines if within 200 feet of the tract being
subdivided.
(g) All street names and addresses approved by the Borough
Engineer and Tax Assessor.
(h) All lot lines and other site lines with accurate dimensions,
bearings, central angles, radii and lengths of all curves.
(i) Minimum building setback line.
(j) The area of each lot shown to the nearest 0.001 of an acre.
(k) All dimensions, both linear and angular shall be based on a
certified boundary.
(1) Block and lot numbers provided by the Borough Engineer.
c. Certification by the Borough Engineer. The Borough Engineer shall
prepare a statement, that he has examined the street, drainage, utility,
erosion, stormwater control, and grading plans, and found that they
substantially conform with the provisions of this chapter. He shall also
identify those portions of any improvements already installed and
indicate that the developer has either:
1. Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and the preliminary plat approval with a maintenance
guarantee accompanying the final plat; or
2. Posted a performance guarantee that has been approved by the
Borough Attorney.
a. Standards for Review. The data to be included for a minor site plan shall
be sufficient to enable the approving authority to determine that the
proposed site design shall not have a deleterious effect upon the
neighborhood and that it is designed in conformance with the standards
of this chapter.
In reviewing site plans incorporating any commercial or industrial
development proposal for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more
§ 23-8.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.6
AO:523
of land, the reviewing body shall take into consideration methods of
addressing the recycling requirements of the Borough.
b. Submission Requirements. The applicant shall file with the
Administrative Officer at least 28 days prior to the meeting of the
approving authority:
1. The required application forms supplied by the Administrative
Officer.
2. The application and escrow fees required pursuant to this chapter.
3. A signed escrow agreement.
4. Certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
5. A copy of the completed minor site plan checklist.
6. Four copies of recycling report addressing the means of recycling
for the proposed minor site including:
(a) Materials to be collected.
(b) Location of materials to be stored.
(c) Method for collection of materials.
(d) Who will pick up the materials.
(e) Frequency the materials will be collected.
(f) Quantity of materials to be generated.
(g) Amount of storage area required for each material.
7. Seven copies of the minor site plan checklist:
(a) Clearly and legibly drawn.
(b) Titled as "Minor Site Plan for (name of the development)".
(c) Title block containing block and lot number for the tract.
(d) Name and address of the applicant and of the owner.
(e) Name, address, telephone number and signature of plat
preparer.
(f) North arrow.
(g) Scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet.
(h) The date of the original drawing.
(i) Area for the date and substance of each revision.
(j) Signature block for the Board Chairperson and Secretary.
§ 23-8.6 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.6
AO:524
(k) All adjacent block and lot numbers.
(l) Zoning district(s).
(m) A key map with North arrow showing the entire development
and its relation to surrounding areas.
(n) Area of tract to nearest tenth of an acre.
(o) Existing lot lines to be eliminated.
(p) Existing and proposed street and lot layout with dimensions
showing that portion proposed for development in relation to
the entire tract.
(q) Existing and proposed structure and uses including the
shortest distance between buildings and lot lines.
(r) An indication of those buildings to remain and those to be
removed.
(s) Building elevations.
(t) Building coverage and impervious coverage in areas of square
feet and percentage of lot coverage.
(u) All setback lines.
(v) Intent for water and sewer treatment:
(1) Show any existing wells and/or septic systems.
(2) Show proposed septic systems and/or well location.
(3) Show proposed public water and/or sewer connections.
(4) When septic systems are proposed, supply boring and
percolation test results per this chapter.
(5) When public sewer is proposed, supply one boring for each
acre if soil maps indicate that the seasonal high water
table may exceed ordinance standard for buildable lot.
(w) Existing and proposed rights-of-way and easements within the
adjoining tract.
(x) Full landscaping details in accordance with the standards of
this chapter including:
(1) Location of wooded areas.
(2) Buffers in accordance with this chapter.
(3) Location and identifications of existing vegetation outside
of wooded areas.
§ 23-8.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.6
AO:525
(4) An indication as to whether existing vegetation is to
remain or to be removed.
(5) A planting schedule as outlined in this chapter.
(y) Lighting details in accordance with this chapter.
(z) Freestanding sign details showing location and dimensions.
(aa) Circulation and parking details in accordance with the
standards of this chapter including:
(1) Sight triangles at intersections.
(2) Driveways and aisles.
(3) Parking spaces.
(4) Ingress and egress.
(5) Loading.
(6) Sidewalks.
(7) Curbs.
(8) Railroad ties.
(9) Handicapped parking and curb cuts.
(10) Improvement details for the above.
(bb) Drainage provisions in accordance with the standards of this
chapter including:
(1) Existing contours and proposed grades based on USGS
Datum where appropriate.
(2) All streams, lakes and drainage rights-of-way based on Soil
Conservation Service Data including:
[a] Direction of flow.
[b] Location of all drainage structures.
[c] Floodplain limits.
[d] Wetlands.
[e] Swamps.
(3) Drainage calculations.
(4) Any proposed drainage improvements.
(cc) Area for storage and pick-up of recyclables.
§ 23-8.6 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.6
AO:526
§ 23-8.7. Submission Procedures for Preliminary Major Site Plan.
[Ord. No. 95-588 Art. VIII]
8. A soil removal plan and a copy of the application for soil removal
permit.
a. General Purposes and Standards for Review. Site Plan review shall be
for the general purpose of enhancing the neighborhood, providing
adequate access to off-street parking and loading facilities for
employees, visitors and residents; providing buffering techniques for
safety and/or aesthetic purposes; preventing uses which violate
applicable state and federal safety and environmental regulations;
preserving floodways and flood hazard areas, and requiring that all raw
materials, fuels, goods in process, finished goods, machinery and
equipment shall be appropriately housed and/or screened, and for the
protection and promotion of public health, safety and welfare. In
reviewing major site plans, the reviewing body shall take into
consideration conformity with the adopted Master Plan, the natural
features of the Borough and the site, and the ecological systems of the
Borough, retention of trees, preservation of natural vegetation and
scenic beauty, preservation of historic areas, problems worsened or
caused by the site development relating to water systems and
resources, drainage, sewerage, traffic hazards and pedestrian travel,
fire and police protection, health and sanitation, and erosion and
siltation.
In reviewing major site plan incorporating any commercial or industrial
development proposal for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more
of land, the reviewing body shall take into consideration methods of
addressing the recycling requirements of the Borough.
b. Submission Requirements. The applicant shall file with the
Administrative Officer at least 35 days prior to the meeting of the
approving authority:
1. The required application forms supplied by the Administrative
Officer.
2. The application and required escrow fees.
3. A signed escrow agreement.
4. Certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
5. A copy of the major site plan preliminary checklist.
6. Four copies of the drainage calculations and engineer's report.
7. Four copies of the Environmental Impact Report which shall
include the requirements and elements set forth in this chapter.
8. Four copies of the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
§ 23-8.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.7
AO:527
9. Four copies of the Traffic Impact Statement.
10. Four copies of any additional reports or supporting data not
included on the preliminary site plan and required by this chapter.
11. Four copies of a recycling report addressing the means of recycling
for the proposed site plan including:
(a) Material to be collected.
(b) Location of materials to be stored.
(c) Method for collection of materials.
(d) Who will pick up the materials.
(e) Frequency that the materials will be collected.
(f) Amount of storage area required for each material.
12. Seven copies of the preliminary site plan which shall show or be
accompanied by the following information:
(a) Identifying and general information.
(1) Clearly and legibly drawn by a licensed New Jersey
Engineer or architect.
(2) Titled as "Preliminary Site Plan for (name of
development)".
(3) Plans shall be presented on sheets of one of the following
dimensions: 30 inches by 42 inches; 24A inches by 36
inches; 15 inches by 21 inches; or 8 1/2 inches by 13
inches.
(4) If more than one sheet is required to show the entire site
development, a separate composite map shall be drawn
showing the entire tract and the sheets on which the
various sections are shown, and each detail sheet shall
include a key map showing its relation to the whole tract.
(5) The plat shall consist of as many separate maps as are
necessary to properly evaluate the site plan and the
proposed work.
(6) A boundary survey by a licensed New Jersey Land
Surveyor, certified on a date within six months of the date
of submission.
(7) Title block containing block and lot numbers for the tract
and the name of the Borough.
(8) Name and address of the applicant and the owner, and
signed consent of latter, if different from applicant.
§ 23-8.7 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.7
AO:528
(9) Name, address, telephone number, signature and seal of
plat preparer.
(10) Space for the application number.
(11) North arrow.
(12) Scale not less than one inch equals 50 feet with written
and graphic scales shown.
(13) The date of the original drawing.
(14) Area for the date and substance of each revision.
(15) A key map with the North arrow showing the entire
development and its relation to surrounding areas at a
scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
(16) The names, addresses and block and lot numbers of all
property owners within 200 feet of the tract.
(17) Locations of all existing structures and their uses within
200 feet of the tract.
(18) Zoning district(s).
(19) Area of original tract to nearest 0.01 of an acre.
(20) Existing lot lines to be eliminated.
(21) Existing and proposed street and lot layout with
dimensions correct to scale accuracy, showing that portion
proposed for development in relation to the entire tract.
(22) The site in relation to all remaining contiguous lands in the
applicant's or owner's ownership.
(23) The names, locations, rights-of-way widths and purposes
of existing and proposed easements and other rights-ofway
on the tract. Legal documentation that supports the
granting of an easement by an adjoining property owner
shall be included where necessary.
(24) Existing and proposed building coverage in square feet
and as a percentage of the lot area.
(25) Existing and proposed impervious lot coverage in acres or
square feet and as a percentage of the lot area.
(26) All side, rear and front setback lines with dimensions.
(27) Appropriate places for the signatures of the Chairperson
and Secretary of the approving authority, the dates of the
official approving authority actions and dates of the
signatures.
§ 23-8.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.7
AO:529
(28) Area for the storage and pickup of recyclables.
(b) Building and use.
(1) Existing structures and uses on the tract including:
[a] Size.
[b] Height.
[c] Location.
[d] Arrangements.
[e] The shortest distance between any existing building
and existing lot lines.
[f] An indication of those to be retained and those to be
removed.
(2) Proposed structures and uses on the tract including:
[a] Size.
[b] Height.
[c] Location.
[d] Arrangement.
[e] An architect's scaled elevations of the front, side and
rear of any structure to be erected or modified
including:
[1] Building mounted lighting and details in
accordance with this chapter.
[2] Attached signs.
[f] Area for storage of recyclables.
(3) A written description of the proposed uses(s) and
operation(s) of the building(s) including:
[a] The number of employees or users of nonresidential
buildings.
[b] The proposed number of shifts to be worked and
maximum number of employees on each shift.
[c] Expected truck and tractor-trailer traffic.
[d] Emission of noise, glare, vibration, heat, odor, air and
water pollution.
[e] Safety hazards.
§ 23-8.7 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.7
AO:530
(4) Expansion plans incorporated into the building design.
(5) Floor plans where multiple dwelling units or more than
one use is proposed that have different parking standards.
(6) Existing signs including:
[a] Location.
[b] Size.
[c] Height.
(7) Proposed signs including the following information:
[a] Location.
[b] Size.
[c] Height.
[d] Scaled elevations of front, side and rear of any sign to
be erected or modified including sign lighting details.
(c) Natural features and drainage.
(1) Two permanent bench marks on USGS datum.
[a] All elevations to relate to bench marks.
(2) Existing and proposed elevations and contour lines over
the entire area of the proposed site development.
[a] Contours shall be shown in not more than two-foot
intervals for the areas with less than 20% slope, fivefoot
intervals for areas with slopes in excess of 20%.
[b] Proposed grading shall be shown by spot elevations
sufficient for stake out of the project.
(d) Circulation, facilities and utilities.
(1) Within a distance of 200 feet of the site show:
[a] Names, locations, and dimensions of all existing
streets.
[b] Existing driveways.
[c] Any connections by site to existing:
[1] Streets.
[2] Sidewalks.
[3] Bike routes.
§ 23-8.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.7
AO:531
[4] Parking lots.
[5] Water, sewer or gas mains.
(2) Plans of all proposed improvements, whether onsite, or offtract,
showing:
[a] Acceleration/deceleration lanes.
[b] Traffic channelization.
[c] Fire lanes.
[d] Driveways and aisles with dimensions.
[e] Parking spaces including:
[1] Size.
[2] Number.
[3] Location.
[4] Handicapped spaces.
[f] Loading areas and number.
[g] Curbs.
[h] Ramps for handicapped.
[i] Sidewalks and bike routes.
[j] Any related facility for the movement and storage of
goods, vehicles and persons.
[k] Directional signs with scaled drawings.
[l] Sight triangle easements at intersections.
[m] Radii of curblines.
[n] Street names.
[o] Traffic control devices.
[p] Streetlights in accordance with this chapter.
[q] Site lighting in accordance with this chapter.
[r] Fencing, railroad ties, bollards and parking bumpers.
[s] Any expansion plans for the proposed use shall show
feasible parking and loading expansion plans to
accompany building expansion.
[t] Cross-sections.
§ 23-8.7 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.7
AO:532
§ 23-8.8. Submissions for Final Major Site Plan. [Ord. No. 95-588
Art. VIII]
[u] Proposed grades.
[v] For roads provide center line profiles at horizontal
scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet.
[w] Standard details for:
[1] Curbing.
[2] Sidewalks, bikepaths.
[3] Paving.
[4] Stoned or graveled surfaces.
[5] Bollards, railroad ties, fences.
(3) Plans and profiles of water and sewer systems whether onsite,
off-site or off-tract showing:
[a] Size of pipes and mains.
[b] Slope.
[c] Pumping stations.
[d] Fire hydrants.
[e] Standard details.
(4) If private utilities are proposed, they shall comply fully
with all Borough, county and state regulations.
(5) If service is to be provided by an existing water or sewer
company, a letter from the company shall be submitted,
stating that service will be available before occupancy of
any structures.
(6) When on-lot water supply or sewerage disposal is
proposed, the concept for such system shall be reviewed
by the appropriate Borough, county and state agencies.
[a] Plans for individual water supply shall be submitted.
[b] Plans for individual sewerage disposal system shall be
submitted.
(7) Location of proposed electric, telephone and cable TV
lines.
a. Standards for Review. In reviewing final site plans, the approving
authority shall ensure that the drawing specifications and estimates of
§ 23-8.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.8
AO:533
the application for final approval conform with the preliminary site plan
approval.
b. Submission Requirements. The applicant shall file with the
Administrative Officer at least 15 days prior to the meeting of the
approving authority:
1. The required application forms supplied by the Administrative
Officer.
2. The application and escrow fees required pursuant to this chapter.
3. A signed escrow agreement.
4. Certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
5. A copy of the signed preliminary site plan in conformance with the
resolution of approval.
6. A copy of the final site plan checklist.
7. Four sets of the final development plans at a minimum scale of one
inch equals 50 feet showing all utilities and other improvements
(both in the development and off-tract) in exact location and
elevation.
8. A construction schedule in accordance with this chapter for all
improvements yet to be installed.
9. Seven copies of the final site plat as follows:
(a) Drawn by a licensed New Jersey engineer or architect.
(b) Title as "Final Site Plan for (name of development)" and
showing block and lot, municipality and county.
(c) Plat shall be presented on sheets of one of the following
dimensions: 30 inches by 42 inches; 24 inches by 36 inches; 15
inches by 21 inches; or 8 1/2 inches by 13 inches.
(d) If more than one sheet is required to show the entire site
development, a separate composite map shall be drawn
showing the entire tract and the sheets on which the various
sections are shown, and each detail sheet shall include a key
map showing its relation to the whole tract.
(e) Appropriate places for the signatures of the Chairperson and
Secretary of the approving authority, the dates of the official
approving authority actions and dates of the signatures.
(f) Tract boundary lines.
(g) Street names.
§ 23-8.8 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.8
AO:534
§ 23-8.9. Submission Procedures for Variance Application. [Ord. No.
95-588, Art. VIII]
(h) All lot lines and other site lines with accurate dimensions,
bearings, central angles, radii, and lengths of all curves.
(i) Minimum building setback lines.
c. Certification by Borough Engineer. The Borough Engineer shall prepare
a statement, that he has examined the street, drainage, utility, erosion,
stormwater control, and found that they substantially conform with the
provisions of this chapter. He shall also identify those portions of any
improvements already installed and indicate that the developer has
either:
1. Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and the preliminary plat approval with a maintenance
guarantee accompanying the final plat; or
2. Posted a performance guarantee that has been approved by the
Borough Attorney.
a. Standards for Review. In reviewing variance applications, the reviewing
authority shall determine that sufficient information has been
submitted for the reviewing authority to fully evaluate that the
prerequisites of N.J.S.A. 40:50D-70(c) or (d) or 40:55D-60 as
appropriate are present and may request the submission of any
information to that end.
1. Bulk Variance. An application for bulk variance or variances
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:50D-70(c) and 40:55D-60(a) shall submit
the following:
(a) The required application forms supplied by the Administrative
Officer.
(b) The application and escrow fees required pursuant to this
chapter.
(c) A boundary survey of the property by a licensed New Jersey
Land Surveyor, certified on a date within six months of the date
of submission.
(d) Certification by the Tax Collector that all taxes on the property
are paid to date.
(e) A sketch plan outlining the location, nature and any variance or
variances requested.
(f) A sketch of the proposed addition or new construction for
which a variance is sought, demonstrating how same is
architecturally consistent with the existing structures or an
improvement thereof.
§ 23-8.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.9
AO:535
§ 23-8.10. Application for Special Consideration. [Ord. No. 95-588
Art. VIII]
The following applications shall be made on forms promulgated by the
Administrative Officer who shall process them in accordance with the
requirements of the Municipal Land Use Law. The fee for any application
for special consideration shall be as provided in § 23-4.
2. Use Variances (with Minor Subdivision or Site Plan). An applicant
for a use variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) which will also
require minor subdivision or minor site plan approval shall submit
the information required for bulk variances in paragraph a above,
and in addition the application shall provide a written statement
delineating the exact proposed use requested.
3. Variances (with Major Subdivision and/or Major Site Plan). An
applicant for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) or (d),
including use variances, which will also require major subdivision
and/or major site plan approval shall submit the following:
(a) The required application form submitted by the Administrative
Officer.
(b) The application and escrow fees required pursuant to this
chapter.
(c) A certified survey of the property.
(d) A certificate by the Tax Collector that all taxes on the property
are paid to date.
(e) A variance plan showing the limits of the proposed
construction.
(f) Architectural renderings and a sketch plan including, at a
minimum, the data required in this chapter, which the
applicant will accept as binding as a condition of approval of
any subsequent application for major site plan and/or major
subdivision approval.
(g) An Environmental Impact Statement pursuant to this chapter.
(h) A Traffic Impact Statement.
(i) A written statement delineating the exact proposed use
required.
a. Conditional use.
b. Building permit in the bed of a mapped street, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60(c) and 40:55D-32.
c. Permit a structure unrelated to a street, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60(c) and 40:55D-36.
§ 23-8.9 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.10
AO:536
§ 23-8.11. Zoning Permits. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. VIII]
The following applications shall be made to the Zoning Officer in
accordance with this chapter: temporary use permit, temporary zoning
permit, zoning permit, certificate of zoning conformity.
§ 23-8.12. Enforcement, Guarantees and Inspections. [Ord. No.
95-588, Art. VIII]
d. Appeal to the governing body pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
e. Request for a certificate of approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68.
f. Appeals from the decision of the Zoning Officer and Administrative
Officer pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72(a) and 40:55D-70(2).
g. Inquiries pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-73.1.
h. Exceptions to requirements (waivers) pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-51(a), (b), (c).
i. Interpretation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b).
j. Building permits or certificates of occupancy pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-18.
a. Enforcement. The governing body shall have overall authority for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, through the Mayor and
his designees.
b. Pre-Conditions to Commencement of Construction.
1. Except as otherwise provided in paragraph b2 below, no
construction of buildings, structures, site improvements (whether
on-site or off-site) or other work shall be commenced on any site for
which an approval is required pursuant to this chapter, until all of
the following conditions are met:
(a) All required local, county and state approvals shall have been
obtained, including both preliminary and final approval, if
required, and all required signatures are obtained on the final
plat and/or site plan, after review by the appropriate officials
required to sign.
(b) The Borough Engineer shall be notified by the developer not
less than three working days (excluding Saturdays and
Sundays), in advance of the starting or restarting of
construction or work.
(c) Except where prior permission has been granted by the
Borough Engineer, no construction or work shall be performed
unless the Borough's inspector is present to insure satisfactory
progress and completion of the construction.
§ 23-8.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.12
AO:537
2. In the event that a developer elects to perform initial site
construction of improvements, including clearing of roads, based
on a preliminary approval granted by the Planning Board and/or
Zoning Board, construction may be commenced only after a revised
preliminary plan has been submitted and signed, incorporating all
conditions of approval required as a result of the public hearing
and the resolution granting the preliminary approval. The
developer shall still comply with paragraphs b1, b1(b) and b1(c)
above, as preconditions prior to the commencement of work.
3. In the case of a minor subdivision, in the event that the developer
elects to complete all improvements without posting the
performance guarantee required by this chapter, no construction
shall be commenced until a revised plan is submitted and signed,
incorporating all conditions of approval as above. The developer
shall still post the inspection escrow and notify the Borough
Engineer prior to commencement of work. Whether or not an
inspection escrow is required, all site improvements under this
paragraph must be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, or within 120 days of a temporary certificate of
occupancy if the performance guarantee covering the balance of
the uncompleted improvements has been posted.
4. The enforcement provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to
any other additional requirements of the Uniform Construction
Code, as amended, and the regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto, governing construction permits. Nothing in this chapter
shall relieve the developer or the contractors performing the work
and construction from complying with all of the Uniform
Construction Code requirements as enforced by the Borough
Uniform Construction Code Official.
c. Stop Construction Orders. In the event that construction, including
clearing on any lands, buildings, structures, site improvements
(whether on-site or off-site) or other work by any owner or developer of
any site for which approval is required pursuant to this chapter, is
commenced or continued contrary to the provisions of the Borough's
Land Use Law, this chapter, or the conditions of any approval granted
by any official, Board or other entity pursuant to this chapter, or in
violation of any denial of approval by said official, Board or other entity,
the Mayor or his designees, including the Borough Engineer, may issue
a written, dated stop construction order which shall require that
construction shall immediately cease and which shall further include
the conditions upon which construction may be resumed, which said
order shall be served on the owner or developer of the site, or the
holder of the approval, in person, or by certified mail, return receipt
requested. If the owner, developer or holder of the approval is not
known or cannot be located, the notice may be served on the person in
charge of, or apparently in charge of, the construction. No construction
or work shall continue after service of a stop construction order, and
§ 23-8.12 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.12
AO:538
construction shall not be resumed without written, dated permission of
the manager, or his designee, removing or lifting the stop construction
order.
d. Staging and Completion of Installation of Improvements.
1. In the case of major subdivisions, at the same time of granting final
subdivision approval, the Planning and/or Zoning Board shall
require applicant to submit a construction schedule for approval,
establishing the scheduling and timing of installation of all
improvements covered by the performance guarantee. The
approved schedule shall be required for the protection of the
interest of the public and of the residents, occupants and owners of
the proposed development in the total completion of the project.
The schedule shall be included in the resolution granting final
approval and completion of the improvements in accordance with
the schedule shall be a condition of approval.
2. Unless otherwise approved by the Planning or Zoning Board, based
on the size of the development, or specific site conditions, or
improvements proposed, said schedule shall provide for all
improvements to be completed within a two-year period. The
schedule shall be based on the performance guarantee estimate, as
prepared by the Borough Engineer at the time of final approval, in
relation to the proposed number of construction permits for the
project, shall require at a minimum that prior to the time that 75%
of the construction permits are issued for the project, 75% of the
improvements as set forth in the performance guarantee estimated
shall be installed, inspected and the performance guarantee
reduced in that amount by the governing body.
3. In the event that final approval is granted by sections, then the
provisions of this section shall apply by sections. Prior to the
granting of final approval for a subsequent section of the project,
the Planning Board may require:
(a) A report from the Borough Engineer certifying that the
developer is in compliance with the schedule previously
adopted for a prior section; and
(b) In the event that all of the certificates of occupancy have been
issued for a prior section, that all improvements have been
completed for that section.
4. At any time that the developer is not in compliance with the
schedule required pursuant to this section, the governing body, at
the request of the Planning Board, or upon its own motion based on
information submitted by the Borough Engineer, may order that the
issuance of any further construction permits be suspended until
certain, specified improvements are completed and certified by the
Borough Engineer as complete. The suspension of permits may be
pursued independently or in conjunction with a formal declaration
§ 23-8.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.12
AO:539
of default and action against the developer's performance
guarantee pursuant to this chapter. For projects that received final
approval prior to the effective date of this chapter, but are still
under construction at the time of adoption hereof, the provisions
of this subparagraph shall apply and construction permits may be
withheld and/or default declared if the Borough Engineer reports
that the developer has received final approval in new sections and
the improvements have not been completed in prior sections in
which certificates of occupancy have been issued.
5. Prior to the approval by the governing body of the final reduction
and release of the performance guarantee, all easements and open
space shall be conveyed to the Borough, or such other guarantee,
as specified on the final plat, by deed containing a metes and
bounds legal description.
e. Guarantee Required. No final plat shall be approved until the
completion of all improvements has been certified by the appropriate
state, county or municipal bodies or officers or until the developer shall
have filed with the Borough a performance guarantee sufficient in the
amount of 120% of the cost of all such improvements on or before an
agreed date.
Improvement cost as used in this section shall be defined to include
construction and installation costs of grading, pavement, clearing,
surveyor's monuments, drainage structure, storm sewers, sanitary
sewers and other means of sewage disposal, water mains, fire
protection features, streets, gutters, curbs, culverts, sidewalks,
streetlights, shade trees, parking areas, landscaping, street signs,
sedimentation and erosion control devices, public improvements of
open space and other on-tract improvements.
Any improvements installed prior to the application for final approval
that do not meet Borough standards shall be included in the
performance guarantee.
f. Public Utilities. No performance guarantee or maintenance guarantee
shall be required for the installation of utilities when the improvements
have been or will be installed by the utility company involved.
g. Amount of Performance Guarantee. The total performance guarantee
shall equal 120% of the performance guarantee cost estimate. The
performance guarantee cost estimate shall be submitted to the
approving authority by the Borough Engineer as part of his report on
the final subdivision plat and/or site plan. It shall detail the scope of the
work and cost for the construction of all necessary improvements. An
amount equal to 15% of the cost of any improvements installed shall be
included in the estimate to cover maintenance of the improvements
until final acceptance by the Borough.
h. Form of Guarantee. The performance guarantee shall consist of any
security acceptable to the Borough Attorney, including but not limited
§ 23-8.12 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.12
AO:540
to, a performance bond, letter of credit and cash. If the performance
guarantee, to its terms, is limited to a certain time limit which will
expire prior to the date established in the construction schedule for
completion of all improvements, then the guarantee shall further
contain an absolute guarantee by obligor or bank to:
1. Pay over the entire amount of the guarantee, less any reductions, to
the Borough, or
2. To replace the guarantee with a new guarantee, on or before the
expiration date thereof.
i. Extension of Time for Installation of Improvements. The time allowed
for installation of the improvements for which a performance guarantee
has been provided may be extended by the governing body by
resolution only upon written request of the developer. As a condition or
part of any such extension, the amount of any performance guarantee
shall be increased or reduced, as the case may be, to an amount not to
exceed 120% of the cost of the remaining construction and
improvements to be installed as determined as of the time of the
passage of the resolution.
j. As-Built Plans. After completion of the construction of the
improvements covered by the performance guarantee, and prior to final
acceptance by the Borough of any improvements, the developer shall
cause the approved, final development plans and profiles to be updated
to show "as-built" conditions. Three sets of record prints shall be
furnished; two to the Administrative Officer and one to the Borough
Engineer. "As-built" plans shall be signed and sealed by a professional
engineer of the State of New Jersey.
k. Reduction of Performance Guarantee or Rejection Thereof.
1. Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements, and the connection of same to the public system,
the obligor may notify the governing body in writing, by certified
mail addressed in care of the Municipal Clerk, of the completion or
substantial completion of improvements and shall send a copy
thereof to the Borough Engineer. Thereupon the Borough Engineer
shall inspect all improvements of which such notice pertains and
shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the governing body,
indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of such
improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection. The
cost of the improvements as approved or rejected shall be set forth.
2. The Borough Engineer shall certify the amount to be reduced, if
any, as follows:
(a) An estimate of value of all work completed will be made, and
multiplied by 120%.
§ 23-8.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.12
AO:541
(b) This amount shall be reduced by 15% which shall be withheld
to guarantee the repair of damages which may occur prior to
final acceptance.
(c) The amount of the previous reductions shall be submitted.
(d) The remainder shall be the amount to be reduced.
3. The Borough Engineer shall forward copies of his report to the
governing body, Borough Attorney, and the developer.
4. The governing body shall either approve, partially approve, or
reject the improvements on the basis of the report of the Borough
Engineer, and shall notify the obligor in writing, of the contents of
said report and action of said approving authority in relation
thereto, not later than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the
developer of the completion of the improvements. Where partial
approval is granted, the developer shall be released from all
liability pursuant to its performance adequately sufficient to secure
a provision of the improvements not yet approved, provided that
30% of the amount of the performance guarantee posted may be
retained to insure completion of all improvements. Providing a
request is made for a reduction in conformity with this chapter,
failure of the governing body to send or provide such notification to
the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute approval of
the improvements, and the developer of surety, shall be released
from all liability pursuant to such performance guarantee for such
improvements.
5. If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the
Borough Engineer and such other individuals as designated by the
Mayor, shall prepare a "punch list" of the items remaining to be
completed, whether they are newly created as a result of
construction practices. A new estimate for the cost of completing
items rejected and the balance of all other improvements shall be
prepared. The performance guarantee shall not be reduced below
the estimate of the amount deemed necessary to complete the
items as identified on the "punch lists", and if the performance
guarantee balance is below said amount, an additional
performance guarantee shall be posted in the amount of the new
estimate. Unless otherwise recommended by the Borough
Engineer, the developer shall have 120 days to reduce the "punch
list" to a condition suitable for a final inspection, at which time the
same procedure of notification as set forth above for reduction shall
be followed.
l. Default by Developer. If the required improvements are not completed
or in accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and
surety, if any, under the performance guarantee shall be liable thereon
to the Borough for the cost of the improvements not completed or
corrected and the Borough may, either prior to or after receipt of the
§ 23-8.12 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.12
AO:542
proceeds thereof, complete the improvements. For the purposes of this
subsection, "default" shall mean failure to install the improvements in
accordance with Borough standards of construction, including but not
limited to, failure to install the improvements.
1. Prior to the expiration of the performance guarantee;
2. Within the time schedule established pursuant to this chapter;
3. In accordance with the terms and conditions of the resolution
granting approval; and/or
4. In accordance with any applicable provisions of the New Jersey
Land Use Act or this chapter.
The Borough Engineer's certification that the developer has
defaulted in compliance with the required standard of construction
and installation of improvements shall be the basis for governing
body action which rejects the improvement, withholds approval,
withholds construction permits, or formally declares default and
authorizes collection on the performance guarantee.
m. Acceptance of Improvements. The approval of any plat under this
chapter or the reduction of any performance guarantee by the
approving authority shall in no way be construed as acceptance of any
street, drainage systems, or other improvement required by this
chapter, nor shall such plat or performance guarantee reduction
obligate the Borough in any way to maintain or exercise jurisdiction
over such street, drainage system, or other improvements. Acceptance
of any street, drainage system or other improvements shall be
implemented only by favorable action of the governing body in
accordance with the provisions set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. No
improvements shall be accepted by the governing body unless and until
the following conditions have been met:
1. The Borough Engineer shall have certified in writing to the
governing body that all of the improvements are complete and that
the improvements fully comply with the requirements of this
chapter and any approval granted pursuant thereto.
2. A maintenance guarantee has been posted and approved in
accordance with this chapter.
3. As-built plans have been submitted in accordance with this chapter.
n. Maintenance Guarantee. The developer shall file with the Borough
Clerk, and the governing body shall approve and accept, a maintenance
guarantee in the amount of 15% of the Borough Engineer's estimate of
the total cost for the installation of improvements, which guarantee
shall run for a period of two years from final acceptance of the
improvements. The procedure and requirements for filing, approving
and releasing the performance guarantee shall be identical to the
§ 23-8.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.12
AO:543
§ 23-8.13. Permits, Generally. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. VIII]
No zoning permit, construction permit or certificate of occupancy shall be
issued for any parcel of land or structure which was sold or on which
improvements were undertaken in violation of the provisions of this chapter
for the use of a lot which was created by subdivision after the effective
date of, and not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. No site
improvement such as, but not limited to, excavation or construction of
public or private improvements shall be commenced except in conformance
with this chapter in accordance with plat approvals and the issuance of
required permits. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued, except in
the case of residential lots within an approved subdivision, without the
certification by the Administrative Officer that all requirements of this
chapter have been met.
§ 23-8.14. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. VIII]
procedures and requirements for filing, approving and releasing the
performance guarantee as set forth in Subsection 23-8.12k above. For
on-site plans, the maintenance guarantee shall be required only for
improvements accepted by the Borough. In the event that other
governmental agencies or public utilities are to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance maintenance guarantee
to another governmental agency no performance or maintenance
guarantee, as the case may be, shall be required by the municipality for
such utilities or improvements.
o. Penalties. In addition to the penalties for violation of this chapter, and of
any other ordinance or regulation made under authority conferred
herein, as set forth in Subsection 23-8.1 of this chapter the Borough
Engineer is specifically authorized to require the replacement and
reconstruction of any construction, including clearing, of any land,
building structures, site improvements (whether on-site or off-site) or
other work commenced or continued of any site for which an approval is
required pursuant to this chapter in violation of any stop construction
order pursuant to Subsection 23-8.12c; the condition as set forth in
Subsection 23-8.12b; or the standards for construction as established
by the Borough.
a. If, before favorable referral and final approval have been obtained, any
person transfers or sells, as owner or agent, any land which forms a
part of a subdivision on which by this chapter, the Planning Board is
required to act, such person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000 or to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, and each parcel,
plat or lot so disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation. In
addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not such
that a structure on said land in the subdivision will meet requirements
for a building permit under Section 3 of the Official Map and Building
Permit Act (1953), the Borough may institute and maintain a civil
action:
§ 23-8.12 PINE HILL CODE § 23-8.14
AO:544
1. For injunctive relief.
2. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if the certificate of compliance has not been
issued in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56, but only if the
Borough has a Planning Board or a committee thereof with power
to act and which:
(a) Meets regularly on a monthly or more frequent basis; and
(b) Whose governing body has adopted standards and procedures
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38.
b. In any such action the transfer, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to
a lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was made
that remains in the possession of the subdivider or assigns or
successors, to secure the return of any deposit made or purchase price
paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing
expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within two years after
the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or
conveyance of said land, or within six years if unrecorded.
§ 23-8.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-8.14
AO:545

ARTICLE IX
Design and Performance Standards
§ 23-9. STANDARDS.
§ 23-9.1. Streets. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
a. The arrangement of new streets shall be such as to provide for the
appropriate extension of existing streets shown on the Official Map.
b. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
c. A subdivision abutting an arterial street shall provide a marginal
service road or reverse frontage with a twenty-five-foot buffer strip for
planting or some other means of separation of through and local traffic
as the Planning Board may determine appropriate.
d. The right-of-way width shall be measured to the lot lines and shall not
be less than the following table listed below, considering all locational
and physical characteristics of the development. In all cases, the rightof-
way shall be of sufficient width and design to safely accommodate the
maximum traffic, parking and loading needs and maximum access for
firefighting equipment.
Type of
Street
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
Cartway
(feet) Sidewalks
Parking
Permitted
in Right-of-
Way
Industrial 60 40 yes no
Major
Arterial
60 40 yes no
Primary 60 40 yes no
Collector 60 40 yes yes
Local Feeder 60 40 yes yes
Minor 50 30 yes yes
Internal
Road*
* The right-of-way and cartway for internal roads and alleys in
multifamily, commercial and industrial development shall be
determined on an individual basis and shall be subject to approval
by the Borough Engineer and Fire Marshal or Fire Commissioners.
e. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been conveyed to the governing body under conditions
approved by the approving authority.
§ 23-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.1
AO:547
f. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to width as shown on the Official Map or the street width requirements
of this chapter shall have additional width dedicated along either one or
both sides of the road. If the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of
the required extra width shall be dedicated.
g. Grades on all streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have a
minimum grade of less than 1/2% to 3/4%.
h. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall they be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections
shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve having a radius of not less
than 20 feet.
i. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
j. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
k. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any point by
more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor and 300 feet for
arterial and collector streets.
l. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance as
determined by the Borough Engineer.
m. Dead-end streets (cul-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and shall
provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of 50 feet to the outside
edge of the cartway and 60 feet to the outside edge of the right-of-way
and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street. The
length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured along its center line from its
intersection with the intersecting street's center line to the center of
the radius of the cul-de-sac.
n. If a dead-end is of temporary nature, a similar turnaround shall be
provided and provisions made for future extensions of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
o. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name. All street names shall be
checked against the Borough master file of street names.
p. Subdivisions shall be so designed as to minimize the total area of the
subdivision devoted to street rights-of-way.
q. The access road and the area on each side thereof for a distance of 10
feet on each side of the pavement of said road and for a height of 14 feet
from the surface of the road shall be kept free and clear of tree limbs,
§ 23-9.1 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.1
AO:548
§ 23-9.2. Driveways. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
Driveways within residential subdivisions shall be constructed in
accordance with this chapter.
§ 23-9.3. Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
vines and other obstructions, to permit free and unobstructed use of
said access roads by emergency vehicles.
r. The pavement thickness design shall, as a minimum, conform to the
following schedule:
Classification Pavement
Bituminous
Stabilized
Base
Type II Class B
Subbase
Industrial 3" FABC-2 5" 6"
Major Arterial 3" FABC-2 5" 6"
Primary Street 3" FABC-2 5" 6"
Collector Street 2 1/2" FABC-2 5" *
Local Feeder 2 1/2" FABC-2 5" *
Minor 2 1/2" FABC 5" *
* Type II Class B subbase may be required if determined by the
Borough Engineer due to unstable subbase.
Or, in the alternative, at the option of the applicant, the pavement
thickness may be determined by the certified results of soil testing
and analysis conducted by the applicant to determine the bearing
strength of the subgrade soil together with the projected use
of the street or highway with an adequate margin to cover all
contingencies and extraordinary conditions. Where such tests are
conducted, the pavement design must be reviewed and approved
by the Borough Engineer; and in no event shall the paving be
less than 6 inches of Type II Class B subbase, with 2 inches of
bituminous stabilized base and 2 inches of FABC-1 surface.
a. Concrete sidewalks shall be installed on one or both sides of streets as
the Planning Board may direct and at such width as may be determined
by the Planning Board, in accordance with the attached construction
standards. All sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet wide and four
inches thick, except at driveway crossings where they shall be six
inches thick.
b. Sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed of New Jersey Class B airentrained
concrete. Curbing compounds or methods shall be required
and approved by the Borough Engineer. Cold weather protection to the
concrete by utilizing admixtures or insulation shall also be approved by
the Borough Engineer.
§ 23-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.4
AO:549
§ 23-9.4. Street Signs. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
Street signs shall be placed at each street intersection. They shall be
fourway signs of such material, size, height and location as specified by the
Borough Engineer, and shall be in conformity with the existing signs already
established in the Borough.
§ 23-9.5. Landscaping. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
a. Shade Trees. Shade trees shall be installed on both sides of all streets
subject to the approval by the approving authority, at a maximum
spacing along each side of the street of 50 feet on center. The variety
shall be approved by the approving authority. The method of installation
and location shall be approved by the Borough Engineer. Shade trees
shall be installed at a minimum size of two inch caliper at a minimum
distance of six feet from the inside edge of the sidewalk. Wherever
provisions of other regulations impose restrictions more extensive than
those of this chapter, then those provisions shall govern.
b. Planted Buffer Areas. In the instance where the approving authority
determines that buffer planting is necessary to protect the general
welfare of the public, planted buffer areas shall be installed to provide a
year-round visual screen of such width, height and location as approved
by the Planner for the approving authority. The size, variety and
planting design of the buffer area shall be as approved by the approving
authority.
c. Prior to the construction of any building or other structure in any zone
other than for single family residential use, or for any, other than
residential in a residential zone, there shall be planted a twenty-foot
evergreen planting strip in accordance with the definition of screening
strips herein described along all property lines adjoining lands which
are zoned residential.
d. Said screening strip shall be properly installed and maintained in good
condition under the supervision of the Borough of Pine Hill Department
of Public Works or other appropriate authority. If the Construction
Official upon inspection determines that the landscape or screening
material is not being maintained in satisfactory condition, he shall
notify the owner in writing of his findings and order that any negligent
or improper maintenance on the part of the owner be corrected within
30 days of the date of said notice. In the event that any plantings
required by this chapter fail to live, they shall be replaced. Any failure
on the part of the owner to comply with said notice shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter and is subject to the penalties of this chapter.
The Zoning Officer may, in addition, revoke the certification of
occupancy.
e. Landscaping for parking areas shall be installed in accordance with
Subsection 23-9.19.
§ 23-9.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.5
AO:550
§ 23-9.6. Monuments. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
Monuments shall be of the size and shape required by Section 4 of Chapter
358 of the Laws of 1953, and shall be placed at each point of curvature and
each point of tangency.
§ 23-9.7. Water Supply. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
f. Compensatory Planting. Every effort should be made to avoid removal
of trees having a caliper of five inches or greater as measured 36 inches
above ground from the property in process of subdivision, grading or
installing improvements. Where, in the judgment of the approving
authority, such removal is unavoidable, the applicant shall install trees
in such locations and of such size, variety and quantity as the approving
authority shall direct. Notwithstanding the five-inch caliper limitation,
no substantial area of smaller trees or shrub cover shall be removed
without the provision of comparable replacement as approved by the
approving authority. A plan and statement of the material to be
removed and/or demolished shall be submitted for approval.
g. All landscape plans submitted shall contain the following note and
language:
"All plant material not surviving for a period of two years shall be
replaced with the same or equivalent size species."
a. All water supplies and water treatment works shall comply with the
rules and regulations established by the Pine Hill Municipal Utilities
Authority, Department of Environmental Protection and Energy of the
State of New Jersey as amended and revised.
b. Water mains shall be sized for adequate delivery of pressure and
volume as established by the Pine Hill M.U.A. In general, the following
policies shall be followed in determining the size of water mains.
1. Lines whose primary function is and will be to serve adjacent
property will be six inches.
2. Lines which serve as feeder lines to several other streets should be
eight inches and should be laid out to provide loops with other lines
which enclose areas of not more than 1/4 square mile.
3. Lines which provide the main feed from present or future sources
of supply or storage shall be 12 inches or larger and shall be laid
out as to form loops with other lines which enclose not more than
one square mile.
4. Lines whose only purpose is to serve abutting properties and to
which there is no fire hydrant connected and which do not serve
more than four residences may be four inches if specifically
approved by the approving authority.
§ 23-9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.7
AO:551
§ 23-9.8. Sanitary Sewers. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
§ 23-9.9. Storm Drainage. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
c. In any event the approving authority shall decide upon the size of lines
to be used and the above general criteria are set forth only as a guide to
the subdivider.
d. In general, criteria affecting valve and hydrant locations shall be that
not more than one hydrant is affected by shutting off any one section,
hydrants are located within 600 feet along street lines of any property
in the subdivision, not more than (3) valves are necessary to shut off any
one section, and the number of homes affected by shutting off any one
section shall be limited to 25.
a. All sanitary sewer systems, sewage and industrial waste treatment
works shall comply with the rules and regulations established by the
Department of Environmental Protection and Energy of the State of
New Jersey as amended and revised.
b. Sanitary sewer pipe shall be sized for full flow from the tract. The
Municipal Utilities Authority may require larger pipe sizes to
accommodate future extensions.
c. Minimum grades at terminal runs of all sanitary sewer lines shall be
1%.
d. Manholes shall be placed at every point where the sanitary sewer line
changes direction. In no instance shall the spacing exceed what has
been established by the Pine Hill M.U.A.
e. Prior to final approval, the engineer for the Municipal Utilities
Authority shall approve all sanitary sewer designs which will become a
part of the Municipal Utilities Authority facilities.
a. Runoff Computations.
1. Computation of the rate of the flow at any given location shall be
based on the rational formula:
Q.C.I.A., in which:
Q = Volume in cubic feet per second.
C = Runoff factor.
I = Intensity of rainfall in inches per hour.
A = Watershed area in acres.
2. In setting the value of the runoff coefficient C, consideration will be
given to the physical features of the drainage basin and best
available data on the further density of development of the
drainage basin. In no case shall it be less than 0.50.
§ 23-9.7 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.9
AO:552
3. The intensity of the storm shall be based on the following: As a
minimum, all design shall be based upon a ten-year storm. The
rainfall intensity-duration-frequency curve for Philadelphia present
in Technical Paper No. 25, prepared by the United States
Department of Commerce Weather Bureau, shall be used. A copy of
this is included in the standard details portion of this chapter. Time
of low curves are also included in that section for use in design.
4. Standard New Jersey Department of Transportation concrete
headwalls shall be installed on all pipe discharge of effluent points.
5. Pipeline Design. Storm sewer pipelines shall be designed by either
of the following two methods. Both shall be based on the Manning
equation and shall utilize the following friction factors:
n = 0.015 concrete pipe.
n = 0.0-21 corrugated metal pipe.
The minimum allowable pipe size is 15 inches.
(a) Pipe Submerged.
(1) This method is based on the assumption that when the
storm sewer system is under maximum load, the hydraulic
gradient will be at, or above, the crown of the pipe and
that flow in the lines will be controlled by head
differentials between structures and other locations where
the system is open to the ground surface, such as inlets or
outlets, manholes and streams inlets or outlets. The head
of water above the crown of any pipe can range from zero
feet to a point which will not cause surface flooding.
(2) The slope of the hydraulic gradient in any section of storm
sewer between opening to the surface shall be calculated
on the assumption that the pipe is flowing full at constant
velocity and at the required capacity.
(3) The elevation of the hydraulic gradient at a point in the
pipe shall be no lower than the crown of pipe and no
higher than the surface of the ground.
(4) At all structures such as manholes, inlets, etc., where the
pipe size does not change the elevation of the hydraulic
gradient shall be dropped 0.2 feet to allow for losses
therein. Where the inlet and outlet pipe sizes are not the
same, the elevation of the hydraulic gradient shall be
dropped an amount based on the following formula:
H = 0.2 feet + 0.8 (D1-D2 feet)
D1 = Diameter of inlet pipe
§ 23-9.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.9
AO:553
D2 = Diameter of outlet pipe
If D1 is larger than D2, head loss = 0.2 feet
(5) The minimum slope of any pipe shall be such that a
minimum velocity of 2.5 feet per second shall be
maintained when the pipe is following 1/4 full.
(b) Pipeline Flowing Full.
(1) This method is based on the assumption that the hydraulic
gradient will match the inside top of the pipe when system
is under maximum hydraulic load.
(2) For this method, head losses through manholes, inlets,
etc., shall be ignored.
(3) The minimum slope of any pipe shall be such that a
minimum velocity of 2.5 feet per second shall be
maintained when the pipe is flowing 1/4 full.
(4) When the pipe sizes change, the inside tops of the pipes
shall be matched.
(c) Continuous profiles for each reach of pipe shall be plotted,
along with the location of the hydraulic gradient and the
hydraulic information pertinent to each reach with the system.
This information shall include the pipe size and type, the "n"
factor, the slope of the hydraulic gradient, slope of the pipe, the
design capacity and velocity at the design capacity.
(d) Inlet Design.
(1) Stormwater inlets shall be equal to New Jersey State
Highway Department Inlet Type B. The maximum
collecting capacities of the inlets shall be considered to be:
[a] When installed on streets where the grade is 1%, five
cubic feet per second.
[b] When installed on streets where the grade is 2%, 4.8
cubic feet per second.
[c] When installed on streets where the grade is 3%, 4.6
cubic feet per second.
[d] When installed on streets where the grade is 4%, 4.4
cubic feet per second.
[e] When installed on streets where the grade is 5%, 4.2
cubic feet per second.
[f] When installed on streets where the grade is 6%, four
cubic feet per second.
§ 23-9.9 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.9
AO:554
(2) Sufficient inlets shall be located and constructed so that
the length of surface runoff will not contribute a runoff to
the inlets exceeding the preceding designated collecting
capacities.
(3) The gutter grade of all inlets shall be set not less than two
inches nor more than four inches below the gutter grade.
The surface of the paving adjacent to the inlets shall be
constructed to blend into the lowered gutter grade at the
inlet in such a manner that a sudden drop off or dip at the
inlet will not be created. At such locations where drainage
is entirely dependent on inlets, the collecting capacities of
the inlets shall be designated for 1/2 the preceding
considered capacities.
(4) Where surface water is collected from two directions at
one street corner, the required inlet or inlets shall be
placed accordingly along the arc to properly receive the
runoff.
(5) Access manholes shall be spaced at 500-foot intervals
(maximum) through right-of-way and at sewer junctions
where there are no catch basins.
(e) Open Channel Design. Open channel design should be based
on the following hydraulic considerations:
(1) Manning's equation.
[a] _____
n = 0.015, best concrete-lined ditch
n = 0.025, best unlined ditch
N = 0.03 to 0.15, fair to poor to natural streams and
watercourses.
[b] Velocity.
Excavation Material
Velocity
(feet per second)
Fine sand and firm loam 2.50 to 3.5
Stiff clay/hardpan 3.75 to 6.0
Concrete lined ditch 15
(2) Ample free board should be provided on all channels.
(3) The channel should be designed to conform, wherever
possible, to the adjacent ground conditions. This means
that it should not be projecting excessively above the
§ 23-9.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.9
AO:555
surrounding ground or placed excessively above the
surrounding ground.
(4) Continuous profiles for each reach of open channel shall
be plotted along with the adjacent average ground and the
hydraulic information pertinent to each reach within the
system. This information shall include the type of channel
lining, the "n" factor, the width of the channel bottom, the
side slopes, the water depth, the design capacity and the
velocity at the design capacity.
(5) Open channels have maximum slope of 3:1 and shall have
adequate slope protection as required by the Soil Erosion
and Sediment Control Ordinance.
(f) Culverts. All culverts shall be limited to a single opening:
multiple pipes will not be permitted. The design of culverts
shall be such as to minimize the probability of debris
accumulation.
(g) Retention Basin Design. Retention basins shall be required on
all major subdivisions unless deemed unnecessary by the
Borough Engineer.
(1) Project area runoff shall be determined by:
[a] Using natural ground coefficient.
[b] Using ultimate developed ground coefficient.
(2) Storage shall be required for a maximum rainfall of 5.5
inches (twenty-four-hour rainfall occurring in 1960).
(3) Indicate flooded area if additional two inch rainfall during
24 hours following design storm.
(4) Allowances for percolation and evaporation of basins
during and after the storm will not be considered in
calculations.
(5) Basin storage capacities shall be calculated as follows:
Storage volume in cubic feet = project area in square feet
x coefficient x total rainfall = 12.
(6) The outlet structure shall be discharging water equal to or
less than the contribution calculated for the drainage
basin area in its natural state before development for a
ten-year storm period.
(7) If required, profiles and sections indicating downstream
capacities and proposals and/or easement for
reconstruction or cleaning of all streams shall be
submitted prior to consideration of the first section.
§ 23-9.9 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.10
AO:556
§ 23-9.10. Streetlighting. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
§ 23-9.11. Blocks and Lots. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
a. Streetlighting shall be installed at no cost to the Borough by the
subdivider in locations approved by the Borough Engineer. Such
lighting must be installed when 50% of that section is occupied in
accordance with the Borough streetlighting policy.
b. For normal street usage, laminated poles, 30 feet high shall be placed at
a minimum distance of 200 feet with 50 watt high pressure sodium
luminare (HOS).
c. At intersections, a laminated wood pole, 30 feet high shall be placed
with a 70 watt HPS.
d. At any intersection of two streets, both of which have cartways in
excess of 40 feet, or where one street is an industrial road and other
street has a cartway in excess of 40 feet, a laminated wood pole 30 feet
high shall be placed with a 400 watt HPS.
e. The Borough will assume the operating expense for streetlights in a
particular section when 50% of that section is occupied.
f. The subdivider whose property is located in the Electric Company's
Franchise area, shall deposit with the Borough Clerk a sum to be
estimated by the Borough Engineer, for the cost of equipment for
lighting. Said sum shall be deposited at the time of posting the required
performance guarantee for the subdivision. The sum deposited shall be
held in escrow for payment by the Borough of equipment costs for
lighting to Atlantic City Electric Company, and after payment, the
balance of escrow shall be returned to the subdivider. If the amount
deposited shall be insufficient to pay for the actual costs of said
equipment, the subdivider shall be required to deposit sums to cover
said deficiency.
a. Blocks.
1. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be
such as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by this
chapter and to provide for convenient access, circulation control
and safety of street traffic.
2. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, ten-foot wide easements, or
pedestrian crosswalks, may be required in locations deemed
necessary by the Planning Board.
b. Lots.
1. Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than the requirements
established under Zoning, Article VII of this chapter.
§ 23-9.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.11
AO:557
§ 23-9.12. Pedestrian Ways. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
In order to promote public safety, a primary design criterion shall be the
separation of pedestrian traffic and vehicular traffic. To this end
subdivisions shall be designed, wherever feasible, to provide for pedestrian
walkways separated from vehicular use streets. The location, width and
construction of such walkways shall be subject to the approval of the
approving authority and the Borough Engineer. Sidewalks shall be
constructed and lighting shall be installed prior to occupancy. Prior to final
approval for any section, the responsibility for the construction, operation,
maintenance and liability for these walkways shall be clearly established.
Grade-separated pedestrian crossings shall be provided across primary
roads at points required by the approving authority.
§ 23-9.13. Underground Wiring. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
All electric, telephone, television and other communication service
facilities, both main and service lines, shall be provided by underground
cables, installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices
of the utility or other companies providing such services.
§ 23-9.14. Underdrains. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
Underdrains shall be provided throughout all of the developments to carry
water by gravity from below all basement floors to storm drains or as
approved by the Borough Engineer. Where sump pumps are used on
individual lots, they shall discharge into a pipe which shall run from the
structure to the underdrain in the street. A sump pump may only be used to
supplement the underdrain system around the structure. No sump pumps
2. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
3. Each lot must front upon an approved street at least 50 feet in
width. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of
existing streets, lots shall begin at such extra width line and all
setbacks shall be measured from such line.
4. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for
their intended use to factors such as soil conditions, rock
formations, flood conditions or similar circumstances, the
approving authority shall require a percolation test of such lots or
require remedial action before approval.
5. Unless otherwise waived by the approving authority, no singlefamily
residential dwelling unit shall be permitted to front on a
primary road, or a controlled access highway.
6. If dwelling unit lots are designated with reverse frontage, the depth
of the lot will be a minimum of 200 feet and the rear yard shall be a
minimum of 50 feet, exclusive of buffer area.
§ 23-9.11 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.14
AO:558
shall be connected to a sanitary sewer system. No underdrains in the streets
shall be less than six inches in diameter and shall exclude an Orangeburgtype
material. The size of the underdrains shall be increased not less
than 10% in cross section areas for each 1,000 feet of longitudinal drain.
Cleanouts shall be provided at all changes in line or grade; however, the
distance between cleanouts shall not exceed 450 feet. In no case shall
cleanouts be permitted in sanitary manholes. One cleanout with a screwtype
cap shall also be provided in each basement floor in line with the pipe
connecting the perimeter house underdrain to the underdrain in the street.
The underdrain system shall be no less than five feet horizontally and two
feet laterally from the sanitary sewer.
§ 23-9.15. Topsoil Protection. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil moved
during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to provide
at least four inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and shall be
stabilized by seeding or planting. Under no circumstances shall any soil or
earth be sold or otherwise removed from the site, unless pursuant to a soil
removal permit.
§ 23-9.16. Natural Features. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be preserved
whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing such features.
§ 23-9.17. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art.
IX]
Soil erosion prevention and sediment control techniques shall be submitted
with the preliminary plan. Silt retention basins may be required as
determined by the Borough Engineer at storm drainage outfall lines.
§ 23-9.18. Recreational Facilities. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
a. In order to provide for the safety and general welfare of the public, all
major subdivisions shall meet the open space and recreation
requirements set forth in Article VII, Zoning.
b. The developer shall install as a minimum the following recreational
facilities on land which has been set aside for recreation purposes:
Dwelling
Units Tot Lot
Basketball
Courts
Tennis
Courts
Multi-
Purpose
Field
1 to 4 1
5 to 25 1
26 to 50 1 1
51 to 100 1 1
§ 23-9.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.18
AO:559
Dwelling
Units Tot Lot
Basketball
Courts
Tennis
Courts
Multi-
Purpose
Field
101 to 150 1 1 1
151 to 200 2 2 1
201 to 250 2 2 1 1
251 to 300 3 2 1 1
301 to 350 3 3 2 1
351 to 400 4 3 2 2
401 to 450 4 3 2 2
451 to 500 5(1) 2(2) 3 (3) 2(4)
Notes:
(1) Plus 1 for every 100 units or fraction thereof over 500.
(2) Plus 1 for every 200 units or fraction thereof over 500.
(3) Plus 1 for every 125 units or fraction thereof over 500.
(4) Plus 1 for every 200 units or fraction thereof over 500.
c. All park and playground equipment specifications must be approved by
the Borough Engineer and Director of Recreation before installation.
d. Tot Lots. Tot lots shall be a minimum size of 60 feet by 60 feet and shall
contain, as a minimum, the following improvements:
1. Surrounded with a four-foot high chain link fence with the
exception of a minimum of one opening for access.
2. Two wooden benches with a minimum length of six feet.
3. Each covered with six inches of sand underneath each piece of
equipment.
4. One three-leg heavy duty swing set with three sections and a total
of two tot swings and four butyl rubber swing seats.
5. One galvanized pipe jungle gym or climber with a minimum ground
space of seven feet.
e. Basketball Courts. Basketball courts shall be a minimum size of 35 feet
by 60 feet and shall contain as a minimum the following improvements:
1. Two regulation backstops with rope or nylon nets, one at each end
of the sixty-foot dimension.
2. Court base and covering to be specified by the Borough Engineer
and approved prior to construction.
§ 23-9.18 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.18
AO:560
3. The backboard shall be fabricated from a piece of aluminum 1/4
inch by four feet by six feet. The backboard shall be braced with
aluminum angle placed horizontal and distributed to assure a
smooth, solid surface with no dead or soft spots.
4. The braces shall be fabricated from aluminum angle two inches by
two inches by 1/2 inch, four-foot log securely welded to backboard.
5. The clamp for attaching board to support posts shall be cast from
malleable iron. Clamp face shall have nonslip serrate surface.
6. The support post will be 4 1/2 O.D. galvanized cantilevered post
with a four-foot extension. The length of the post is 14 feet. There
will be 1/2 inch hot roll steel plate welded into the end of the
extension to mount the backboard from the post.
7. The fittings shall be high strength malleable iron. The complete
assembly shall extend the backboard three feet or four feet in front
of support posts.
8. The goal (rim) should be 18 inches diameter double ring fabricated
of 5/8 inch diameter steel taping and 1/2 inch diameter steel
bottom ring. The bracket which fastens ring to board shall be
formed of 3/16 inches steel and six inches wide. Bracket shall be
supported with two "V" shaped braces. The outside brace
fabricated of 7/16 inch diameter steel and the inside brace
fabricated of 3/8 inch diameter steel. The goal shall be an all
welded unit.
9. The net shall be fabricated of 13 gauge galvanized steel chain. The
net shall be attached to the goal between the top and bottom ring
with nine gauge galvanized steel "S" hooks.
f. Tennis Courts. Tennis courts shall be regulation size and shall contain
as a minimum, the following improvements:
1. The two end posts shall be 3 1/2 inches O.D. galvanized pipes six
feet by six feet long for official three feet six inches above and three
feet below ground level. They should be capped to keep out
moisture. All welds should be chipped, and primed, painted
aluminum over galvanizing.
2. The ratchet reel shall be the gear and pawl type made entirely of
steel and malleable iron.
3. The nylon tennis net shall be 42 feet by 3 1/2 feet with 1 3/4 inches
openings, 43 thread nylon, 1/32 inch galvanized steel cable through
top binding.
4. The ground socket shall be fabricated of four inches P.D. galvanized
pipe. A round cover plate shall be welded to one end. The other end
shall have a threaded coupling welded to it. Screw in brass plug
should be finished with the socket.
§ 23-9.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.18
AO:561
5. Courts surrounded with twelve-foot high chainlink fence and buffer
planting as recommended by the Borough Engineer.
6. One wooden eight-foot bench per court.
7. Night lighting as approved by the Borough Engineer.
8. Courts paved and coated with colored sealer. Both paving and
sealer specification must be approved by the Borough Engineer
prior to construction.
g. Multi-Purpose Fields. Multi-purpose fields shall be a minimum size of
300 feet by 600 feet and shall contain as a minimum, the following
improvements:
1. Completely grassed field.
2. Two backstops and four player benches, locations will be specified
by the Recreation Director and approved by the Borough Engineer.
3. A minimum of two sets of spectator bleachers with a minimum of
four rows per set.
4. Night lighting as approved by the Borough Engineer.
h. Playground Equipment.
1. Topsails shall be fabricated of 2 3/8 inches O.D. galvanized pipe
nine inches long. Toprail shall be eight feet above ground.
2. The legs shall be fabricated of 2 7/8 inches O.D. galvanized pipe.
Legs shall be of sufficient length to allow 18 inches to enter
concrete footings.
3. The fittings shall be fabricated of 2 7/8 inches O.D. galvanized pipe.
A 2 7/8 inches O.D. socket shall be welded to the fitting to attach
toprail fittings.
4. The belt seat should be 3/8 inch thick by five inches wide plus/
minus 25 inches long. Inserts shall be fabricated of 26 gauge
martinsite steel with three 0.062 wire cables fastened to the insert.
End brackets shall be fabricated of 14 gauge hot rolled steel zinc or
cadmium plated. Grommets shall be fabricated of stainless steel.
Seat covering shall be molded 50 durometer EPDM rubber.
Type of construction: The seat shall be molded in special dies over
solid martinsite steel inserts. The inserts with cables completely
circle the end holes and not only add strength to the molded
rubber, but also deters vandals from cutting the belt. The holes
(where "S" hooks enter seat), are completely encircled by the end
bracket for reinforcement. Safety features include flexibility which
minimizes accidents and the fact it is difficult to stand up and swing
with a belt type of swing.
§ 23-9.18 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.18
AO:562
§ 23-9.19. Off-Street Parking. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
In connection with every industrial, commercial, institutional, professional,
recreational, residential or any other use, there shall be provided off-street
parking spaces and parking lot standards in accordance with the following
requirements:
5. The swing hanger shall be cast in two halves. The top half shall
have a nonslip serrated surface. Two ears shall be cast on the top
half and lower half to receive 3/8 inch hex bolt. The lower of the
swing hanger body shall have a sintered bronze bearing
incorporated into it. 3/8 inch diameter hex head bolts shall hold the
two halves of the swing hanger together. The clevis shall be
attached to the swing hanger together by a 7/16 inch diameter bolt
through clevis and bearing. The clevis shall be trapped for 7/16
inch thread.
6. The chain material should be 7/32 inch diameter steel wire and the
dimensions (for each link) 13/16 inch wide, one equals 13/16 inch
long. The chain shall be hot dipped galvanized and type of
construction hot dipped galvanized 4/0 welded link chain.
7. The cable assembly, each 19 mm rope shall consist of six strands of
galvanized steel wire. Each strand is tightly wrapped with red
nylon yarn wrapped around a galvanized steel cable core.
8. The "S" hook shall be fabricated of 3/8 inch diameter hardened
steel. Overall size 3 3/8 inches long, 2 5/16 inches wide. Shall be
cadmium plated after fabrication.
a. Standards.
1. Every parking space outdoors or in a garage shall consist of not
less than 200 square feet of usable area for each motor vehicle. The
required parking area shall be measured exclusive of interior
driveways or maneuvering areas.
2. In the case of a parking lot which has facilities for five or more
automobiles, any boundary or property line which abuts a
residence district or a lot used for residence district or a lot used
for residence purpose shall be screened from the adjacent property.
3. Bus, tractor-trailer and trailer parking. Buses, tractor-trailers and
trailers must be parked on the property and not the street. Buses,
tractor-trailers and trailers are restricted to parking in industrial
districts, except those incidental for farming operations.
4. Size and Access.
(a) Each dead storage bay of an off-street parking space may be
perpendicular with the aisle, parallel with the aisle, or at an
§ 23-9.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.19
AO:563
angle between 60° and 90°. The following are minimum stall
and aisle dimensions:
(1) Perpendicular, 90°: Stall width, 10 feet; stall depth, 20
feet; aisle width, 25 feet.
(2) Angle, 60° to 90°: stall width 10 feet; stall depth, 20 feet;
aisle width, 20 feet.
(3) Parallel: Stall width, 23 feet; stall depth, 10 feet; aisle
width, twelve-foot single lane, twenty-foot double lane.
(b) No area shall be used for parking if it is not large enough to
provide for at least three contiguous stalls, unless approval
otherwise is obtained from the body, agency or official having
jurisdiction of the plan.
(c) When the parking area is designed for angle parking the stalls
on both sides shall be inclined so as to permit a driver
approaching from either end of the aisle to have access to the
stalls on one side.
(d) In lots having a capacity of more than 100 cars, a main access
drive shall be provided from points of ingress and egress. No
parking shall be permitted on the main access drive, nor shall
it serve as an access aisle to adjacent parking spaces.
(e) All parking areas shall be paved in accordance with this
chapter and shall include barrier lines, lane lines, directional
arrows and stoplines.
(f) Entrance and exit drives shall have a minimum width of 16 feet
for those designed for one-way traffic and 24 feet for those
carrying two-way traffic.
(g) All access drives shall provide a minimum turning radius of 30
feet.
b. Location of Parking.
1. Off-street parking spaces for special uses in residential zones and
office uses in professional zones shall not be located between the
front building line and street line. On corner lots, this restriction
shall also apply to the space between the side street line and the
side building line.
2. Where parking is permitted between the front building line and the
street line, whether by ordinance or variance, a safety island or
raised median separating the public street from the parking area
shall be provided in accordance with the following minimum
requirements:
§ 23-9.19 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.19
AO:564
(a) The width of the safety island shall be that width between the
proposed street curbline to the point five feet inside the
property line.
(b) Safety islands shall be raised a minimum of six inches above
the adjacent parking area.
(c) Safety islands shall be topsoiled and seeded or otherwise
landscaped, except that they may, in the alternative, be
constructed of maintenance-free materials which provide a
clear and unmistakable distinction between the parking area
and the safety island.
(d) Not withstanding the use of maintenance-free materials, there
shall be provided at least one deciduous tree two inches in
diameter at breast height every 40 feet or part thereof, on all
safety islands. A greater distance will be allowed for plantings
if necessary for traffic safety. The area between trees shall be
planted with a minimum of three evergreen type shrubs.
(e) No commercial signs, light standards or other aboveground
obstructions other than plantings shall be permitted in the
safety islands.
(f) When parking areas abut the safety island, a continuous wheel
stop shall be provided three feet from the normal edges of the
island, and the minimum depth of the stalls shall be increased
by one foot. If cast-in-place curb is used for the wheel stop, it
shall be placed as above stated and the stall depth measured
from a point two feet outside the face of the curb.
c. Small Parking Areas. Parking areas having 50 or less spaces shall be
designated to provide the following minimum design requirements:
1. Safety island or raised median as herein described.
2. A five-foot unbroken landscaped driving strip along all side
property lines from the street line to the rear lot line, unless
otherwise specified herein.
3. Not more than one two-way access drive or two one-way access
drives on any one street unless approval otherwise is obtained from
the body, agency or official having jurisdiction over the plan.
4. All safety islands and landscaped dividing strips planted with at
least one deciduous tree with a trunk of two inch diameter at breast
height every 40 feet, or part thereof, and the area between trees
planted with a minimum of three evergreen-type shrubs.
5. All entrance and exit drives shall be curbed on both sides from the
street curb to a point at the beginning of the access drive or
parking stalls.
§ 23-9.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.19
AO:565
d. Large Parking Areas. Parking lots which have a capacity for parking
more than 50 vehicles shall incorporate the following minimum design
standards:
1. All entrance and exit drives shall be curbed on both sides a
minimum distance of 100 feet back from the street curb or to a
major collector aisle.
2. No parking stalls which shall require the use of the entrance and
exit drives as access aisles shall be permitted.
3. All access drives located along one-way streets of divided highways
shall be separate one-way drives. Said drives shall be located so
that vehicles enter the parking area at the beginning of the
property and exit at the far end of the property unless other
considerations, such as median openings, dictate otherwise.
4. All directional (one-way) drives shall be marked with appropriate
signs facing all peripheral service roads serving the property as
well as the parking area.
5. On lots having frontage of 100 feet or less, driveways, exits and
entrances shall be located as far as practical from an intersection.
On lots having a frontage in excess of 100 feet, driveways, exits and
entrances shall be located as near the middle line as practical.
However, on such lots the entrance or exit driveways need not be
located more than 500 feet from the intersection. Measurements
shall be taken for the purpose of locating the driveways from the
curbline of the intersection.
6. No driveway shall be located less than 10 feet from the side
property line or within 30 feet of an existing drive, whichever is
greater.
7. No property having a frontage of less than 100 feet shall have more
than one two-way driveway on one street. No property having less
than 1,000-foot frontage shall have more than two driveways on
one street. Any frontage greater than 1,000 feet may have more
than two drives on one street; however, the number location, size
and design shall be subject to the approval of the body, agency or
official having jurisdiction over the plan.
8. There shall be provided landscaped safety islands as described
aforesaid.
9. Any parking area providing spaces for more than 200 cars, shall in
addition, provide concrete sidewalks within the parking area for
pedestrian movement. Sidewalks shall be at least four feet wide
and shall be located in such a manner as will prevent them from
being blocked by overhanging cars. A portion of any landscaped
dividing strip may be used for sidewalk construction.
§ 23-9.19 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.19
AO:566
e. Parking Area Landscaping. Every parking lot with 100 or more spaces
shall be divided as nearly as possible into smaller lots of 50 spaces
separated by landscaped dividing strips, excepting the area for access
aisles. The plantings required within the parking area shall be
considered exclusive from any other plantings that may be required for
screening or foundation planting. The following criteria shall apply for
internal landscaped dividing strips:
1. They shall have a minimum width of seven feet.
2. They shall be seeded and topsoiled. The use of maintenance free
material other than topsoil may be permitted if the same provides a
safe and attractive alternative.
3. They shall be planted with deciduous trees of two-inch diameter at
breast height having a maximum distance between trunks at
ground level of 40 feet. All trees shall be planted in the dormant
state.
4. The area between trees shall be planted with a minimum three
evergreen-type shrubs.
f. Retaining Walls and Landbanks.
1. In the event that parking is proposed on a lot or site having a slope
greater than 10%, regardless of size, it shall be terraced, utilized
retaining walls or properly reinforced landbanks and providing for
adequate safety, stability and drainage. At no time should a
landbank that is not reinforced or any other earthen material
having greater elevation than the adjacent parking areas, having a
slope exceeding 2:1.
2. When retaining walls or landbanks or similar types of earthen
materials are necessitated adjacent to or within parking area, they
shall be kept in good repair or otherwise maintained so as to keep
the parking area free of debris dirt.
g. Other Consideration. All uses, including existing uses that are changed,
expanded or modified as to structure or function, shall be bound by the
above requirement. In addition, no unrestricted vehicular access shall
be permitted between adjacent properties. Vehicular access, if agreed
upon by the owners or possessors of adjacent properties, shall be
limited to one opening providing two lanes of traffic and shall be located
in such a manner so as to offer continuity of a similar access drive on
the adjacent property. The opening shall occur at a point having the
greatest distance from the street line that would facilitate the joining of
properties. Access shall be denied across the remainder of the sidelines
by construction of a landscaped dividing strip, five feet in width on the
property being developed. If and when the adjacent property is
developed, there shall be a similar dividing strip at least five feet wide.
All dividing strips shall be landscaped as provided in paragraph e
herein.
§ 23-9.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.19
AO:567
h. Screening of Refuse Area. These areas adjacent to or within the parking
areas designated as refuse, storage and pick-up areas shall be properly
screened to prevent the unsightly display and the scattering of debris.
The following minimum requirements shall apply:
1. The area shall be surrounded on at least three sides by a solid
uniform fence or a wall not less than five feet nor more than eight
feet in height and maintenance in good condition. The wall of an
adjacent building may serve as one side. Said fence shall be exempt
from the provisions of any ordinance of this municipality regulating
the height of fences and requiring permits therefor.
2. The opening in said screen wall or fence shall be located as to
prevent the visual display of refuse from any adjacent parking area
or street.
i. Screening of Equipment or Machinery.
1. When the effective operation of a building or structure, or
equipment within a building or structure, necessitates placing
machinery, generators, or similar devices for cooling, heating or
generating purposes outside or on top of any structure, it shall be
screened from public view. Said screening may consist of any of the
following materials.
(a) Densely planted evergreen shrubs which shall grow to not less
than five feet after one growing season.
(b) A solid and uniform fence at least five feet in height on four
sides of said equipment.
(c) A masonry wall at least five feet in height on four sides of said
equipment.
(d) Any similar type of solid uniform screening which will prevent
exposure of such equipment to public view.
2. The above requirements shall not be construed to prevent an
opening in any required screening for maintenance purposes.
However, any such opening shall be made as inconspicuous as
possible so as not to present a display of said equipment to public
view.
j. Maintenance and Performance Bonds.
1. The owner of property covered by the on-site parking provisions of
this chapter shall be required to post a performance bond covering
the full amount of such improvements as are required herein. The
amount of the bond shall be determined by the Borough Engineer
and shall be filed with the Borough Clerk prior to site plan or other
approval.
§ 23-9.19 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.19
AO:568
2. Upon satisfactory completion of the work, said owner shall supply a
cash maintenance bond for a period of two years for 15% of the
amount of performance bond. Prior to expiration of said
maintenance bond, Borough Engineer shall conduct an inspection
to ascertain if the required improvements are intact and are in
satisfactory condition. In the event the requirements have not been
met, the developer shall be informed as to what further work may
be necessary. If after six months the work has not been completed
to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer, then the applicant shall
be required to forfeit any or all of the maintenance bond.
k. Minimum Off-Street Parking Spaces Required. No building or structure
shall be erected nor any major reconstruction or change in use made to
an existing building or structure unless there already is existing upon
the lot or unless provisions are made for off-street parking facilities
providing adequate parking spaces on the basis of the following
minimum requirements:
1. Automotive repair, garage or body shop: One parking space for
each 400 square feet of gross floor area.
2. Automobile sales: 1.5 parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area for exclusive use of customers. In addition, there
shall be provided at least 170 square feet of lot area for each
vehicle stored on the premises to be sold, rented or otherwise used
in the operation of the business. The lot area to be used to compute
the number of vehicles that can be stored on the premises shall be
the total lot area not used for building or customer parking as
herein provided.
3. Automotive Service Station: Five parking spaces for each service
bay, exclusive of vehicle service area. In no instance shall there be
fewer than five off-street parking spaces.
4. Banks, Savings and Loan Association and Similar Financial
Institutions: One parking space for each 200 square feet of gross
floor area.
5. Bar, Cocktail Lounge or Nightclub, including Restaurants with
Bars: One parking space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area.
6. Barber and Beauty Shop: Three parking spaces for each chair.
7. Bowling Alley: Five parking spaces for each alley. Other
commercial uses within the same building will be computed
separately in accordance with this chapter.
8. Business Offices: One parking space for 200 square feet of gross
floor area.
9. Car Washes: Five parking spaces for employees plus off-street
storage space equal to at least five times the number of cars that
§ 23-9.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.19
AO:569
can be in the wash process at one time. For self-wash or selfservice
car washes, the requirement for employee parking shall be
eliminated.
10. Church, Temple or Chapel: One parking space for each four seats in
the main auditorium. Where no individual seats are provided, 20
inches of bench shall be considered as one seat.
11. Schools, including Academies, Junior High Schools, Elementary
Schools, Technical and Art Schools and Similar Institutions of
Learning: One parking space for each four seats in the main
auditorium, plus one parking space for each administrator, teacher,
student and any other employees.
12. Community Center, Library, Museum or Art Gallery: One parking
space for each 200 square feet of gross floor plan.
13. Community Club, Private Club or Lodge: One parking space for
each 100 square feet of gross floor area, plus 1 1/2 spaces for each
boat slip where applicable.
14. Convalescent Home, Nursing Home or Rest Home: One parking
space for each three beds, plus one parking space for each two
employees, including nurses and other staff.
15. Meeting Rooms, Assembly or Exhibition Halls: Without fixed seats,
one parking space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area. With
fixed seats, one parking space for every four seats.
16. Dwellings: Two parking spaces for each single-family dwelling; for
multiple-family dwellings, two parking spaces for each dwelling.
17. Dental or Medical Offices: Three parking spaces for each doctor,
plus one parking space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area.
18. Drive-In Restaurant: One parking space for each 35 square feet of
enclosed floor area, plus one parking space for each four seats.
19. Driving Ranges, Miniature Golf (Indoor and Outdoor), Indoor
Computer Golf and Batting Cages: One parking space for each tee,
hole or batting cage.
20. Furniture, Appliance Stores or Similar Types of Uses Requiring
Large Amount of Storage: One parking space for each 400 square
feet up to 4,000, plus one parking space for each 800 square feet of
gross floor area above 4,000.
21. Government, County or Municipal Offices: Four parking spaces for
each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
22. Hardware or Auto Supply Stores: One parking space for each 400
square feet of gross floor area.
§ 23-9.19 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.19
AO:570
23. Hospital (General, Mental or Sanitarium): One parking space for
each three beds, plus one space for each employee on the shift
having the greatest number of employees, plus one space for each
visiting doctor.
24. Hotel or Motel: One parking space for each rental unit. Each
commercial use within the building shall be computed separately
according to the requirements for such use set forth herein. The
approving authority may allow up to 50% of the required parking
for commercial uses in the hotel or motel to be satisfied by guest
room parking.
25. Laundromats or Similar Coin-Operated Cleaning: One parking
space for each four cleaning units or fraction of four cleaning units.
26. Manufacturing or Industrial Establishment, Research or Testing
Laboratory, Bottling Plant or Similar Uses: One parking space for
each 500 square feet of gross floor area or two parking spaces for
each three employees, whichever is greater. If the number of
employees or the gross square footage of the principal building(s)
cannot be determined at the time of the application, the sufficient
land area shall be reserved to provide a total number of spaces at
the rate of one space for each 300 square feet of maximum lot
coverage.
27. Marina, Boat Yard or Boat Sales: 1 1/2 parking spaces for each boat
slip, plus one parking space for each employee.
28. Mortuary Funeral Home: One parking space for every 150 square
feet in slumber rooms, parlors and funeral service rooms.
29. Nursery School, Day Camp or Similar Uses: One parking space for
each employee, plus one parking space for each vehicle used for
transportation of students.
30. Personal Services Establishment: One parking space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each vehicle used
in connection with the business.
31. Professional Office, such as Architectural, Clerical, Engineering,
Legal and Similar Uses: One parking space for each 200 square
feet of gross floor area.
32. Public and Private Utilities (Electrical Substation, Gas Regulator,
Water Works, Station and Similar Facilities): One parking space for
each vehicle stored on the premises, plus one parking space for
each employee on the shift which has the greatest number of
employees.
33. Restaurant, Cafe or Diner: One parking space per three seats, and
one parking space for every two employees.
§ 23-9.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.19
AO:571
34. Recreation Facilities: Those not specifically mentioned herein shall
be determined by the approving authority.
35. Retail Stores, except otherwise specified: One parking space for
each 200 feet of gross floor area.
36. Studio (Art, Music, or Dance for the Purpose of Giving Instruction):
One parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area used for
giving such instructions.
37. Shopping Centers: Six parking spaces for each 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area for centers having less than 500,000 square feet.
Shopping centers having 500,000 square feet or more shall provide
parking at the rate of 5.5 space for each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area. If more than 5% of the enclosed gross floor area of any
shopping center is occupied by malls, lobbies, corridors, heating
plants or other space not utilized for direct commercial purposes,
which in the opinion of the approving authority will not generate a
need for parking, the approving authority shall allow the parking
required to be based on the gross leasable area of the shopping
center at the above rate. The "gross leasable area" for the purpose
of this chapter shall be defined as the total floor area designed for
tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basement,
mezzanines and upper floors. This definition shall not, however,
include offices, theaters or similar nonretail occupants.
38. Theater: One parking space for each three seats.
39. Veterinary or Animal Hospital: One parking space for each 400
square feet of gross floor area.
40. Warehouse, Wholesale, Machinery or Large Equipment Sales: One
parking space for each 1,500 square feet of gross floor area, plus
one space for each vehicle used in connection with the business.
41. Colleges or Universities: Two parking spaces for each three
students, plus one parking space for each administrator, teacher
and any other employee.
l. Miscellaneous. In computing the number of the above required parking
spaces, the following rules shall govern:
1. Where fractional spaces result, the required number shall be
construed to be the nearest whole number.
2. The parking space required for a use not specifically mentioned
herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature as
determined by the approving authority.
3. Nothing in the above requirements shall be construed to prevent
the joint use of off-street parking facilities by two or more uses,
provided the total of such spaces shall not be less than the sum of
§ 23-9.19 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.19
AO:572
§ 23-9.20. Off-Street Loading. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
In some zones, in connection with buildings occupied by industrial,
commercial and certain institutional uses, there shall be provided and
maintained on the same lot with such building, off-street loading berths in
accordance with the requirements of the table following:
the requirements for various individual uses computed separately
by the above requirements.
4. All required parking facilities shall be located on the same lot or
parcel as the structure or use it shall serve. In the case of
nonresidential uses, parking facilities may be provided on other
lots or parcels, but shall not be greater than 300 feet from the
structure or use it shall serve.
5. No part of off-street parking required by a structure or use shall be
included as part of an off-street parking requirement of another use
unless substantial proof and assurance are established that the use
of this parking will not be simultaneous.
6. Where special traffic problems exist, the approving authority may
require a special survey of conditions and require the location of
entrances and exits to the parking lot to be altered to minimize
congestion and hazard.
a. Size and Location. Each loading space shall be not less than 12 feet in
width, 35 feet in length and have a minimum vertical clearance of 14
feet, and may occupy all or any part of the required yard.
b. Required Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces.
Use
Loading
spaces
Hospital: square feet of gross floor area under:
10,000 1
10,000-30,000 2
Funeral home 1
Office, hotel, retail service, wholesale, warehouse,
manufacturing, processing or repairing:
Floor area:
Under 10,000 0
10,0000 to 25,000 1
25,001 to 40,000 2
40,001 to 60,000 3
60,001 to 100,000 4
§ 23-9.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.20
AO:573
§ 23-9.21. Additional Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations.
[Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX; Ord. No. 2002-715, § 1]
Additional off-street parking and loading areas shall be as follows:
c. Loading areas will be designed in accordance with Subsection 23-9.21i.
a. Joint Facilities for Parking and Loading.
1. Off-street parking and loading facilities for separate uses may be
provided jointly if the total number of spaces so provided is not less
than the sum of the separate requirements for each use, and
provided that all regulations governing the location of accessory
spaces in relation to the use served are adhered to and that no
accessory space or portion thereof shall serve as a required space
for more than one use.
2. In the calculation of area for off-street parking and loading, there
shall be excluded that area which shall have a minimum width of 15
feet, which is to be reserved for access from the road to the loading
area, thereby serving as a service access for the premises in which
the building is to be erected. Service access may be located in all or
part of any required yard.
b. Development and Maintenance of Parking and Loading Areas. Every
parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area for five
or more cars or loading area, including a commercial parking lot, shall
be developed and maintained in accordance with the following
requirements:
1. Screening and Landscaping. Off-street parking areas for five or
more vehicles and off-street loading areas shall be screened on the
side or sides which adjoin residential zones.
2. Minimum distances and setbacks. No off-street loading area or
parking area or part thereof for five or more vehicles shall be closer
than 10 feet to any dwelling, school, hospital or other institution for
human care located on an adjoining lot, or two feet from any lot
line.
3. Surfacing. Any off-street parking areas shall be paved in
accordance with paragraph I of this subsection. All of the exterior
of any building shall be in keeping with other structures in the
neighborhood.
c. Substation electric and gas facilities, sewage lift station, water
pumping station, transmission lines and gas regulators stations subject
to the following special requirements:
1. No storage of materials and trucks and no repair facilities or
housing of repair crews, except within completely enclosed
buildings.
§ 23-9.20 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.21
AO:574
2. The architectural design of the exterior of any building shall be in
keeping with other structures in the neighborhood.
3. Screening to be developed as defined in this chapter. All plants not
surviving one, two-year period after planting must be replaced.
d. Model homes or sales offices within a subdivision shall be allowed, but
only during the period necessary for the sale of new homes within such
subdivision. Such uses shall not be considered a business use.
e. (Reserved)
f. Conditional Uses. The following conditional uses may be authorized by
the Planning Board, provided that applications conform to the following
specifications and standards: Areas shall be marked so as to provide for
the orderly and safe loading, parking and storage of self-propelled
vehicles.
g. Lighting.
1. Lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking or loading areas
shall be arranged so as to reflect the light away from adjoining
premises or the adjoining street.
2. Off-street parking facilities for multifamily structures containing
four or more families shall be so adequately lighted.
h. Drainage. Any off-street parking area and off-street loading areas shall
be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water without
detriment to surrounding uses.
i. Parking Lot, Driveway and Loading Area Design Standards.
1. Parking areas to be used exclusively for automobile traffic, except
for infrequent small truck deliveries, shall be constructed of six
inches of quarry blend stone with a two inch FABC-1 surface
content.
2. Parking areas subject to heavy loadings from trucks or other heavy
vehicles shall be constructed of five inches of bituminous stabilized
base with a two inch FABC-1 surface course.
3. In areas where there is a combination of the above uses, the lot
should be constructed using the truck standard 5d where heavier
loadings will be imposed and using the automobile standard where
cars will be parked.
4. Loading areas for trucks shall be constructed either of truck
standard mentioned in paragraph i,2 above, or of concrete
reinforced with No. 5 bars at 12 inches on center each way. The
concrete utilized shall be 4,000 PSI at twenty-day compressive
strength.
§ 23-9.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.21
AO:575
§ 23-9.22. Signs. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
See Article X.
§ 23-9.23. Wetlands. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
All applications for development and uses of wetlands shall be subject to
and permitted only in compliance with the provisions of the New Jersey
Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act. (N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq.). and the
regulations adopted thereunder (N.J.A.C. 7:7A-1 et seq.). Any provisions in
this chapter referring to wetlands regulations shall be construed to mean
the provisions of the New Jersey Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act and
the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
5. Driveways in residential developments shall be constructed of two
inch FABC - Surface paving on a base of six inches of quarry blend
stone or of four inch thick concrete of 3,000 PSI strength with No. 9
reinforcement wire or equivalent on a suitable stable subbase.
6. The respective reviewing board has the authority to review and
approve substitute design standards for driveways in residential
developments on an individual case by case basis as applications
are received and reviewed. In certain residential areas, as
determined by the respective board, stone driveways may be
allowed using six inches of red stone or other acceptable material
to the Board. Pinned railroad ties shall be installed for borders. The
approvals may be given on a case by case basis as requested by the
individual developer. The respective Board will have the final
determination as to the approval or denial of the use of stone
driveways in residential areas.
7. Design Standard for Drive-Thru Window Services. All drive-thru
window service establishments shall provide a stacking lane for a
minimum of five vehicles per window subject to approval of the
approving authority. In all instances, an escape lane shall be
provided to prevent traffic congestion on the site.
a. Development Restricted.
1. No development shall be permitted in or on any wetlands within the
jurisdiction of the Borough.
2. No development, except for those uses which are specifically
authorized in paragraphs b1, b2 and b3, shall be permitted within
100 feet of any wetlands, unless the applicant demonstrated to the
approving authority that the proposed development will not result
in a significant adverse impact on the wetlands. For purposes of
this subsection, a significant adverse impact shall be deemed to
exist where it is determined that one or more of the following
modifications of a wetlands will have an irreversible effect on the
ecological integrity of the wetland and its biotic components:
§ 23-9.21 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.23
AO:576
(a) An increase in surface water runoff discharging into a wetland.
(b) A change in the normal seasonal flow patterns in the wetlands.
(c) Alteration of the water table in the wetland.
(d) An increase in erosion resulting in increased sedimentation in
the wetland.
(e) A change in the natural chemistry of the ground or surface
water in the wetland.
(f) A loss of wetland habitat.
(g) A reduction in wetland habitat diversity.
(h) A change in wetlands species composition.
(i) A significant disturbance of areas used by indigenous and
migratory wildlife for breeding, nesting or feeding.
b. Permitted Uses. The following development shall be authorized within a
wetland:
1. Horticulture of native plant species and berry agriculture.
2. Low-intensity uses, such as hunting, fishing, trapping, hiking,
boating and swimming, provided that such uses do not involve any
structure other than docks, piers, moorings and boat launches.
Such structures may be permitted, provided that there is no
significant adverse impact on the wetland as set forth in paragraph
a above.
3. Fish and wildlife management activities, provided that the activity
conforms to all applicable state and federal regulations and that
the activity does not have a significant adverse impact on the
wetland as set forth in paragraph a above. On a case by case basis,
proposals shall be evaluated relative to the scientific research
value of the proposal.
4. Public improvements such as bridges, roads, trails and utility
transmission and distribution facilities, provided that:
(a) There is no feasible alternative route or site for the facility that
does not involve development in a wetland.
(b) The public need cannot be met by existing facilities or
modifications thereof.
(c) There is no significant adverse impact on the wetland as set
forth in paragraph a above.
c. Clearing Standards. For lots containing portions of designated wetland
buffer, the following shall prevail:
§ 23-9.23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-9.23
AO:577
§ 23-9.24. Conventional Septic Systems. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. IX]
In order to develop on a lot less than 40,000 square feet utilizing on-site
conventional septic wastewater systems, the following criteria shall be met:
1. 100-foot buffer: 10% of the vegetative cover up to a maximum of
2,000 square feet per lot shall be allowed to be cleared up to the
fifty-foot buffer line.
(a) Uses: limited to outdoor activities (sandbox, swings, sheds), no
dwelling units or extension thereof or garages shall occur
within the designated buffer.
2. Fifty-foot buffer: no clearing shall occur within the designated
buffer.
(a) Exceptions: the removal of diseased, dead or hazardous
vegetation.
a. The location of the system and its discharge point, and size of the parcel
on which the system is located, will ensure that groundwater exiting
from the parcel or entering a surface body water will not exceed two
parts per million nitrate/nitrogen;
b. The percolation rate is no greater than 30 minutes per inch.
c. The depth to seasonal high water table is at least five feet.
d. Any potable water well will be drilled and cased to a depth of at least
100 feet, unless the well penetrates an impermeable clay aquiclude, in
which case the well shall be cased at least 50 feet; and
e. The location of all wells within 500 feet of the site shall be shown.
§ 23-9.23 PINE HILL CODE § 23-9.24
AO:578
ARTICLE X
Signs
§ 23-10. SIGN REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 95-588, Art. X; Ord. No.
2003-722, §§ I, III; amended 3-18-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-976]
§ 23-10.1. Permitted Signs.
In all zoning districts of the Borough, signs may be erected, altered,
maintained, used, removed or moved only in compliance with the provisions
of this article.
§ 23-10.2. Definitions.
In addition to the definitions listed in Article III, the following definitions
shall apply to these regulations:
ATTACHED SIGN — Any sign erected, construed or maintained on a
building with the principal support of said sign being the building, including
specifically the painting of signs or displays on the exterior surface of the
building. Attached signs shall not be more than 10 inches off of the building
to which they are attached.
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A sign designating the name of a subdivision of
residential homes, whether single or multi-family, attached, or an apartment
complex.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, place, suspend or affix and shall also
include the painting of wall signs and the painting of signs or displays on
the exterior surface of the building, structure or material surface.
EXTERNALLY LIGHTED — Any sign whose sole source of artificial
illumination is outside the display portion of the sign.
FREESTANDING SIGNS — Any sign not attached to a building, erected,
constructed or maintained on a post, pole or other bracing or supporting
device.
FRONTAGE — The distance between property lines of any property
measured along the right-of-way line of the street or road.
GRADE LEVEL — The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the
ground where the sign support structure meets the ground.
INTERNALLY LIGHTED — Any sign whose sole source of artificial
illumination is contained within the display portion of the sign.
MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY AND TENANCY SIGN — A single sign relating to
a use or facility such as a shopping center, industrial park, or office complex
where there is more than one occupancy and/or tenancy or uses, where
said multiple occupancy and tenant uses a common parking facility and/or a
common private drive or roadway, and where the names and professions or
business names of the various tenants and/or occupants are displayed.
§ 23-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-10.2
AO:579
OFF-SITE SIGN — Any sign, including a billboard sign, located on a lot
other than a lot occupied by the use, event or product which said sign
identifies.
OFFICIAL SIGN — Any sign, symbol or device erected, constructed or
maintained by the federal, state or county or local government, or any
agency thereof, for the purpose of informing or guiding the public, or for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign by an owner of real property or of a licensed
real estate broker designating a property "for sale" or "for lease."
ROOF SIGN — An attached sign erected, constructed or maintained upon
or over the roof of any building where principal support of said sign is the
roof structure.
SIGN — Any object, device, display, mural or structure of any part thereof,
situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display,
direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words,
letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected
images. This definition shall specifically include any building or part of
a building, including walls and facades used for such purposes and shall
further include banners, pennants, flags, and similar blank devices. This
chapter, however, specifically excludes any sign inside a structure or
building which is not visible from outside of the building or structure.
SIGN HEIGHT — In the case of a freestanding sign, will be computed from
grade level to the greatest height at any one point in the sign. In the case
of any attached sign, no sign can be higher than the level of a second floor
window sill in a two or more story building, or cannot be higher than the
lowest point of the roof line in a single story building, except where a roof
sign is expressly permitted in certain zones.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign which is not permanently attached to a
building structure or permanently affixed to a freestanding structure, and
which may be erected for a limited period of time in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
WARNING SIGN — A sign indicating no trespassing, no fishing and/or
hunting, and an existing danger where a warning is legally required.
WIND SIGN — A sign consisting of one or more banners, flags, pennants,
ribbons, spinners, streamers, captive balloons, or other objects or material
fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by
wind.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed or maintained in or on a
window of a building, visible from outside the building, whether illuminated
or nonilluminated.
§ 23-10.3. Permits and Approvals.
§ 23-10.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-10.3
AO:580
§ 23-10.4. Prohibited Signs.
No person shall erect, install or maintain the following signs in the Borough:
a. Sign permit required. It shall be unlawful to erect, alter, maintain,
relocate or otherwise have a sign within the Borough, as defined herein
(except those hereinafter exempt), without first making application for
obtaining a permit from the Zoning Officer which said permit shall be in
addition to any other licenses or permits which may be required by
other ordinances.
b. Application. Applications for permits shall be made on such forms as
may be required by the Borough and shall be completed fully by the
applicant or his agent. In the event that the applicant is not the owner
of the property on which the sign is to be located, the owner of said
property must co-sign the application.
c. Procedure. Upon receipt of a completed application, the Zoning Officer
shall determine whether or not the sign complies with this chapter, and
if so, the Zoning Officer shall issue the sign permit. The applicant may
process an appeal from said ruling of the Zoning Officer to the Zoning
Board of Adjustment in accordance with this chapter.
d. Fees. An application for a sign permit must be accompanied by a fee of
$0.85 per square foot, a minimum fee of $33, which shall be
nonrefundable. There shall be no separate fee for the issuance of a sign
permit.
e. Exemptions. The following signs shall not require an application, a sign
permit, or a fee:
1. Residential name plate and address.
2. Official signs as defined in Subsection 23-10.2.
3. Warning signs, as defined in Subsection 23-10.2.
4. A flag, pennant, or insignia of a nation, organization of nations,
state, county, city, religious, civic or fraternal organization, or any
educational institution, except such flags used in connection with
commercial promotion or as an advertising device.
5. Temporary signs as defined in Subsection 23-10.2, if used in
accordance with Subsection 23-10.5j.
a. Signs with visible moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible
mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible
movement achieved by electrical, electronic or mechanical means,
except for traditional barber poles, gauges and dials that may be
animated to the extent necessary to display correct measurement, and
time and/or temperature signs, if the sign on which the time/or
temperature displays is located is an otherwise permitted sign under
this chapter.
§ 23-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-10.4
AO:581
b. Signs with lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate,
blink, flicker, vary in intensity, vary in color, or use intermittent
electrical pulsations.
c. Signs with optical illusion of movement by means of a design that
presents a pattern capable of reversible perspective, giving the illusion
of motion or changing of copy.
d. Signs that incorporate projected images or emit any sound that is
intended to attract attention.
e. Any sign or structure that:
1. In any way obstructs the view of, may be confused with or purports
to be an official traffic sign, signal or device of any other official
sign.
2. Obstructs the view of motor vehicle operators entering a public
roadway from any parking area, service drive, private driveway,
alley or other thoroughfare.
3. Creates any other unsafe distraction for motor vehicle operations.
f. Any sign or structure that is structurally unsafe, constitutes a hazard to
safety of health by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation, is
not kept in good repair, or is capable of causing electrical shock to
persons likely to come into contact with it.
g. Any sign, together with its supporting structure, that 90 days or more
after the premises have been vacated, advertises an activity, business,
product or service no longer produced or conducted upon the premises
upon which such sign is located, If the sign or sign structure is covered
or the identifying symbols or letters removed, the Zoning Officer may
grant an extension of time under this subsection upon showing of good
cause, but nothing in this subsection prohibits permanent signs
accessory to businesses that are open only on a seasonal basis, if there
is clear intent to continue operation of the business.
h. No sign shall be erected or maintained on a lot, tract or parcel including
any improvement thereon, with the exception of billboard signs which
are a permitted use in the GBD and LBD business zoning districts along
Berlin-Cross Keys Road and Blackwood-Clementon Road, unless the
message on the sign directly relates to the use of said lot, tract or
parcel.
i. No sign other than an official sign may be placed within the right-of-way
of any Borough or county street, road or right-of-way within the
Borough.
j. No sign shall be attached, affixed or painted on trees, fences, rocks,
curbs, walks, hydrants, benches or bridges, except for warning signs as
defined herein indicating "no trespassing" and the like.
§ 23-10.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-10.4
AO:582
§ 23-10.5. General Regulations.
k. No vehicle shall be regularly parked, stopped or located in such a
manner as to be used as or considered a sign.
a. Maintenance. All signs shall be periodically maintained by the owner of
said sign, including painting, repairing and cleaning as necessary. Any
sign that, because of improper maintenance, is deemed to be in a state
of disrepair, such that the sign is no longer functional, visible or
dangerous to the safety of others, as determined by the Zoning Officer,
shall be repaired by the owner of said sign within 14 days of a notice
requiring said repair; otherwise, the sign shall be removed.
b. Sign content. All signs shall indicate only the principal names of the
establishment, proprietor, or owner, and may include a brief description
of the principal goods or service, or use thereof, and a logo or
trademark by which the business or owner is identified.
c. Misleading information. No sign shall be erected or maintained that
contains information stating, indicating or implying that a property may
be used for any purpose not permitted under the applicable provisions
or Article IX of this chapter in the zoning district in which the property
to which the sign relates is located.
d. Setback. No point of any sign, including rim, border, and support shall
be located within 10 feet of any property line.
e. Computation of sign area.
1. Sign area shall be measured around the outside edges of a framed
or enclosed sign or by the area utilized by isolated words and/or
symbols including the background whether open or enclosed but
said area shall not include any supporting framework and bracing
incidental to the display itself.
2. In the event a double-faced back-to-back or v-type sign is used,
each side shall be considered a component in determining the total
square feet of this area.
3. All temporary and permanent riders or attachments to sign or sign
structures are included as part of the total sign area for the sign to
which they are attached.
f. Wall-mounted sign. Wall-mounted signs shall not project more than four
feet above the top of the building on which erected, unless a projection
of more than four feet is authorized by the Zoning Officer or other
approving authority. In no case shall the height of signs exceed the
height limits of the district in which located.
g. Signs on fences and walls used as fences. Signs displayed upon fences
or upon walls that are not an integral part of a building or that are used
as fences shall be erected or mounted in a plane parallel to the fences
§ 23-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-10.5
AO:583
or wall and shall not exceed above the top of the fence or wall or project
more than 15 inches from the face of the fence or wall. Such signs shall
be subject to all requirements of this section applicable to freestanding
signs, including, without limitation, maximum area per sign, maximum
sign height, minimum setback and number of permitted signs.
h. Wind signs. Banners, flags, pennants and similar blank devices may be
permitted in connection with a bonafide grand opening for any
permitted use in a trade zone if the persons wishing to display such sign
applies therefore and obtains the approval of the Zoning Officer, but
such signs may only be displayed for a period of 30 days, and no time
extension may be granted.
i. Illuminated signs.
1. Illuminated signs shall be arranged so that no light or glare is
directed or reflected to adjoining lots or streets or into residential
windows.
2. All beams or beacons used in externally illuminated signs shall be
directed downwards wherever feasible, and shall be shielded to
prevent spillage off the lot onto streets, parking and driveway
areas.
3. Signs in residential and agricultural zoning districts shall be
nonilluminated or externally illuminated. If such signs are
illuminated, the illumination shall be turned off between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless illumination is required for
safety purposes.
4. Signs in trade and institutional zoning districts may be externally
or internally illuminated, with the exception of billboards which
shall not be internally lit unless an integral part of a digital
billboard display. Any illumination sign visible from and located
within 300 feet of any lot in a residential zoning district shall be
turned off no later than 11:00 p.m. or 1/2 hour after the use to
which it is appurtenant has closed, whichever is later; but this time
limit does not apply to any light primarily used for the protection of
the premises or provisions of light for safety purposes. Billboard
signs shall be illuminated by top-mounted lights directed
downward onto the sign.
j. Temporary signs.
1. All temporary signs shall be nonilluminated.
2. A real estate sign is permitted in all zones provided it complies with
the following requirements.
(a) It must pertain only to the lease or sale of the lot upon which it
is placed.
§ 23-10.5 PINE HILL CODE § 23-10.5
AO:584
(b) It shall not exceed 12 (plus or minus 12) square feet in area,
except in residential zones, in which case it shall not exceed six
square feet in area.
(c) It shall be removed within seven days after closing or
settlement on said property or the execution of the lease.
3. Temporary signs advertising events such as fairs, bazaars,
auctions, garage sale, or other special activities, including political
signs or posters, shall be erected or placed so as not to obstruct or
obscure visibility at corners or intersections or to cause a traffic
safety hazard. Such signs are allowed one month prior to the event
being advertised and must be removed within 10 days following the
conclusion of the event.
4. Temporary signs of mechanics or artisans are permitted only
during the period when the artisans and mechanics are actively
performing work on the lands and premises where the signs are
placed. The sign shall have a maximum size of 12 square feet,
inclusive for all mechanics or artisans performing work on said
premises.
5. Temporary window signs advertising or describing sales or special
merchandise are permitted provided that the same sign does not
remain in the window for a period of longer than 30 days and that
all of the signs collectively do not exceed 30% of all available
window space on the wall on which the window signs are located.
6. Temporary development signs for major subdivision. One
temporary development sign is permitted for major subdivisions.
Said sign is subject to the following standards:
(a) Size: Maximum 20 square feet and six feet in height.
(b) Content: The signs shall include only the name of the
subdivision; the offer for sale of the lots or homes therein; and
the name and telephone number of the developer, realtor or
other agent to contact with reference to the sale.
(c) Time: The temporary development sign may be installed only
after final subdivision approval has been granted and before or
at the same time as the first building permit is issued on the
first lot sold. The sign must be removed within 10 days of the
issuance of the certificate of occupancy or the sale of the last
lot and replaced, if desired, with a permanent development
sign in accordance with the standards of Subsection 23-10.6a2
below if the permanent development sign has not already been
installed. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no
temporary development sign shall remain longer than two
years from the date of final subdivision approval unless an
extension is granted by the authority that granted said final
approval.
§ 23-10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-10.5
AO:585
(d) Location: The temporary sign shall be located at the entrance
of the subdivision on property owned by the developer. No
temporary development sign may be installed that interferes
with traffic as specified in Subsection 23-10.4e and i. If there is
more than one entrance, the developer may move the one sign
periodically to a different entrance, as sections are sold and
new sections opened. Upon acceptance of the roads, or the sale
of lands on which the sign is located, such that the sign
becomes located on private property owned by other than the
developer, or within a Borough or county right-of-way, the sign
shall be moved to another location as above, and subject to the
overall time restriction in Subsection c above.
7. Temporary development sign for major site plan. One temporary
site sign is permitted for major site plans, which sign is subject to
the following standards:
(a) Size: Maximum 35 square feet and six feet in height.
(b) Content: The sign shall include the name of the building or site
plan; the offer for sale or lease of the stores, shops, offices or
business units therein; and the names and telephone number
of the developer, realtor, or other agency to contact with
reference to the sale or lease.
(c) Time: The temporary site sign may be installed only after final
site plan approval has been granted and before or at the same
time as the building permit for the building (or first building or
site, if there be more than one) is issued. The sign must be
removed within 10 days of the issuance of the last certificate of
occupancy for the building (or first certificate of occupancy, if
there be more than one) and replaced with the permanent
signs permitted in Subsection 23-10.6c below for the business
zones. Nothing herein shall prevent the subsequent use of real
estate signs as permitted under Subsection j2 above, to
advertise the stores, shops and offices, 15 square feet, with a
maximum height of 10 feet. An attached sign may not exceed
10% of the wall surface area of the wall on which said sign is
placed.
k. Historical signs. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the
contrary, signs on structures of historic significance for historic
informational purposes upon which the name of the original or historic
inhabitant or builder, and the date of construction of said structure is
set forth, and/or the historical significance of the structure, are
permitted, provided that said signs shall not exceed two square feet.
l. Service stations. In addition to the freestanding attached signs
permitted in business and commercial zones, as set forth in Subsection
23-10.6c, service stations offering the sale of gasoline and other fuel
products may:
§ 23-10.5 PINE HILL CODE § 23-10.5
AO:586
§ 23-10.6. Signs in Particular Zones.
1. Increase the size of freestanding sign by 1/3 for the listing of name
and/or symbol of the principal fuels available, or in the alternative,
an attachment to the freestanding sign is permitted, listing the
principal fuels available, said attachment not to exceed 1/3 of the
area of the base sign.
2. Have an attachment to the freestanding sign up to 1/2 of the base
area from the display of price information.
a. Residential and agricultural zones.
1. The following are signs which are permitted in residential and
agricultural districts:
(a) A name plate not exceeding one square foot in area of an
address and/or street number not exceeding two square feet in
area, both within the property lines, which may be attached or
freestanding, are permitted.
(b) Signs indicating the name of a particular farm or estate,
provided that the area on one side of any such sign shall not
exceed two square feet.
(c) Signs advertising the sale of farm or nursery products
produced on the lot, provided that the area on one side of any
such sign shall not exceed six square feet and that no more
than two such signs shall be erected and maintained on the lot.
(d) Signs prohibiting or otherwise controlling trespassing upon
particular premises or indicating the private nature of a road,
driveway or premises, provided that the area on one side of any
such sign shall not exceed two square feet.
2. Development signs.
(a) In the case of a major subdivision, one permanent development
sign stating the name of the subdivision shall be permitted. The
permanent sign shall be mounted on concrete, steel, or other
noneroding material, specifically excluding wood, railroad ties,
and the like such that the sign shall be permanent and require
little maintenance.
(b) The permanent development sign shall be a sign not to exceed
two feet by eight feet, rectangular in shape, at a height not to
exceed five feet.
(c) During construction, a temporary development sign is
permitted only in accordance with the standard of Subsection
23-10.5j7 above. The permanent development sign, if desired,
may be installed at any time after approval is granted.
§ 23-10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-10.6
AO:587
(d) The location of the permanent development sign must be
approved by the Planning and/or Zoning Board at the time of
preliminary subdivision, and other development approval. The
sign may be installed at the entrance (or main entrance to the
subdivision, if there is more than one), and may be located
within an island or other entrance land specifically dedicated
to the Borough or homeowner's association specifically for the
purpose of the sign location.
3. Illumination standards. External illumination only is permitted, in
accordance with Subsection 23-10.5i of this article.
b. Institutional zone. Signs in institutional zone districts must conform to
the standards set forth in Subsection 23-10.5k for sign for nonprofit
institutions. Internal or external illumination is permitted in accordance
with Subsection 23-10.5i.
c. Trade zones. The following regulations apply to commercial and
industry:
1. Permitted signs. Each business or use may have a maximum of two
signs except as otherwise permitted below, in accordance with
following standards:
(a) One attached and one freestanding is permitted.
(b) If there is one business or use on the lot, the single business
may elect to use two attached signs and no freestanding sign.
(c) If more than one business or use is located in a particular
building or buildings, where said business or uses use a
common parking facility and/or common driveway or roadway,
no freestanding signs shall be permitted and instead there
shall be one multiple occupancy/tenant (MOT) sign as defined
in Subsection 23-10.2 located at the entrance to the shopping
center, industrial park, office complex or parking facility.
(d) If a MOT sign is required, the building-mount, attached signs
for the uses or business shall be all uniform in size, scale,
design and color.
(e) A roof sign may be used in place of the permitted attached sign
if the owner of the building can demonstrate that there is no
other location on the building where the legal attached sign
can be located. The size of the roof sign may not exceed the
size requirements for an attached sign in the particular zone,
as set forth below.
(f) If a business or use is located on a lot with more than one
street frontage, each business or use may have either one
additional attached sign or one additional freestanding sign,
unless the MOT sign is required, in which case the additional
§ 23-10.6 PINE HILL CODE § 23-10.6
AO:588
§ 23-10.7. Signs for Nonconforming Uses.
Upon application for a use variance or other approval to permit a
nonconforming use on a property in any zone where the use is not
permitted, the sign for said use may be approved by the Planning and/
or Zoning Board, subject to the following standards, regardless of the
proposed use:
§ 23-10.8. Nonconforming Signs.
MOT sign shall be located on a separate entrance, drive, or
separate part of the parking facility.
(g) Notwithstanding anything herein, each business or use may
have one sign, not to exceed three square feet, and located on
the front door or entrance, stating only the name of the
business or use, and including, if desired, its business hours.
(h) Billboards as defined and set forth in this article may be
permitted in the GBD and LBD zoning districts along Berlin-
Cross Keys Road and Blackwood-Clementon Road subject to
identified regulations as set forth herein.
2. Size and illumination standards.
(a) Commercial zones.
(1) Attached signs: Ten percent of the wall surface of the wall
on which the sign is to be placed.
(2) Freestanding sign: Thirty-five square feet; height not to
exceed eight feet.
(3) MOT sign: 100 square feet; height not to exceed 12 feet.
(b) Industry zone.
(1) Attached sign: Ten percent of the wall surface area on
which the sign is to be placed.
(2) Freestanding MOT sign: One square foot for each foot of
lineal building frontage on the principal street, with a
maximum size of 100 square feet, height not to exceed 25
feet.
3. Illumination. Either internal or external, but not both, subject to
the standards of Subsection 23-10.5k.
a. If the property is in a residential zone, the sign must conform to the sign
standards established for residential zoning.
b. If the property is in any zone other than residential, the sign must
conform to sign standards established for the zone in which the
property is located, as set forth in Subsection 23-10.6.
§ 23-10.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-10.8
AO:589
§ 23-10.9. Billboards.
a. Intent. It is the intent and purpose of this article that to the extent
practical, all existing signs not conforming to the provisions of this
article be eliminated or brought into conformity with the provisions of
this article.
b. Legal nonconforming signs. Any sign located within the Borough which
does not conform with the provisions of this article, but did conform
with the applicable laws and ordinances relating to signs at the time it
was erected, shall be deemed a "legal nonconforming" sign and may
continue in use until said sign loses its "legal nonconforming" status as
defined in Subsection c3 below.
c. Loss of "legal nonconforming" status. A legal nonconforming sign shall
immediately lose its "legal nonconforming" status if:
1. The sign is altered in any way in structure or size.
2. The sign is replaced.
3. Damage to the sign such that repair or restoration would exceed 1/
3 of the replacement value as of the date of said damage. Upon the
happening of any one of the above events, the sign shall be
immediately brought into compliance with this article, with a new
permit, in accordance with the provisions of this article, or shall be
immediately removed. Periodic maintenance, as required by
Subsection 23-10.5a, shall not be considered an alteration resulting
in the loss of a sign's "legal nonconforming" status.
a. Location restrictions.
1. Billboard signs shall be permitted along the Berlin-Cross Keys Road
(County route 689) and Blackwood Clementon Road (County Road
534) corridors in the following zones: GBD, and the LBD Districts.
2. Such billboard signs shall be positioned so that their sole intended
direction of visibility shall be from these roadways.
b. General regulations.
1. Billboard signs shall not be placed less than 3,000 feet from
another billboard within the Borough of Pine Hill.
2. Billboard signs are considered a permitted use as indicated in
Subsection a1 hereinabove subject to the following requirements
and regulations contained herein.
3. Billboard signs to be erected under these regulations shall be
buffered to restrict visibility from residential zones and residential
dwelling units. Specific buffers are further described in Subsection
23-10.9f.
§ 23-10.8 PINE HILL CODE § 23-10.9
AO:590
4. The minimum distance (spacing) between permitted locations of
billboards, being 3,000 feet, shall be measured along the nearest
edge of the pavement between points directly opposite the side of
the sign facing nearest the center line of the right-of-way of the
highway where the sign side shall be erected.
5. Double-faced-type billboard signs shall be permitted only under the
terms and conditions of this regulation.
6. No billboard signs shall be allowed that are painted on or attached
to railroad bridges, overhead bridges, or any other structure over
any highway or overhanging the highway, and within the right-ofway
of any highway.
7. Billboard illumination shall be in accordance with General
Regulations, Subsection 23-10.5ai4.
8. There shall be a minimum front yard setback established for the
underlying zoning district for structures/buildings. The front yard
shall be the portion of the lot facing either of the aforestated
roadways, the minimum feet per side yard setback shall be not less
than 20 feet from any proposed buffer, berm, or property line.
9. No billboard signs shall be permitted unless specifically authorized
by permit from the applicable agency of the State of New Jersey
having jurisdiction over outdoor advertising signs, where said
billboard signs shall be maintained within the State of New Jersey
or any department thereof right-of-way, or any portion of limited
access or unlimited access highways within the State of New
Jersey. This prohibition shall not apply to signs, public notices, or
markers erected or maintained by the Department of
Transportation, the County of Camden, or the Borough of Pine Hill.
10. No billboard sign shall interfere with the ability of an operator of a
motor vehicle to have a clear and unobstructed view of streets or
highways ahead, approaching, merging or intersecting traffic, or
official signs, signals or traffic control devices.
11. No billboard sign shall interfere with or contain advertisements
that resemble any official traffic sign, signal or device.
12. No billboard sign shall be painted, drawn, erected, or maintained
upon trees, or other natural features, or public utility poles.
13. No billboard sign shall be of a type, size or character or placed at a
location that will endanger or potentially injure public safety or
health or pose a physical threat to property in the vicinity thereof.
14. No billboard sign shall be permitted which advertise activities that
are illegal under federal, state or local law.
§ 23-10.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-10.9
AO:591
15. No billboard sign shall be permitted which have any animated or
moving parts or have reflectorized materials which may impair the
vision of a motorist.
16. Erection of billboard signs shall be considered as site development
and for which site plan approval is required.
17. Lighting shall not interfere with visibility of traffic signs or signals
or distract drivers attention, or direct glare upon residential uses.
18. Illumination of billboards shall be subject to specifications
contained in Subsection 23-10.5i herein.
c. Dimensional requirements.
1. No billboard sign may exceed a maximum width of 24 feet.
2. No billboard sign may exceed the maximum height of 22 feet from
ground level. Ground level shall be the lesser of the natural ground
level or the ground level before considering any berm or other
elevation on which the sign may be situated.
3. The maximum advertising surface shall not exceed an area
measured at 12 feet by 24 feet for each display area, with a
maximum of one display areas per side.
4. The maximum advertising surface area shall not exceed 288 square
feet for each display area.
5. Area not utilized for display, or boundary or border area, shall not
be calculated in the square footage of the advertising billboard
sign.
d. Time limits for securing permits and carrying out construction.
1. The applicant shall be required to secure a permit for the
construction of the billboard within one year from the Planning
Board approval of the plan. Thereafter, the proposed construction
shall be carried out within one year from the securing of the permit
unless good cause shall be shown to extend the time allowed.
2. Failure of the applicant to meet the above time constraint shall
nullify and void the approval of the billboard. Construction or
excavation undertaken or continued after the time limit of
expiration shall be a violation of this article. In such case the
violation shall be construed in accordance with this article.
e. Inspections.
1. All improvements associated with the project known as "billboard"
shall be subject to inspection and approved by the Borough
Engineer of the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 23-10.9 PINE HILL CODE § 23-10.9
AO:592
2. The applicant shall notify the Township official at least 24 hours
prior to the start of any construction and shall not pour, cover,
install or perform any work until such inspections have been
approved.
3. Utility work that may be completed by any public utility company
shall be regarded as an exception from this provision.
f. Landscaping. Landscaping standards which contain buffers for off-site
billboards shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the
following supplemental standards:
1. Billboards shall be suitably landscaped to improve the environment
of the site and surrounding area, and protect the general welfare of
the public, so that the sign shall be shielded by buffers, to limit
visibility from residential areas which may overlook the sign. Any
and all landscaping around the off-site billboard installation shall
be placed so that it will not obstruct sight distance along any street
frontage.
2. A conscious effort shall be made to preserve and incorporate the
existing vegetation on site, wherever possible. The area
underneath and around the billboard sign structure shall include a
landscaping bed containing evergreens and flowering materials.
The final spacing and species mixture shall be as approved by the
Planning Board Engineer, and be consistent with landscaping and
buffering standards contained in Subsection 23-9.5.
3. All plant material installed as part of a billboard planting screen
shall be maintained, and installation guaranteed for a period of two
years.
g. Application information. The application shall contain the information
set forth in Article VIII of this chapter for submission provisions and
procedures, § 23-8 applicable to site plans, accordingly.
h. Approval and review procedures.
1. A billboard use is permitted subject to the above restrictions and
regulations and subject to approval by the Planning Board that the
use can be provided in a manner that will minimize the impact upon
adjacent properties, and will conform with the additional standards
as provided in both municipal ordinances and the Administrative
Code of the State of New Jersey and applicable New Jersey
statutes.
2. Application and review procedures shall be consistent with
established application procedures provided for in this chapter and
consistent with provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law as
amended and/or supplemented, accordingly.
§ 23-10.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-10.9
AO:593
§ 23-10.10. Enforcement and Penalties.
i. Exterior maintenance and appearance. Any permanent sign and
billboard exposed to public view shall be maintained in good repair. Any
permanent sign or billboard which has weathered excessively or faded
or the paint on which has excessively peeled or cracked shall, with its
supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into a state of good
repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be repaired or
shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith. Permanent
signs and billboards shall not be located within a public right-of-way.
a. Enforcement. The enforcing official shall be appointed by the Mayor
and shall enforce the provisions of this article. Upon discovery of an
alleged violation of this article, the enforcing officer shall serve written
notice, either by personal service or certified mail, return receipt
requested, on the owner of the sign and/or the owner or leasee of the
property where the sign is located, ordering the sign to be brought into
conformity with provisions of this article, or its removal within 30 days
of the date of said notice, or seven days if the alleged violation concerns
a temporary sign. The notice shall include notification that if the sign is
not brought into conformity or removed within such time, a summons
and/or complaint will be issued. In the event the sign is not brought into
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, or removed, prior to the
30 days or seven days from the date of the notice, the enforcing official
shall cause a summons and/or complaint to be issued.
b. Summary removal.
1. In the event it shall be determined by the enforcing official that the
presence of any sign, either by reason of its construction, location
or lack of maintenance and repair, presents a hazard to the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough, the enforcing
official shall be empowered to immediately effectuate the removal
of the sign, and the expenses and costs of the removal shall be
borne by the owner of the sign and/or the owner or leasee of the
property upon which the sign is located.
2. In addition to any fine imposed hereunder, the sentencing court,
upon conviction, shall order the removal of the sign or the sign
being brought into conformity with the provisions of this article, at
the owner's sole expense.
§ 23-10.9 PINE HILL CODE § 23-10.10
AO:594
ARTICLE XI
Satellite Antennas
§ 23-11. SATELLITE REGULATIONS.
§ 23-11.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. XI]
In addition to the definitions listed in Article III of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
SATELLITE ANTENNA — Shall mean any apparatus or device, except a
traditional or conventional television antenna, designed and/or used for
receiving television, radio, microwave, satellite or similar signals. The term
shall include "satellite dish", "satellite dish antenna", "satellite television
antenna" and "satellite earth station antenna".
SATELLITE ANTENNA MOUNT OR MOUNT — Shall mean any base, stand,
platform, foundation, pole, extension, support or mount on or upon which
a satellite antenna is placed, affixed, attached, erected, extended,
constructed, mounted, or installed.
§ 23-11.2. Permits Required. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. XI]
No satellite antenna or satellite antenna mount shall be erected,
constructed, placed, located, mounted or installed on any lot or lands
within the Borough unless a zoning permit issued by the Zoning Officer
and a construction permit by the Construction Official shall first have been
obtained therefor. The zoning permit shall be a required prior approval
and condition precedent to the issuance of a construction permit by the
Construction Code Official and to the erection, construction, placement,
location, mounting or installation of a satellite antenna or satellite antenna
mount.
a. Application for Zoning Permit. Applications for the issuance of a zoning
permit for satellite antennae and satellite antenna mounts shall be
made on the form prescribed by the Zoning Officer which form shall
include:
1. Address or location and Tax Map block and lot numbers of the
premises on which the satellite antenna and mount are to be
installed.
2. Name and address of owner of the premises.
3. Name and address of person or contractor installing the satellite
antenna and mount.
4. Description of the satellite antenna and mount, including color,
size, dimensions, height, etc.
5. Attached sketch or plan of satellite antenna and mount showing
design with details of proposed manner of erection, construction
and installations.
§ 23-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11.2
AO:595
§ 23-11.3. Restrictions and Conditions. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. XI]
No satellite antenna or satellite antenna mount shall be installed or located
on any lot or lands within the Borough except in compliance and conformity
with all of the provisions and terms of this chapter.
6. Attached plot and plan or survey of lot showing existing structures,
proposed location of antenna and mount with all setback distances
and overall height from ground level indicated, and the location
and height of existing and proposed shrubs, trees, screening or
buffers.
7. Such other information as may be reasonably required and
necessary for Zoning Officer to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws, regulations,
codes and ordinances.
b. Application for Construction Permit. Application for the issuance of a
construction permit for satellite antenna and satellite antenna mounts
shall be made on the form prescribed by the Construction Official.
c. Fees.
1. Application for zoning permits shall be filed with the Zoning Officer
together with payment of a zoning permit fee in the sum of $10.
2. Application for a construction permit shall be filed with the
Construction Official together with payment of fees established
under the Construction Code.
a. Residential Districts.
1. Single-Family Dwellings. A satellite antenna shall be permitted as
an accessory residential use and structure on a lot which contains a
principal residential use and structure in the nature of a singlefamily
dwelling, subject to the following restrictions and
conditions:
(a) Not more than one satellite antenna per residential lot shall be
permitted.
(b) No satellite antenna shall be permitted or located on a vacant
lot.
(c) The satellite antenna shall be an accessory use structure to
that principal residential use and structure on the lot on which
it is situate, and shall not serve or be used in conjunction with
any principal use or structure on any other lot.
(d) The satellite antenna shall be black or earthtone in color or
effectively screened with black or earthtone colored mesh.
§ 23-11.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11.3
AO:596
(e) The diameter or width of a satellite antenna shall not exceed
8 1/2 feet.
(f) The overall height of a satellite antenna installed (including the
satellite antenna mount) shall not exceed 10 1/2 feet from
ground level.
(g) The satellite antenna shall be located in the rear yard of the lot
on which it is situate, behind the rear building line of the
principal structure.
(h) The satellite antenna shall be set back a minimum distance of
at least 10 feet from the rear and respective side property (lot)
lines.
(i) The satellite antenna shall not be located or permitted in the
front yard of any lot, nor in the case of a corner lot, in the side
yard abutting or adjoining a public street.
(j) The satellite antenna shall not be located or permitted to be
erected, constructed installed, mounted, attached or affixed to
the roof or other part of any building or structure.
(k) The satellite antenna shall not be located, erected,
constructed, installed or mounted as to constitute a danger or
hazard to any person or property.
(l) The satellite antenna shall be reasonably located, screened or
buffed so as not to be readily visible by persons standing on
ground level on an abutting public street or on an adjoining or
adjacent property.
2. Multifamily Dwelling Units (Townhouses and Apartments). A
satellite antenna shall be permitted as an accessory residential use
and structure on land which is common or association owned
property within a residential complex or development of
multifamily dwelling units, subject to the following restrictions and
conditions:
(a) No more than one satellite antenna per complex or
development shall be permitted irrespective of the number of
lots, the nature of ownership or the number of owners within
the complex or development.
(b) The satellite antenna shall be an accessory use and structure
to all principal residential uses and structures within the
complex or development wherein it is situate, and shall serve
all residents of the complex or development desiring said use,
but it shall not serve or be used in conjunction with any
principal use or structure in or on any other complex or
development or any lot not within the complex or development.
§ 23-11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11.3
AO:597
(c) The satellite antenna shall be black or earthtone in color or
effectively screened with black or earthtone colored mesh.
(d) The diameter or width of a satellite antenna shall not exceed
10 1/2 feet.
(e) The overall height of a satellite antenna installed (including the
satellite mount) shall not exceed 12 1/2 feet from the ground
level.
(f) The satellite antenna shall be located in the rear yard area
behind the rear of a principal structure on the common or
association owned land on which it is to be situate.
(g) The satellite antenna shall be set back a minimum distance of
at least 25 feet from the rear property line and respective side
property lines of the common or association lands on which it is
situate.
(h) The satellite antenna shall not be located or permitted in the
front yard of any common or association-owned lands, nor in
any side yard area which abuts a right-of-way, roadway or
street.
(i) The satellite antenna shall not be located or permitted in any
buffer area or zone of a complex or development.
(j) A satellite antenna shall be reasonably located, screened or
buffered so as not to be readily visible by persons standing on
ground level on any abutting right-of-way, roadway or street
from ground level on any adjoining or adjacent property.
(k) A satellite antenna shall not be located, erected, constructed,
installed or mounted as to constitute a danger or hazard to any
person or property.
(l) The satellite antenna shall not be located, erected,
constructed, installed, mounted, attached or affixed to the roof
or any other part of any building or structure within the
complex or development.
b. Other Zoning Districts.
1. Single Principal Use or Structure. A satellite antenna shall be
permitted in all other districts as an accessory use and structure on
a lot which contains a single principal use and structure, subject to
the following restrictions and conditions:
(a) No more than one satellite antenna per lot shall be permitted.
(b) No satellite antenna shall be permitted on a vacant lot.
(c) The satellite antenna shall be an accessory use and structure
only to that principal use and structure on the lot on which it is
§ 23-11.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11.3
AO:598
situate, and shall not serve or be used in conjunction with any
principal use or structure on any other lot.
(d) The satellite antenna shall be black or earthtone in color or
effectively screened with black or earthtone mesh.
(e) The diameter or width of a satellite antenna shall not exceed
8 1/2 feet.
(f) The overall height of a satellite antenna installed (including the
satellite antenna mount) shall not exceed 10 1/2 feet from
ground level.
(g) The satellite antenna shall be located in the rear yard of the lot
on which it is situate behind the rear of the principal structure.
(h) The satellite antenna shall not be located in any parking lot
area or buffer area or zone.
(i) The satellite antenna shall be set back a minimum distance of
at least 10 feet from the rear and respective side property (lot)
lines.
(j) The satellite antenna shall not be located or permitted in the
front yard of any lot, nor in the case of a corner lot, in the side
yard abutting or adjoining a public street.
(k) The satellite antenna shall not be located, erected,
constructed, installed or mounted as to constitute a danger or
hazard to any person or property.
(l) The satellite antenna shall be reasonably located, screened or
buffered so as not to be readily visible by persons standing on
ground level on an abutting public street or on an adjoining or
adjacent property.
(m) No satellite antenna shall be located or permitted to be
erected, constructed, installed, mounted, attached or affixed to
the roof or other part of any building or structure.
(n) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if it is clearly demonstrated
and shown to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that the
satellite antenna cannot be located in compliance with the
requirements in paragraphs (f) through (m) herein set forth, a
satellite antenna shall be permitted to be located, erected,
constructed, installed, mounted, attached or affixed to the roof
of the principal structure in accordance with the following
restrictions and conditions:
(1) Compliance with the requirements above set forth under
paragraphs (a) through (d).
§ 23-11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11.3
AO:599
(2) The diameter or width of the satellite antenna shall not
exceed five feet.
(3) The satellite antenna shall be located, erected,
constructed, installed, mounted, attached or affixed on or
to the rear 25% portion of the roof, away from any street or
right-of-way, so that it shall not be readily visible by
persons from the front.
(4) The height of the antenna shall not exceed the height of
eight feet above the highest part of the roof. In no event,
however, shall the height of the satellite antenna, when
mounted to the roof, exceed the maximum height
limitation applicable within the zoning district.
2. Multi-Tenant Properties, Complexes or Developments (Shopping
Centers, Shopping Malls and Commercial Offices and Industrial
Complexes or Developments). A satellite antenna shall be
permitted as an accessory use and structure on land which is
common or association-owned property within multi-tenant
properties, complexes or development, subject to the following
restrictions and conditions:
(a) No more than one satellite antenna per multi-tenant property,
complex or development shall be permitted irrespective of the
number of lots, the nature of ownership or the number of
owners within the multi-tenant property, complex or
development.
(b) The satellite antenna shall be an accessory use and structure
to all principal uses and structures within the multi-tenant
property, complex or development wherein it is situate, and
shall serve all tenants or occupants of said multi-tenant
property, complex or development desiring said use, but it shall
not serve or be used in conjunction with any principal use or
structure in or on any other multi-tenant property complex or
development or any lot not within the complex or development.
(c) The satellite antenna shall be black or earthtone in color or
effectively screened with black or earthtone color mesh.
(d) The diameter or width of a satellite antenna shall not exceed
10 1/2 feet.
(e) The overall height of a satellite antenna installed (including the
satellite mount) shall not exceed 12 1/2 feet from ground level.
(f) The satellite antenna shall be located in the rear yard area
behind the rear of a principal structure on the common or
association-owned land on which it is to be situate.
§ 23-11.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11.3
AO:600
(g) The satellite antenna shall be set back a minimum distance of
at least 25 feet from the rear property line and respective side
property lines of the common or association-owned land on
which it is situate.
(h) The satellite antenna shall not be located or permitted in the
front yard of any common or association-owned lands, nor in
any side yard areas which abut a right-of-way, roadway or
street.
(i) The satellite antenna shall not be located or permitted in any
buffer area or zone of a multi-tenant property, complex or
development.
(j) A satellite antenna shall be reasonably located, screened or
buffered so as not to be readily visible by persons standing on
ground level on any abutting right-of-way, roadway or street or
from ground level on any adjoining or adjacent property.
(k) A satellite antenna shall not be located, erected, constructed,
installed or mounted as to constitute a danger or hazard to any
person or property.
(l) The satellite antenna shall not be located, erected,
constructed, installed, mounted, attached or affixed to the roof
or any other part of any building or structure within the
multifamily property, complex or development.
(m) Notwithstanding the foregoing, if it is clearly demonstrated
and shown to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that the
satellite antenna cannot be located in compliance with the
requirements of paragraphs (e) through (l) herein set forth, a
satellite antenna shall be permitted to be located, erected,
constructed, installed, mounted, attached or affixed to the roof
of the principal structure in accordance with the following
restrictions and conditions:
(1) Compliance with the requirements above set forth under
paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (k).
(2) The diameter or width of the satellite antenna shall not
exceed five feet.
(3) The satellite antenna shall be located, erected,
constructed, installed, mounted, attached or affixed on or
to the rear 25% portion of the roof, away from any street or
right-of-way so that it shall not be readily visible by
persons from the front.
(4) The height of the antenna shall not exceed the height of
eight feet above the highest part of the roof. In no event,
however, shall the height of a satellite antenna, when roof
§ 23-11.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11.3
AO:601
mounted, exceed the maximum height limitation
applicable within the "zoning district".
§ 23-11.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11.3
AO:602
ARTICLE XIA
Sexually Oriented Businesses
§ 23-11A. SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
§ 23-11A.1. Statement of Policy. [Ord. No. 98-639 § 1]
These regulations are adopted in furtherance of all of the public purposes
of municipal zoning and planning, including, but not limited to, guiding
the appropriate use and development of the Borough of Pine Hill in a
manner which will promote the public health, safety, morals and general
welfare, and in order to meet the needs of citizens of the Borough of Pine
Hill and of the State of New Jersey, while maintaining the quality and
character of the Borough and deterring the growth and spread of blight
and crime, especially prostitution, sexual offenses, public indecencies and
related offenses. It is recognized there are some uses commonly known as
"adult uses" which, because of their very nature, are recognized as having
serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when such
uses are located near residential areas or in other inappropriate locations,
or without sufficient showing that such uses in a specified location will
comply with conditions and standards for location and operation of such
uses. Therefore, special regulation of these objectionable adult uses is
deemed necessary to insure that adverse effects will not contribute to the
blighting or downgrading of the Borough of Pine Hill. In no manner is the
fact that the Borough of Pine Hill regulates any or all of the adult uses
described herein, or prohibits or allows them in any respect, to be construed
as approval of, or condoning such uses.
§ 23-11A.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 98-639 § 2]
ADULT BOOK STORE — Shall mean an establishment, from which minors
are excluded, having a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade,
books, magazines, or other periodicals, films or other viewing material
or sexual paraphernalia which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matters depicting, describing or related to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein, or an
establishment in which a segment or section of the premises is diverted to
the sale, rental, display or viewing of such material.
ADULT MINI MOTION PICTURE/LIVE ENTERTAINMENT THEATER —
Shall mean an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons,
from which minors are excluded, used for presenting material, films,
movies, video or live shows, distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, for observation by patrons
therein. This definition shall also apply to an enclosed building which
contains any number of individual viewing booths not in excess of the
maximum permitted by separate ordinance of the Borough of Pine Hill, in
which a person may privately or individually view material, films, movies,
videos or live shows distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
§ 23-11A ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11A.2
AO:603
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas," as defined herein.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association, or other legal entity.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — Shall have the meaning as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.2A(1) and N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6a.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREA — Shall have the meaning set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.2A(3) and N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6c.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY — Shall have the meaning set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.2A(4) and N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6d.
§ 23-11A.3. Restrictions on Location. [Ord. No. 98-639 § 3]
a. No person shall operate an adult bookstore, similar adult use or a
sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of an existing adult
bookstore, similar adult use or sexually oriented business, or any
church, synagogue, temple or other place of public worship, or any
elementary or secondary school or any school bus stop, or any
municipal or county playground or place of public resort and
recreation, or within 1,000 feet of any area zoned for residential use or
within 1,000 feet of any premise licensed for the sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages. The foregoing distance limitation shall be
measured by a straight line drawn from the nearest point of the lot
boundary on which the proposed adult bookstore, adult use or sexually
oriented business is to be located to the nearest point of the lot or
district boundary, as the case may be, of the other use or district, and
such uses, district boundary lines and dimensions shall be indicated on
a submitted plan by the person making an application for license to
conduct such adult use.
b. Such adult use must be located in a freestanding building which will
include a buffer zone to separate it from all other businesses, said
perimeter buffer being at least 50 feet in width with plantings, fence or
other physical divider along the outside of the perimeter sufficient to
impede the view of the interior of the premises in which the business is
located.
c. Off-street parking shall be provided at the ratio required pursuant to
the Borough of Pine Hill Zoning and Land Use and Development
Ordinances.
d. Any sign shall meet the requirements specified for retail/commercial
businesses in the Borough of Pine Hill Zoning and Land Use and
Development Ordinances, however, no "specified anatomical areas" or
"specified sexual activity" shall be shown, described or displayed on any
sign, advertisement or exhibit that is visible from the outside of the
building premises.
§ 23-11A.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11A.3
AO:604
§ 23-11A.4. Licensing of Adult Book Stores, Similar Adult Uses and
Sexually Oriented Businesses. [Ord. No. 98-639 § 4]
e. The interior of the adult use building shall be designed so that no
interior contents of the building are visible at any time from the outside
through windows, door openings or in any other manner.
f. The interior of any building in which an adult use is located shall be
adequately lighted and ventilated and shall be constructed so that every
portion thereof is readily visible without obstruction to the Clerk or
other person in charge of the building from the counter, booth, cash
register or other place where such Clerk or employee is normally
situated.
g. All applicable BOCA Code requirements, applicable health, safety and
welfare ordinance requirement and other applicable Zoning and Land
Use and Development Ordinance requirements shall be satisfied by the
applicant.
a. No person shall maintain, operate or conduct an adult use business as
defined herein without having first obtained a license for such use.
b. An application for such a license under this article shall be made to the
Borough Clerk on forms to be supplied for this purpose and shall be
subscribed and sworn to by the applicant. The application for the
license shall contain the following:
1. Name and address of the owner of the premises. The name and
address of the applicant if different than the owner, i.e., lessee.
2. Name under which the business is to be operated.
3. Detailed description of the type of adult use business to be
conducted on the premises.
4. Hours of operation.
5. Information indicating whether the applicant has ever been
convicted or pleaded guilty to a crime relating to narcotics or a
controlled dangerous substance as defined in the Statutes of the
State of New Jersey, or a crime pertaining to gambling or gambling
in violation of the Statutes of the State of New Jersey, or a crime
involving moral turpitude.
6. Plan showing distance from other uses/zoning as provided in
Subsection 23-11A.3.
7. In the case of an adult use which contains viewing booths, seats,
coin operated machines or similar devices, a separate application
shall be filed pursuant the Borough Ordinance "To License and
Regulate Automatic Amusement Devices."34
§ 23-11A.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11A.4
AO:605
§ 23-11A.5. Additional Regulations Governing Adult Uses. [Ord. No.
98-639 § 5]
Every licensee of an adult use as defined in this article shall comply with the
following regulations as applicable:
8. Every application for a license to engage in an adult use of the type
governed by this article shall be filed at least 30 days prior to the
date on which the operation is proposed to commence.
a. The licensed premises and all activities conducted therein shall in all
respects comply with the laws of the State of New Jersey and the
ordinances of the Borough of Pine Hill.
b. No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to any licensed
premises at any time for any purpose. Licensee shall conspicuously post
a sign giving notice of this regulation.
c. The license to conduct said adult business shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises.
d. The hours of operation for an adult use as defined in this article shall
not be earlier than 9:00 a.m. nor later than 12:00 midnight, prevailing
time on weekdays and Saturday. All licensed premises shall be closed
on Sundays.
e. No smoking is permitted in any adult mini motion picture/live
entertainment theater at any time. No consumption of alcoholic
beverages is permitted at any time in any adult use as defined in this
article.
f. No licensee shall cause or permit any premise licensed under this
article to be operated in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12, or as defined pursuant to the ordinances of
the Borough of Pine Hill.
g. All licensed premises with coin operated machine or machines or other
similar type of devices shall only be permitted by issuance of a separate
currently valid license by the Borough of Pine Hill pursuant to its
ordinance "To License and Regulate Automatic Amusement Devices."35
h. Any police officer, Uniform Construction Code or Subcode Official, any
Zoning Officer, any Property Maintenance Officer, or similar authorized
official of the Borough of Pine Hill shall be authorized to enter such
licensed premises at any time for purposes of inspection and/or
enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance and the laws of the
State of New Jersey and the ordinance of the Borough of Pine Hill as
applicable.
34.Editor's Note: Licensing of amusement devices as codified in § 4-6 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Borough of Pine Hill.
35.Editor's Note: Licensing of amusement devices as codified in § 4-6 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Borough of Pine Hill.
§ 23-11A.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11A.6
AO:606
§ 23-11A.6. Fees. [Ord. No. 98-639 § 6]
§ 23-11A.7. License Term: Transferability: Renewal. [Ord. No.
98-639 § 7]
§ 23-11A.8. Approval or Disapproval of Application. [Ord. No.
98-639 § 7]
a. The application fee for a license shall be $100.
b. All adult bookstore, similar adult uses or sexually oriented businesses
shall be required to pay an annual fee for the license of $100. The fee is
in lieu of the mercantile license fee and represents the fair cost for
administering the regulation of such adult uses.
a. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be for a term of one
year, commencing on January 1st and expiring on December 31st, of the
year of issuance. License fee shall be pro rated for such use
commencing less than one year from the date of January 1st.
b. A license may not be transferred from one owner/applicant without the
filing of an application by the new owner/applicant with the Borough
pursuant to the requirements of this ordinance. There shall be a fee of
$100 for all transfers.
c. All licenses are required to be renewed annually by submission of the
applicable fee as set forth in this article.
a. Upon receipt of an application for an adult use as described in this
article, the governing body for the Borough of Pine Hill shall proceed to
consider the application, and shall either approve or disapprove the
issuance of a license to said applicant.
b. The decision of the governing body for the Borough of Pine Hill in
approving or disapproving this application shall be taken no later than
the second regular meeting of the governing body following submission
of the application and payment of the required fees by the applicant. A
failure to take such action within such time by the governing body shall
constitute an approval of the application. An application shall not be
considered complete, and no action shall be taken thereon, until the
license fee shall have been paid.
c. If the application is approved, the governing body shall authorize the
Borough Clerk to issue the necessary license. If the application is
disapproved, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the disapproval
and the reasons therefor. The applicant, upon being advised of the
denial of his application, may within 10 days of denial, request in
writing a hearing before the governing body, at which time the
applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to dispute or disprove the
reasons for said denial at the hearing provided. The applicant may be
represented by an attorney at said hearing. The governing body shall
either affirm or deny the application within 15 days after the date of the
§ 23-11A.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11A.8
AO:607
§ 23-11A.9. Revocation of License. [Ord. No. 98-639 § 8]
§ 23-11A.10. Applicability to Existing Adult Uses. [Ord. No. 98-639
§ 9]
This article shall not apply to existing adult uses, except for the following:
§ 23-11A.11. Penalty. [Ord. No. 98-639 § 10]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction for such violation, be fined a sum not exceeding
$1,000 or committed to the county jail for a term not exceeding 30 days, or
both, at the discretion of the Court.
hearing unless there is an extension of time agreed to by both the
applicant and the governing body.
a. At any time after the granting of a license under this article, the
governing body for the Borough of Pine Hill in the exercise of its
reasonable discretion, may revoke the license if it is determined a
violation of any of the following has occurred.
1. False or misrepresented information on the application furnished
by the applicant.
2. Failure to maintain premises in accordance with the laws of the
State of New Jersey, or the ordinances of the Borough of Pine Hill.
3. Violation of the article regulating adult uses.
4. Such other valid causes as may be determined by the governing
body.
Upon being advised of a revocation of a license, the licensee may
request a hearing and be afforded an opportunity to dispute or
disprove the reasons for said revocation at said hearing. The
licensee shall request said hearing within 14 days of the notice
of revocation. The licensee may be represented by an attorney at
said hearing. The governing body shall either affirm or reverse its
decision in revoking said license within 15 days of the date of said
hearing, unless there is an extension of time agreed to by both the
licensee and the governing body.
a. Payment of annual fee for licensing an adult use.
b. Posting of license and notice to minors.
c. Compliance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, and the ordinance
of the Borough of Pine Hill as relate to the BOCA Code, general health,
safety and welfare regulations, and zoning and land use and
development regulations, as applicable to the existing licensed
premise/operation.
§ 23-11A.8 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11A.12
AO:608
§ 23-11A.12. Separate Violations. [Ord. No. 98-639 § 11]
Each and every day in which a violation of any provision of this article exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 23-11A.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11A.12
AO:609

ARTICLE XIB
Stormwater Control
§ 23-11B. STORMWATER CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT.
§ 23-11B.1. Scope and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-779 § 1]
a. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity, and groundwater
recharge.
b. Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in Subsection 23-11B.2.
c. Applicability.
1. This article shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This article shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Borough of Pine Hill.
d. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this article are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this article shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This article
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different
§ 23-11B ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.1
AO:611
§ 23-11B.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-779 § 2]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Shall mean those areas within
boundaries accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — Shall mean the geographic depiction of the
boundaries for Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and
CAFRA Nodes pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — Shall mean the increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — Shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Shall mean an agency designated by the
County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Shall mean a person professionally qualified and
duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and preparation
of drawings and specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — Shall mean a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
(1) A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
(2)
§ 23-11B.1 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.2
AO:612
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agricultural
lands, development means: any activity that requires a State permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — Shall mean a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — Shall mean a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and
conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — Shall mean an area or feature
which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge
areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using
the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a surface that has been covered with
a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — Shall mean the process by which water seeps into the soil
from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any "development" that provides
for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean any city, Borough, town, Township, or village.
NODE — Shall mean an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — Shall mean a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of organisms.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, Borough of Pine Hill, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 23-11B.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.2
AO:613
POLLUTANT — Shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the
State, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both
hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — Shall mean the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Shall mean solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Shall mean the lot or lots upon which a major development is to
occur or has occurred.
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — Shall mean an area delineated on the State
Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is
intended to be the focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and
revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Shall mean the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the Official Map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Shall mean an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin), or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Shall mean any structural
or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Shall mean water flow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
§ 23-11B.2 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.2
AO:614
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Shall mean a flood hazard area, which
may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— Shall mean a neighborhood given priority access to State resources
through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — Shall mean a zone designated by the New
Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban
Enterprise Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Shall mean previously developed
portions of areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — Shall mean an area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 23-11B.3. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2006-779 § 3]
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(1)
(2) Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
(3) Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
(4)
a. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in Subsection 23-11B.4. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design.
If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this article apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
§ 23-11B.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.3
AO:615
§ 23-11B.4. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major
Development. [Ord. No. 2006-779 § 4]
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to
new major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
a. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with Subsection 23-11B.10.
b. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
c. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections 23-11B4f and g.
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
d. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections 23-11B4f, and g may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections 2-11B4f and g to the
maximum extent practicable;
§ 23-11B.3 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.4
AO:616
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections 23-11B4f and g, existing structures currently in use,
such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under paragraph d3 above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
Subsections 23-11B4f and g that were not achievable on site.
e. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsections
23-11B4f and g shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth at Subsection
23-11B4e into the design. The applicant shall identify the
nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the project.
If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering,
environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in paragraph 2 below
into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify
the strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post-construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
§ 23-11B.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.4
AO:617
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection 23-11B4e3 below;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under Subsection 23-11B4e2(i)(2)
above shall comply with the following standard to control passage
of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see Subsection
23-11B4e3(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or is
no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
§ 23-11B.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.4
AO:618
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than
2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection 23-11.4g1 are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection 23-11B4g1; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections
23-11B4f and g shall be dedicated to a government agency,
subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the appropriate
County Clerk's office, or subject to an approved equivalent
restriction that ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater
management measure approved by the reviewing agency is
maintained in perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Subsection 23-11B7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
§ 23-11B.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.4
AO:619
f. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This paragraph contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at Subsection 23-11B5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from pre-construction to post-construction for the
two-year storm is infiltrated.
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to paragraph (3) below.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
§ 23-11B.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.4
AO:620
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at Subsection 23-11B5,
complete one of the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
§ 23-11B.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.4
AO:621
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to
be constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to
post-construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with paragraphs (1), (2) and (3)
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at Subsection 23-11B.2 shall be
submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review
and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section
and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of
this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
g. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
§ 23-11B.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.4
AO:622
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Subsection 23-11B.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual
and other sources of technical guidance are listed in Subsection
23-11B.7. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and
§ 23-11B.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.4
AO:623
methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design
engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of
these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of
any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal
rate shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See Subsection 23-11B6c
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
4. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
§ 23-11B.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.4
AO:624
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections 23-11B4f and
g.
6. Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in Subsection 23-11B.7.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the center line of the waterway where
the bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph (1) above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
§ 23-11B.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.4
AO:625
encroachments proposed under this subparagraph shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal
rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection 23-11B4g8 has been approved
by the Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water
§ 23-11B.4 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.4
AO:626
§ 23-11B.5. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater
Recharge. [Ord. No. 2006-779 § 5]
resource protection area requirements for that waterway. A
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
paragraph g8 shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in paragraph g8(a)(1) above. In
no case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the
reduction of the Special Water Resource Protection Area to
less than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway
subject to this subsection.
(e) Paragraph g8 does not apply to the construction of one)
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
a. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection 23-11B5a1(a) and the
Rational and Modified Rational Methods at Subsection
23-11B5a1(b). A runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land
cover for an existing condition may be used on all or a portion of
the site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition
has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five years
without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than
one land cover have existed on the site during the five years
immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the
lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In
addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good
hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park),
with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good
§ 23-11B.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.5
AO:627
§ 23-11B.6. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures. [Ord. No. 2006-779 § 6]
hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land use
type is cultivation).
3. In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
b. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
a. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
§ 23-11B.5 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.6
AO:628
§ 23-11B.7. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Ord. No. 2006-779
§ 7]
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of
the water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the
water quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure
shall be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of
the orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of Subsection 23-11B8b.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
Subsection 23-11B8.
b. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by
Subsection 23-11B.4 of this article.
c. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of Subsection 23-11B.4 of this article, provided the pollutant removal
rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
a. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at paragraphs 1 and 2 below, which are
available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
§ 23-11B.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.7
AO:629
§ 23-11B.8. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
[Ord. No. 2006-779 § 8]
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
b. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, (732)932-9306; and
3. The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
a. This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This subsection applies to any new stormwater management basin.
b. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
§ 23-11B.7 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.8
AO:630
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
3. For purposes of this paragraph 3, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection 23-11B8c a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
See Subsection 23-11B8d for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
c. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
d. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
§ 23-11B.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.8
AO:631
§ 23-11B.9. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
[Ord. No. 2006-779 § 9]
a. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this article, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at Subsection 23-11B9c below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this article.
3. The applicant shall submit [the number of copies required for
application for subdivision or site plan approval] copies of the
materials listed in the checklist for site development stormwater
plans in accordance with Subsection 23-11B9c of this article.
b. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this article.
c. Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required:
1. Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
§ 23-11B.8 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.9
AO:632
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
2. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Subsections
23-11B3 through 23-11B6 are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality
and stormwater quantity problems at the source by land
management and source controls whenever possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
§ 23-11B.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.9
AO:633
§ 23-11B.10. Maintenance and Repair. [Ord. No. 2006-779 § 10]
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in Subsection 23-11B.4 of this
article.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Subsection 23-11B.10.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this article may, in
consultation with the Municipal Engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsections 23-11B9c3 through 23-1B9c6 of
this article when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on
the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
a. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in Subsection 23-11B1c of this article
shall comply with the requirements of Subsection 23-11B10b and
c.
b. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
§ 23-11B.9 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.10
AO:634
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility
for maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 23-11B10b2 above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on Subsection
23-11B10b7 below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for
each property on which the maintenance described in the
maintenance plan must be undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 23-11B10b2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 23-11B10b2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of
the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and
the deed as needed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 23-11B10b2 above shall retain and make available,
upon request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection 23-11B10b6
and b7 above.
9. The requirements of Subsection 23-11B10b3 and b4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
§ 23-11B.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11B.10
AO:635
§ 23-11B.11. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-779 § 11]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this article shall be
subject to the following penalties: $500 per day.
§ 23-11B.12. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2006-779 § 12]
This article shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the County
Review Agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the Article by the County
Review Agency if the County Review Agency should fail to act.
§ 23-11B.13. Severability. [Ord. No. 2006-779 § 13]
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this article.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
c. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 23-11B.10 PINE HILL CODE § 23-11B.13
AO:636
ARTICLE XII
Repeal of Conflicting Provisions
§ 23-12. REPEALER. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. XII]
All sections of any ordinance of the Borough of Pine Hill which contain
provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and are hereby
to the extent of such inconsistency repealed.
§ 23-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-12
AO:637

ARTICLE XIII
Severability of Provisions
§ 23-13. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. XIII]
Should any section, phrase or word contained in this chapter be found to be
illegal, unconstitutional, inconsistent with the intent of Chapter 291 of the
Laws of 1975 or in any other respect of no force or effect, then that finding
shall apply only to the particular section, phrase or word which is subject of
the finding and shall not affect the validity of any other section, phrase or
word within this chapter.
§ 23-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-13
AO:639

ARTICLE XIV
Effective Date
§ 23-14. WHEN EFFECTIVE. [Ord. No. 95-588 Art. XIV]
This chapter shall take effect upon hearing and publication according to law.
§ 23-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-14
AO:641
Chapter LULDL
LAND USE DISPOSITION LIST
§ LULDL-1. LAND USE DISPOSITION LIST.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Description Supp. No.
2014-923 12-1-2014 Amends Ch. 23, Land Use; hospitals,
medical clinics, medical and health
centers, nursing homes and
sanitoriums-add to 23-7.10.1, GBD
District; delete from 23-7.10.2, LBD
District; 23-7.10.3, CBD District;
23-7.10.4, IND District; 23-7.11.1, I
District
6
2018-966 8-20-2018 Amends Ch. 23 Land Use, 23-3.2
Definitions, 23-7.4 Zoning Permits;
23-7.8.8 Utility Sheds; adds
23-7.8.8.1 Tents and Carports
8
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-976 3-18-2019 Sign Regulations
Amendment
§ 23-10 9
§ 23-14 PINE HILL CODE § LULDL-1
AO:642