Chapter 001
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 001.01. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Pequannock
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Council of the
Township of Pequannock, consisting of Chapters 1 through 189, together
with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as
the "Code of the Township of Pequannock," hereinafter known and referred
to as the "Code."
§ 001.02. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 001.03. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 001.04. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Pequannock by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided
by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 001.05. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Pequannock"
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments, or supplements to
the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
001:1
§ 001.06. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Pequannock, pursuant to law, shall cause to
be published, in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this adopting ordinance, coupled with the availability of
copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 001.07. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the
Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in said
Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 001.08. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Township
Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 001.09. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code in any manner whatsoever
which will cause the law of the Township of Pequannock to be
misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or part of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than
$1,000, or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 001.10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or part thereof to
be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to
affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
§ 001.11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
§ 001.06 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 001.11
001:2
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 001.12. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this ordinance and not
contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the effective date of this
adopting ordinance, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 001.13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to . . .
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement, or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
§ 001.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 001.13
001:3
§ 001.14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as part
of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical changes and
other minor changes were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the
intention of the Township Council that all such changes be adopted as part
of the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
Chapter 003
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 003.01. Title; Definitions; Hours; Bonds; Records.
§ 003.01.010. Title.
This chapter shall be known and designated as the "Administrative Code."
§ 003.01.020. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CHARTER — The pertinent provisions of the Optional Municipal Charter
Law of the state governing Council-Manager Plan E under which this
Township's government is constituted, and such provisions of general law as
are applicable to such form of government and under which this Township
derives its governmental powers.
DEPARTMENT — An organization unit of the Township government
established or designated by this chapter as a department, and any agency
or instrumentality of the Township government not allocated or assigned to
such an organization unit.
§ 003.01.030. Office hours for Township offices.
The public, administrative and executive business offices of the Township
shall be open for the transaction of public business daily, except Saturday
and Sunday and legal holidays, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30
p.m. The Police Department, Maintenance Division of the Department of
Public Works and other departments in times of emergency shall provide
Township services for 24 hours a day as heretofore provided. The Township
Manager or a department head may require any officer or employee to be
in attendance for work whenever he determines that a public exigency or
emergency so requires.
§ 003.02. Organization and Procedure.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
§ 001.13 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.02.010
001:4
§ 003.02.010. Mayor and Deputy Mayor.
§ 003.02.020. Regular meetings.
The Township Council shall meet annually for organization at 2:00 p.m.
(or such hour as may be fixed at a previous regular or special meetings
of the Township Council) on the first day of January unless that day is
a Sunday, in which case it shall meet on the next succeeding day, and
regularly thereafter on the second Tuesday of each month at 7:30 p.m.,
unless the time or date is otherwise changed by resolution adopted at a
previous regular or special meeting. When the time for any regular meeting
of the Township Council falls on a legal holiday or one prescribed by law,
such meeting shall be held at the same hour on the next succeeding day
which is not a legal holiday unless changed as prescribed above.
§ 003.02.030. Special meetings.
A. Selection.
(1) On the first day of January of each year, or within seven days
thereafter, the Township Council shall meet for organization at the
usual place of meeting and organize and elect one of its members
as Mayor. The Mayor shall be chosen by ballot by majority vote of
all members of the Council. If the members cannot agree on the
selection of a Mayor, the selection will be dictated by N.J.S.A.
40:69A-86.
(2) The Council shall, on the same date and under the same procedure,
designate a Deputy Mayor from among its members to serve in the
event of temporary absence or disability of the Mayor.
(3) The Council shall fill any vacancy in the office of Mayor or Deputy
Mayor which may occur in accordance with the Charter.
B. Powers and duties. The Mayor shall have such powers and duties as are
vested in him by ordinance, the Charter and general law. The Mayor
shall preside at all meetings of the Council and shall have a voice and
vote in its proceedings. All bonds, notes, deeds, contracts and written
obligations of the Township shall be executed in its behalf by the Mayor,
or, in the event of his inability to act, the Deputy Mayor shall be
authorized to fulfill such functions.
A. The Mayor may at any time, and upon written request of any three
Council members, call a special meeting. The call for such a special
meeting shall specify the purpose of the meeting, and no other business
shall be transacted at any such special meeting. The Mayor's call for
such a special meeting shall be filed with the Clerk at least 72 hours
prior to the time for which the meeting is called. The Clerk shall
forthwith provide notice in accordance with the Open Public Meetings
Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.) and shall also give notice by telephone or
telegraph to each Council member at such place as each member shall
§ 003.02.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.02.030
001:5
§ 003.02.040. Procedures and conduct of meetings.
The order of business, agenda, conduct of meetings, procedure, decorum
and any and all matters pertaining to the functions of the Council and the
carrying out of Township business at regular and special meetings shall be
determined and prescribed by resolution of the Council.
§ 003.02.050. Governing rules.
Except as may be provided in the Charter and the Administrative Code,
questions of order, methods or organization and the conduct of business of
the Council shall be governed by the latest revised edition of Robert's Rules
of Order.
§ 003.02.060. Agenda.
The agenda for each meeting shall be prepared by the Clerk in accordance
with regulations adopted by resolution of the Council each year. Such
regulations shall conform to the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6
et seq.).
§ 003.03. Township Clerk.
§ 003.03.010. Appointment of Township Clerk; term; qualifications.
The Township Clerk shall be appointed by the Township Council for a threeyear
term effective January 1 of the year of appointment in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:46-7 et seq. The Township Clerk shall, prior to appointment, be
qualified by training and experience to perform the duties of the office. The
Township Clerk shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by
ordinance.
§ 003.03.020. Duties as Clerk of Council.
The Township Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Township Council. He shall
keep a journal of the proceedings of the Township Council and shall engross
all ordinances and all resolutions of a permanent character in books to be
provided for that purpose. After each ordinance, he shall also engross and
certify the proof of publication thereof as required by law. Each ordinance
have previously designated for that purpose. The Clerk shall further
cause the Township police to serve a written copy of the call for a
meeting upon each Council member by delivery of a copy to his usual
place of abode at least 48 hours before the time set for such meeting.
Proof of delivery of such written notice shall be announced at the
commencement of any such meeting.
B. The Council, by direct vote, straw vote, or telephone poll, may by
majority agreement schedule a special meeting, provided all provisions
of the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.) are complied
with.
§ 003.02.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.03.020
001:6
and resolution so engrossed shall be signed by the Mayor and the Township
Clerk, who shall attest that it was duly adopted upon a date stated pursuant
to law, and when so signed, the engrossed copy shall be deemed to be a
public record of the ordinance or resolution. Any omission by the Township
Clerk or the Mayor to engross, sign or certify as herein required shall not
impair or affect the validity of any ordinance which has been duly adopted.
§ 003.03.030. Custodian of records.
The Township Clerk shall have custody of and shall safely keep all records,
books and documents of the Township, except such as shall be committed
by Charter or ordinance to any other office or be transferred thereto by
resolution of the Township Council. He shall, upon request and upon the
payment of the fees prescribed therefor by resolution of the Township
Council for the use of the Township, furnish a certified copy of any such
paper in his custody, under the Corporate Seal of the Township.
§ 003.03.040. Corporate Seal.
The Township Clerk shall cause the Corporate Seal of the Township to
be affixed to instruments and writings when authorized to do so by any
ordinance or resolution of the Township Council, or when necessary to
exemplify any document on record in his office, or to certify any act of paper,
which from the records in his office shall appear to have been a public act
of the Township or a public document. He shall not affix the Seal or cause
or permit it to be affixed to any instrument or writing or other paper, except
as in this section provided, unless required to do so by law or ordinance.
§ 003.03.050. Depository for bonds, contracts, insurance policies
and leases.
The Township Clerk shall be the depository and custodian of all official
surety bonds furnished by or on account of any Township officer or
employee, except his own bond, which shall be placed in the custody of
the Township Treasurer; and all formal contracts for work, labor services,
supplies, equipment and materials to which the Township may be a part.
The Township Clerk shall also have custody of all leases of property owned
by the Township. The Township Clerk shall also be the depository for and
have custody of all performance bonds running to the Township as obligee,
or any other form of security given by any contractor, subdivision developer
or other person on account of work done or to be done in or for the
Township.
§ 003.03.060. Administrative duties.
In addition to such other functions, powers and duties as may be prescribed
by the Charter and this chapter, the Township Clerk shall:
A. Perform all of the functions required of Municipal Clerks by the General
Election Law and any other law or ordinance and receive the fees
prescribed therefor.
§ 003.03.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.03.060
001:7
§ 003.03.070. Additional duties.
The Township Clerk shall have such other different and additional functions,
powers and duties as may be prescribed by law, this chapter or other
Township ordinances.
§ 003.04. Deputy Township Clerk.
§ 003.04.020. Powers and duties of Deputy Township Clerk.
The Deputy Township Clerk shall act in the place and stead of the Township
Clerk in the event of his absence or disability and shall have such other
duties and powers as may be prescribed by law.
§ 003.05. Township Attorney.
§ 003.05.010. Appointment of Township Attorney; term;
qualifications.
There shall be a Township Attorney appointed by the Township Council for a
term of one years from January 1 of the year of his appointment and until his
successor has been appointed. He need not be a resident of the Township.
He shall be an attorney at law in the State of New Jersey.
§ 003.05.020. Compensation of Township Attorney.
The Township Attorney shall receive compensation as provided by
ordinance and/or a professional services agreement in accordance with the
Local Public Contracts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq., and all regulations
promulgated pursuant thereto.
§ 003.05.030. Powers and duties of Township Attorney.
The duties of the Township Attorney shall be such as are prescribed by
Charter, general law, this chapter and other Township ordinances. In
addition, he shall give legal counsel to the Township Council, the Township
B. Administer the provisions of this chapter and other Township
ordinances with reference to the several trades, occupations and
activities for which licenses are required by law or ordinance to be
obtained from the Township Clerk.
C. Issue such licenses as may be authorized by the Township Council
pursuant to the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Law and this chapter.
D. Perform such functions as are vested in the Municipal Clerk by state
law and ordinances relating to bingo and raffle licensing.
E. Issue certificates as to approval of land subdivisions by the Township
Planning Board of the Township Council pursuant to the State
Municipal Planning Act.
§ 003.03.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.05.030
001:8
Manager, department heads and other boards, committees, etc., where
appropriate.
§ 003.05.040. Appointment of firm.
The Township Council may, in lieu of appointing an individual, appoint a firm
of attorneys, the partners of which have the qualifications herein provided.
§ 003.06. Township Manager.
The Township Manager shall be appointed by the Township Council in the
manner and subject to the qualifications prescribed by the Charter. He
shall receive such annual compensation as shall be provided in the Salary
Ordinance.
§ 003.06.020. Acting Manager.
The Township Manager may designate a qualified administrative officer
of the Township to perform his duties during his temporary absence or
disability. In the event of his failure to make such designation, the Township
Council may, by resolution, appoint an officer of the Township to perform
the duties of the Township Manager during such absence or disability until
he shall return or his disability shall cease.
§ 003.06.030. General duties of Township Manager.
The Township Manager shall:
§ 003.06.040. Duties relative to budget.
The Township Manager shall:
A. Supervise the administration of all departments of the Township
government and be responsible for the maintenance of sound
personnel, policies and administrative practices.
B. Approve all bills, purchase orders and/or vouchers for payment, subject
to audit and control as provided in this chapter.
C. Maintain a continuing review and analysis of budget operations, work
programs and costs of municipal services.
D. Maintain all personnel records, vacation and sick leave schedules and
records.
E. Study the government and administrative operations and need of the
Township government and prepare and recommend to the Township
Council necessary and desirable plans and programs with respect
thereto.
F. Attend all meetings of the Township Council and perform such other
duties as the Township Council may prescribe.
§ 003.05.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.06.040
001:9
§ 003.07. Township Treasurer.
§ 003.07.010. Appointment of Township Treasurer; powers and
duties.
There shall be a Township Treasurer appointed by the Township Manager.
The Township Manager may serve as the Township Treasurer and appoint
a Deputy Treasurer as prescribed by law. He shall have and perform all the
powers and duties prescribed under the Optional Municipal Charter Law,
general law, this chapter or other ordinances of the Township.
§ 003.08. Collector of Taxes.
§ 003.08.010. Appointment of Tax Collector; term; powers and
duties.
There shall be a Collector of Taxes appointed by the Township Manager, who
shall hold office for a term of four years from January 1 of the year of the
appointment. The Collector of Taxes shall have, perform and exercise all of
the functions, powers and duties as are provided by the Optional Municipal
Charter Law, general law, this chapter and other Township ordinances and
in addition thereto shall assume the duties of collector of assessments and
tax title searcher.
§ 003.09. Township Engineer.
§ 003.09.010. Appointment of Township Engineer; compensation.
There shall be a Township Engineer appointed by the Township Manager
who may also serve as Director of the Department of Public Works. In the
event that a qualified professional engineer is not available for appointment
as Township Engineer/Director of Public Works, then the Township Manager
shall appoint a consulting engineer who shall be paid a retainer and
reasonable fees as approved by the Township Council.
A. Be responsible for the preparations of the budget document and the
compilation and analysis of budget costs and estimates.
B. Conduct pre-budget public hearings during the month of November in
each year, during which each department head shall have an
opportunity to present and justify his budget requests.
C. Prepare the forms, schedules and exhibits for each annual budget upon
the basis of departmental requests and the budget hearings which he
conducts and within such policy guides as may be prescribed by
resolution of the Township Council.
D. Prepare the annual budget for introduction in such form and with such
explanatory statements and schedules, consistent with the Local
Budget Law, as the Township Council shall approve.
§ 003.06.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.09.020
001:10
§ 003.09.020. Township Engineer powers and duties.
The Township Engineer shall:
§ 003.10. Tax Assessor.
§ 003.10.010. Appointment of Tax Assessor; term; powers and
duties; clerical assistance.
The Township Council shall appoint a Tax Assessor for a four year term
effective July 1 of the year his appointment. The Assessor shall perform
all duties and have all the powers which are assigned to the Assessor by
general law, this chapter or other ordinances of the Township. The Township
Manager may appoint such clerical assistance as may be deemed necessary
for the effective administration of the Assessor's function.
§ 003.11. Township Auditor.
§ 003.11.010. Appointment of Township Auditor; term;
compensation.
There shall be a Township Auditor, appointed by the Township Council, who
shall hold office for a term of two years from January 1 of the year of
appointment and until a successor is appointed. The Township Auditor shall
receive such compensation as may be hereafter determined and approved
by the Township Council.
§ 003.11.020. Qualifications of Township Auditor; appointment of
firm.
The Township Auditor shall be a registered municipal accountant of the
state and need not be a resident of the Township. In lieu of appointing an
individual auditor, the Council may appoint a firm of auditors, each member
of which shall be a registered municipal accountant of the state.
A. Prepare all plans and specifications for public works and improvements
undertaken by the Township, either on force account or by contract.
B. Provide and maintain maps, plans and specifications, surveys and
records with respect to public property, works and facilities owned or
operated by the Township government.
C. Provide engineering services to the various departments, boards and
agencies of the Township, as directed by the Township Council,
Township Manager, ordinances or other authorized authority.
D. Issue such certificates as may be necessary and approve all bills with
respect to work performed under his supervision.
E. Prepare plans and specifications, make surveys and maps and maintain
the Tax Map on a current basis.
§ 003.09.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.11.030
001:11
§ 003.11.030. Powers and duties.
The Township Auditor shall make the annual audit and shall have such
other powers and duties as may be prescribed by law, this chapter or other
Township ordinances or as may be directed by the Township Council.
§ 003.12. Municipal Court.
§ 003.12.010. Municipal Court established.
There is hereby established in and for the Township a Municipal Court. The
name of the court established by this chapter shall be the "Municipal Court
of the Township of Pequannock in the County of Morris." The Court shall
have such civil and criminal jurisdiction as is provided by law.
§ 003.12.020. Municipal Judge.
§ 003.12.030. Administrator of court.
The Administrator of the Municipal Court shall be appointed by the
Township Manager. The Administrator shall serve for a term of one year.
§ 003.12.040. Additional personnel.
The Township Council may, by resolution, provide for such other necessary
clerical and other assistants as they may deem necessary.
§ 003.12.050. Accommodations; seal; supplies.
The Township Council shall provide the necessary accommodations for the
Municipal Court and shall furnish a court seal as required by law, as well as
other necessary supplies.
§ 003.12.060. Effect of law and Supreme Court rules.
Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the duties, powers
and jurisdiction of the Municipal Court and the judge thereof shall be such
as shall from time to time be prescribed or established by law and the rules
A. The Municipal Court shall have a Judge, who shall be known as the
"Municipal Judge," who shall have such qualifications as may be
provided by law.
B. The Municipal Judge shall be appointed by the Township Council. He
shall serve for a term of three years from the date of his appointment
and until his successor is appointed and qualifies.
C. The Municipal Judge shall, before entering upon the duties of his office,
take and subscribe to an oath, as provided by law.
D. The salary of the Municipal Judge shall be established by the Township
Council, and said salary shall be in lieu of any and all fees and costs.
§ 003.11.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.12.060
001:12
of the Supreme Court of New Jersey, and this chapter shall at all times be
subject to any provisions of law and such rules of the Supreme Court of New
Jersey affecting the duties, powers and jurisdiction of the Municipal Court
of the Judge thereof.
§ 003.13. Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 003.13.010. Appointment of Municipal Prosecutor; term;
qualifications.
There shall be a Municipal Prosecutor appointed by the Township Manager
for a two-year term commencing January 1. He shall be an attorney at law
in the State of New Jersey and be qualified by experience and training for
the position. In the event of his inability to act, the Township Attorney may
substitute for the Municipal Prosecutor.
§ 003.13.020. Compensation of Municipal Prosecutor.
The Municipal Prosecutor shall receive a salary as established by the
Township Council.
§ 003.14. Township Public Defender.
§ 003.14.010. Appointment of Township Public Defender.
There shall be a Public Defender appointed by the Township Manager for
a term of one year. The appointment shall be effective on the first day of
January and shall terminate on December 31st of each year.
§ 003.14.020. Application for Public Defender. [Amended
5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-07]
Any person who shall apply to the Pequannock Township Municipal Court
for the appointment of a public defender to represent him/her, where such
person is entitled by law of the appointment of counsel, shall pay a
nonrefundable fee as provided in Chapter 79. The Pequannock Township
Municipal Court may waive such required application fee, in whole or in
part if the Court determines, in its discretion, that the application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking such
representation.
§ 003.15. Township Historian.
§ 003.15.010. Appointment of Township Historian; compensation;
report; assistants.
The Township Council may appoint a local historian who shall serve at the
pleasure of the Council without compensation. He shall make an annual
report to the governing body and generally perform such duties as outlined
in general law. The Township Historian may request citizens of the
§ 003.12.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.15.010
001:13
community to assist him in special projects from time to time or as
requested by the governing body.
§ 003.16. Department Heads.
§ 003.16.010. General powers and duties of Township Department
Heads.
The head of each department, subject to the Charter, this chapter and other
Township ordinances, and subject to the approval of the Township Manager,
shall:
§ 003.16.020. Authority of Department Heads with regard to
employees.
Each department head shall have the power, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this chapter, to appoint, suspend or remove
subordinate officers and employees within the department, subject to the
approval of the Township Manager.
§ 003.17. Department of Public Works.
§ 003.17.010. Establishment of the Department of Public Works;
composition. [Amended 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-26]
A. Prescribe the internal organization of the department and the duties of
subordinate officers and employees within the department.
B. Assign functions, powers and duties to subordinate officers and
employees within the department and modify such assignments as need
appears.
C. Supervise the work of the department through the divisions established
by this chapter and such other organization units as the head of the
department may find necessary or desirable and supervise and direct
the work of the employees in the department.
D. Delegate to division heads such of his powers as he may deem
necessary for efficient administration.
E. Report at least annually to the Township Council in such form as shall
be approved by the Township Manager on the work of the department
during the preceding year.
A. There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be
the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall be
appointed by the Manager and shall receive such salary as may be
provided by the Salary Ordinance. The Director of Public Works shall
either be a Certified Public Works Manager or a Licensed Professional
Engineer in the State of New Jersey. The Department shall, in addition,
consist of other employees as may be deemed necessary for the proper
functioning of the Department.
§ 003.15.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.17.010
001:14
§ 003.17.020. Water and Sewer Departments to be part of
Department of Public Works.
The Water and Sewer Departments are established as divisions of Public
Works and shall function pursuant to the appropriate provisions of state and
local code. Revenues shall be collected by such employees as may be from
time to time designated by the Township Manager.
§ 003.17.030. Powers and duties of Director of Public Works.
The Director of Public Works, under the direction of the Township Manager,
shall be responsible for the proper and efficient conduct of all Public Works
functions of the Township government. He shall have power, with the
approval of the Township Manager and within the limits of available
appropriations, to engage such specialized equipment and labor for specific
projects and purposes as he may deem necessary for the proper
administration and functions of the Department. The Director shall:
§ 003.18. Fire Department.
§ 003.18.010. Composition of Fire Department; membership
restrictions. [Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-05; 9-27-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-18]
The Fire Department shall consist of a Fire Department liaison
representative from the Township governing body and two volunteer fire
companies plus a Chief for each company. The firefighters shall not be less
than 18 old at the time of their application for membership in the Fire
Department is presented to the Township Manager for approval. In addition,
there shall be nine Fire Marshals attached to each company appointed by
the Township Manager.
B. The Director of Public Works may serve as the licensed water operator.
C. In the absence of a Certified Public Works Manager and a Licensed
Professional Engineer, the Township Manager may appoint a Public
Works Administrator who shall be the Director of Public Works.
A. Supervise all construction and maintenance work pertaining to public
streets, drains, water distribution and conservation, and the
construction of public buildings and property and parking lots.
B. Plan, administer and control snow removal on Township streets and
roads as need appears, within the limits of available appropriations.
C. Issue such certificates as may be necessary and approve all bills with
respect to work performed under his supervision.
D. Provide for the maintenance, construction and other appurtenances for
the operations of the water and sewer systems.
§ 003.17.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.18.020
001:15
§ 003.18.020. Administrative control of Fire Department.
Administrative control of the Fire Department shall be as established by the
Township Manager.
§ 003.18.024. Department Training Officer, appointment, duties.
[Added 6-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-17]
§ 003.18.030. Company Chiefs; designation of Department Chief.
Chief shall be recommended by each department for the term of one year,
who shall then be appointed by the Township Manager and the appointment
reported to the Township Council. Such appointment shall be made on the
first day of January of each year. The Department Chief shall alternate
between the companies each year.
§ 003.18.035. Duties of the Department Chief. [Added 12-22-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-32]
The Department Chief of the Fire Department will be responsible to:
A. Appointment of a Fire Department Training Officer. The Township
Manager may appoint a Fire Department Training Officer from among
candidates recommended by each of the company chiefs. The Fire
Department Training Officer shall serve a term of one year to coincide
with the term of the Department Chief. The Fire Department Training
Officer will serve under the direction of the Department Chief and shall
receive no compensation. The Fire Department Training Officer will be
qualified by way of training and experience to hold the position.
B. Duties of the Fire Department Training Officer. The Fire Department
Training Officer, if appointed, shall be responsible for:
1) Coordination of Department Training Activities.
2) Recommendation of Department Training Program to the
Department Chief.
3) Maintenance of Training Records for all Firefighters.
4) Preparation of an Annual Training Report to the Department Chief.
5) Any other duties assigned by the Department Chief.
A. Establish Department Policies and Procedures.
B. Establish minimum guidelines for Department level training and
coordinate same.
C. Coordinate Department level purchases and budget administration.
§ 003.18.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.18.040
001:16
§ 003.18.040. Helmets.
The Chiefs and other officers shall wear, when on duty, hats or helmets upon
which shall be clearly shown the names of their respective officers.
§ 003.18.050. Application for membership to Fire Department;
transfers.
Any citizen of the Township possessing the qualifications set out in 3.18.010
and desiring to become a member of the Fire Department shall make
application on blanks provided for that purpose to the fire company, and
upon approval of the Township Manager, the application shall be signed by
the Township Clerk and Department Chief, returned to the Township relief
association secretary, and thereupon the new member shall be detailed to
duty with that company. Should such firefighter at any time desire to change
to another company, he shall so request, in writing, to the Fire Department
Chief, and the Chiefs of the companies concurring, such change may be
made at the pleasure of the Township Manager.
§ 003.18.060. Fire Department badges.
Each firefighter, upon entering upon his duties as a firefighter, shall receive
a badge, to be furnished by the Township, and it shall be surrendered to
the Fire Department Chief upon death, resignation, removal or expiration of
term.
§ 003.18.070. Resignations of firefighter.
Any firefighter may resign at any time, such resignation to be made in
writing, and credit will be given for time served as firefighter, provided that
such firefighter is in good standing and free from charges at the time such
resignation is made.
§ 003.18.080. Election of fire company officers; adoption of
constitution and bylaws.
The members of each company shall themselves elect a Captain and a First
and Second Lieutenant, who shall hold office for one year. Each company
shall adopt a constitution and bylaws for their civic government, but all
constitutions, bylaws, rules and regulations adopted by then shall be subject
to the approval of the Township Council.
§ 003.18.090. Duty of fire companies upon sounding of fire alarm;
protective clothing.
It shall be the duty of the companies, so often as any alarm is sounded, to
report immediately upon the alarm thereof to their respective firehouses
and to convey their apparatus to the location, unless otherwise ordered
by the officer present; and to remain under his direction until dismissed.
Helmets, boots and raincoats shall be worn before riding the apparatus
when answering alarms and while on duty at an alarm.
§ 003.18.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.18.100
001:17
§ 003.18.100. Authority of fire department officers over firefighters
and apparatus.
The officers, in order of their rank, shall have entire charge of the
firefighters and the apparatus while it actually engaged in active duty, while
on parade or inspection, or when employed in drills, and it shall be their
duty to see that all apparatus is returned. In all cases, the officers, in order
of their rank, shall have full and absolute command and shall cause the
firefighters and the apparatus to work in the most advantageous manner.
§ 003.18.110. Monthly reports by Fire Chiefs.
It shall be the duty of the Company Chiefs to report monthly to the Township
Manager and Fire Safety Office the condition of all fire-fighting apparatus
and appurtenances, the number and date of all fires during the month
previous.
§ 003.18.120. Records of fire members.
The Township Manager shall keep a true record of the members of the
Department, which record shall consist of at least the name, address, when
admitted, company assigned to, duty performed, when membership expires
and such other information as the Township Manager or Township Council
shall from time to time request.
§ 003.18.130. Authority of Fire Chief in command at fire.
The Chief in command at any fire is hereby clothed with full and complete
police authority and is hereby authorized to call upon the head of any
municipal department for aid and assistance.
§ 003.18.140. Grounds for suspension or removal of firefighters.
Any firefighter or officer, while on duty at any fire, drill, parade or
inspection, who shall refuse or willfully neglect to obey or execute any
orders from any officer, shall for the offense be subject to suspension or
expulsion from the Department, but the officer or firefighter so charged
shall be permitted to be heard in his defense within a period of 10 days
thereafter at a hearing before the Township Manager. In case of willful
refusal or neglect to attend any alarm, such member or members shall be
subject to suspension or expulsion from such company at the discretion of
the Township Manager.
§ 003.18.150. Report of suspension or removal of firefighters.
If any company in the Department shall vote for the suspension or expulsion
of any of its members, the same shall be reported to the Township Manager,
and the expelled or suspended members shall have the right to appeal
by appearing or stating in writing to the Township Manager why such
expulsion or suspension should not be confirmed; and in case of his non-
§ 003.18.100 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.18.150
001:18
appearance, or in case his appeal is not sustained, the Township Manager
may thereupon confirm the suspension or appeal.
§ 003.18.160. Minimum amount of duty required of fire company
members.
Every member of the Fire Department shall, in each and every year, perform
at least 60% of duty, such 60% being composed of answering alarms,
actual attendance and duty at alarms, and not exceeding 20 drills in each
and every year. Any member failing to perform 60% of all duty in each
year may, on recommendation of the fire company, be suspended from the
Department.
§ 003.18.170. Drills.
It shall be the duty of the Chiefs to arrange the drills so that they will
include the proper and efficient use of all appliances, apparatus and other
improved methods of firematics.
§ 003.18.180. Exempt certificates.
Any member of the Fire Department who has served seven years in the
Department and has attended 60% of all alarms in each year, in accordance
with this chapter shall, upon proper verification, be entitled to an exempt
certificate to be issued by the Township Clerk.
§ 003.18.190. Restrictions on fire company members appearing
before Council on Department business.
No member of the Fire Department shall have the right to appear before the
Township Council on any business pertaining to the Fire Department unless
permission, in writing, is given by the Township Manager to do so. Any
member violating such rule shall, after a hearing, be subject to expulsion
from the Department.
§ 003.18.200. Quarterly meetings of liaison representative and
Chiefs; duty of liaison representative to attend company meetings.
The Fire Department liaison representative and the company Chiefs will
meet quarter-annually on the second Fridays of March, June, September
and December of each year. It shall be the duty of the liaison representative
to attend at least one regular meeting of each fire company in each month
of the year, and if unable to attend, to notify the company Chief.
§ 003.18.210. Pensions for widows or minor children of firefighters
killed in line of duty.
A. Any widow, widower or minor child or children of a volunteer firefighter
who dies as the result of injuries sustained in the course of performance
of duty as a member of the Volunteer Fire Department shall receive a
§ 003.18.150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.18.210
001:19
§ 003.18.220. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for any violation of this section, to which no definite penalty is
attached, shall, in case of an officer or member, be demotion from his office,
or suspension from the fire department, or both by the Township Manager.
§ 003.18.230. Junior firefighters. [Added 8-26-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-19; amended 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-11]
pension in accordance with the provisions of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey, commencing with N.J.S.A. 43:12-28.1.
B. The amount of such pension shall total $5,000 annually and shall be
paid to the widow/widower of the deceased firefighter during her/his
widowhood/widowerhood or to the legal guardian of the minor child or
children of such firefighter if he leaves no widow/widower surviving or
to the guardian of such minor child or children after the death of such
widow/widower during his or their minority.
C. The minor child or children of the deceased firefighter shall be
determined to be minors if under the age of 18 years, unless legally
emancipated prior thereto.
D. The Township Council shall make a provision in its annual budget for
the payment of any such pension, and the same shall be paid in such
manner as the governing body shall determine. The Township Council
may, at its discretion, fund the aforesaid pension by appropriate
insurance pursuant to Chapter 331 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey (Laws of 1968) commencing with N.J.S.A. 43:12-28.1.
E. Should any question arise as to whether or not a volunteer firefighter
died as a result of injuries sustained in the course of performance of
duty as a member of the volunteer Fire Department, then and in such
event, a board composed of the Chiefs of the Fire companies of the
Township, the Fire department liaison representative, the Mayor and
the Township Manager shall convene as a board, hear evidence and
make an appropriate determination.
A. There is hereby established an auxiliary to the Pequannock Fire
Department to be known as the Junior Firefighter's Auxiliary, which
shall operate under and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14-95 et seq. the Chief
or his/her designee shall be responsible for the direction and control of
the auxiliary established within his/her company.
B. Any resident of the Township of Pequannock between 14 and 18 years
of age shall be eligible for membership in the Junior Firefighter's
Auxiliary. No individual shall become a member of the Junior
Firefighter's Auxiliary unless permission shall be obtained from such
individual's parent or legal guardian. Such permission shall be in
writing and acknowledged or proved in the manner required by law for
deeds to real estate to be recorded. The original written permission
§ 003.18.210 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.18.230
001:20
shall be retained by the Township Clerk with a copy of the same to be
forwarded by the Clerk to the Fire Department Chief.
C. Members of the Junior Firefighter's Auxiliary shall be provided with the
same insurance coverage as provided for the regular volunteer firemen
in the Pequannock Fire Department.
D. The Township Council hereinafter establishes the following rules and
regulations designed to provide for the training of the Auxiliary for
eventual membership in the Pequannock Fire Department and to
govern the activities of the Auxiliary.
1) Applicants for junior membership to the Pequannock Township Fire
Department shall reside within the Pequannock Township border
and be a minimum of 16 years of age.
2) Only applicants that have the "Parental Consent Form" completed
will be able to become a junior firefighter with the Pequannock
Township Fire Department.
3) Applicants will complete the standard department application for
active membership in the junior fire department.
4) Applicants are encouraged to participate in all fires and drills.
5) Junior firefighters shall obey and follow the by-laws of both
Pequannock Township Fire Companies and the rules and
regulations of the junior fire department.
6) Junior firefighters are to maintain a 2.50 grade point average in
school to maintain membership. Members are to present the Chief
with a copy of his/her report card every marking period. If the
junior firefighter fails to maintain a 2.50 grade point average, they
will be suspended from duty until their grades improve to a 2.50
grade point average.
7) No junior firefighter will be allowed in any portion of the firehouse
without an active firefighter present and aware of the junior
members' presence. (Active member = Member with more than
one year service.)
8) No junior firefighter will be able to respond to emergency incidents
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and during normal
school hours.
9) Junior firefighters will not enter any structure, warm or hot zone
until the IC declares the area safe for them to enter.
10) Junior firefighters will be assigned to a qualified firefighter as an
immediate supervisor, but will fall under the direction of the Chief
and line officers.
§ 003.18.230 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.18.230
001:21
§ 003.19. Police Department.
§ 003.19.010. Police Department; administrative control.
[Amended 6-25-1999 by Ord. No. 99-13]
11) Junior firefighters shall first allow active firefighters to respond on
fire apparatus. If there is room they may respond on fire apparatus.
If there is no room they may respond with any fire apparatus only
after requesting permission from the officer or senior firefighter on
the apparatus.
12) Junior firefighters that bring discredit to the Pequannock Township
Fire Department will be expelled and their parent/guardian will be
notified.
13) Junior firefighters are not allowed to handle alcohol under any
circumstances.
14) The use of controlled substances or alcohol is prohibited and will
result in expulsion and notification to the junior firefighter's parent
or guardian and the local police department.
15) Junior firefighters will be issued personal protective equipment
from the lead instructor to be worn at emergency incidents and
drills as required. All personal protective equipment will be stored
in the firehouse.
16) Junior firefighters shall not be allowed to make financial purchases
for the Fire Department.
17) The parent or guardian of a junior firefighter shall be responsible
for any lost or stolen fire department issued equipment.
18) Junior firefighters are to report any problems, conflicts, damaged
or broken equipment to the lead instructor.
19) Junior firefighters are not allowed to utilize any fire department
computers.
20) All junior firefighters are required to attend the junior firefighter
class at the Morris County Fire Academy within one year of joining.
21) All injuries shall be reported to the Chief or Line Officer.
22) Junior firefighters are prohibited from the use of emergency blue
lights on vehicles.
23) Subject to the approval of the Township Council, these rules and
regulations may be supplemented by the Pequannock Fire
Department.
A. The Police Department shall be under the administrative control of the
Township Manager and shall be governed by the Charter of the
§ 003.18.230 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.19.010
001:22
§ 003.19.020. Composition of police officers. [Amended 6-22-2010
by Ord. No. 2010-12; 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-17]
The Police Department of this Township shall consist of a Chief of Police, a
Captain, two Lieutenants, six Sergeants, and up to 25 police officers.
§ 003.19.030. Police training courses.
§ 003.19.040. Oath of office; signing of police register.
Every member of the Police Department, before entering upon the
performance of his duties, shall take and subscribe an oath or affirmation,
faithfully and impartially to discharge the duties of his office, and shall
file such oath or affirmation with the Township Clerk and sign the police
register.
§ 003.19.050. Head of Police Department; order of rank.
The head of the Police Department shall be known as the Chief, and he shall
be responsible to the Township Manager for the efficiency and discipline of
the Department. In the absence or disability of the Chief, his duties shall
be assumed by the next officer to command in order of rank. The order of
rank of the officers shall be: Chief, Captain of Police, lieutenant of Police
Township. Accordingly, the Township Manager shall be the appropriate
authority in all matters regarding discipline and administration of the
rules and regulations of the Police Department.
B. Rules and Regulations of the Pequannock Township Police Department
contained in Volume I, Chapter I, of the Police Departments Rules and
Regulations/Policies and Procedures Manual as recommended by the
Chief of Police are hereby adopted by ordinance 99-13.
A. No person shall be given or accept a permanent appointment as a police
officer in the Township unless such person has successfully completed a
police training course at a school approved and authorized by the Police
Training Commission in the Department of Law and Public Safety of the
state, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 through
52:17B-77.
B. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the giving or accepting of
a probationary or temporary appointment as a police officer for a period
not to exceed one year, to enable a person seeking a permanent
appointment to complete a police training course as prescribed by the
police training commission.
C. No person shall be permitted to take a police training course unless he
holds a probationary or temporary appointment as a police officer in the
Township. Such appointee shall be entitled to a leave of absence with
pay during the period of the police training course.
§ 003.19.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.19.050
001:23
and Sergeant of Police. The other police officers shall rank in order of the
seniority of their appointment to the Department.
§ 003.19.060. Powers and duties of members of Police Department.
The members of the Police Department will be held responsible for the
proper enforcement of all provisions of this Code and other ordinances of
the Township and the laws of the state. They shall arrest without warrant
any person who, in their presence, may violate any provisions of this Code
and other ordinances of the Township or be guilty of disorderly conduct or
commit a crime against the laws of the state and shall promptly execute all
warrants and serve all court orders issued to them and such other papers
as may be required of them to be served within the Township. They shall
patrol the streets of the Township at such time and on such routes and
perform such other police duty and service as may be assigned to them by
the Township Manager or the Chief of Police.
§ 003.19.070. Records to be kept; release of information.
§ 003.19.080. Monthly reports.
The Chief of Police shall report in writing to the Township Manager on
all matters pertaining to his Department, giving a complete record of all
arrests and complaints, together with dispositions of the same, and such
recommendations as, in his opinion, will increase the efficiency of the
Department.
§ 003.19.090. Qualifications and terms of office of Police Chief and
Department members.
The Chief of the Police shall be a citizen of the United States. The Chief
and every member of the Police Department shall be able to read and write
the English language understandingly and must be of good moral character,
good health and sound body, and shall attend in-service training as required
by law or recommended by the Chief of Police.
§ 003.19.100. Minimum age of appointees.
No person shall be appointed a member of the Police Department who is
less than 18 years of age at the time of his appointment.
A. The Chief of Police, with the assistance of such other members of the
Police Department as shall be detailed for that purpose, shall keep
complete records as required by law. The Department records shall not
be examined by any person except the Township Manager or Chief of
Police.
B. No information of the Department shall be made public except by the
Chief of Police or, in his absence, by the officer in charge of the
Department, or any other officer designated by the Chief of Police.
§ 003.19.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.19.110
001:24
§ 003.19.110. Standard operating procedures.
A. Grounds and procedures for suspension or disciplinary action.
(1) Any member of the Police Department shall be subject to
reprimand, suspension from duty without pay, reduction in rank or
dismissal by the Township Manager upon recommendation by the
Chief of Police according to the nature or aggravation of the
offense, for any of the following causes or violation of any other
rules and regulations governing the police force:
(a) Drinking of any intoxicating liquor while on duty or in uniform.
(b) Willful disobedience of orders.
(c) Indecent, profane or harsh language.
(d) Disrespect to a superior officer.
(e) Unnecessary violence to a prisoner or any other person.
(f) Absence without leave, sleeping on duty, absence from a post
or duty without excuse or not properly patrolling his beat.
(g) Neglecting or refusing to pay any just debts.
(h) Immorality, indecency or lewdness.
(i) Incapacity, either mental or physical; lack of energy; or gross
ignorance of the laws and regulations of the department.
(j) Visiting, except on police business, any gambling house,
poolroom or house of ill fame; or visiting while on duty or in
uniform except on police business, any saloon or liquor store.
(k) Violation of any criminal law.
(l) For making known any proposed action or movement of the
force, or contents of any order, other than to persons
immediately concerned in their execution.
(m) Conduct unbecoming an officer.
(n) Conduct subversive of good order and the discipline of the
force.
(o) Publicly commenting on the official action of a superior officer.
(p) Failure to report a known violation of the law or of the
ordinances of the of the Township.
(q) Visiting any place of amusement while in uniform except on
police business.
§ 003.19.110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.19.110
001:25
(r) Failure to attend drill or the school of instructions for which
compensation is provided at the time affixed or whenever
ordered.
(s) Swearing falsely in application for appointment to the force or
to such other papers as required of him and affidavit.
(t) Soliciting anyone to intercede with the Chief, the Council or
any superior officer in relation to promotions, changing of any
beats, disposition of pending charges of any findings of a trial
before the Council or for refusing to do duty, or evading duty of
any kind, whenever necessity requires, whether on patrol or
elsewhere and whether in uniform or not.
(u) Accepting a bribe or favor as a consideration either for the
performance of nonperformance of his duty.
(v) Receiving or accepting a reward or present of any kind,
directly or indirectly, for any act in the performance of his duty
without permission being first had and obtained of the
Township Manager.
(2) All charges against members of the Police Department shall be
instituted by the Chief of Police and thoroughly examined by the
Township Manager, and upon any member of the Department being
convicted by the Manager of any violations or orders of the
Department, the Manager may, in lieu of dismissal from the
Department, impose such penalty as, in his judgment, is warranted
by the character of the offense.
(3) Emergency suspension. Any command or supervisory officer shall
have the authority to impose emergency suspension until the next
business day against a member of the police department when it
appears that such action is in the best interests of the department.
B. Hearing procedure.
(1) Any member or employee of the Police Department who violates the
terms of this chapter or the rules or regulations promulgated for
the control of the Police Department, against whom charges are
preferred, shall be given a hearing within 30 days, before the
Manager, on such charges. These shall be in writing and signed by
the person making the same. The Manager shall thereupon proceed
as speedily as possible to investigate the charges. The Manager
shall thereupon determine whether to:
(a) Exonerate the member or employee.
(b) Cause a notice in writing to be served upon the member or
employee of the Police Department against whom the charges
are preferred, to appear before the Manager, at a time and
place to be specified therein, to answer the charges.
§ 003.19.110 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.19.110
001:26
§ 003.20. Department of Planning and Building.
§ 003.20.010. Establishment of Department of Planning and
Building; head of Department; composition; compensation.
There is hereby established a Department of Planning and Building the
head of which shall be the Director of Planning. The Department shall
consist of a licensed professional planner who shall be the department
head, a Construction Official and appropriate subcode officials as deemed
necessary by state statute. All employees shall be appointed by the
Township Manager with compensation by Salary Ordinance. In the absence
of a licensed professional planner, the Township Manager may appoint a
Planning Administrator who shall be the department head.
§ 003.20.020. Powers and duties of Planning and Building
Department.
The Department of Planning and Building, under the direction of the
Director of Planning shall:
(2) After the hearing of the member or employee of the Police
Department who may be represented by counsel in his own
defense, or without hearing in case he fails to appear, the Manager
may reprimand, suspend, reduce in rank, fine or dismiss the said
member or employee of the Police Department from the service of
the Township or exonerate him from such charges. The Chief of
Police shall have the power to suspend any member or employee of
the Police Department from active duty, without pay, pending the
determination of such charges.
C. Assignments and orders. All orders or assignments for members of the
Police Department shall be made through the Township Manager and
the Chief of Police.
A. Exercise initiative and professional judgement in providing the
Township with guidance in planning within the framework of a Master
Plan.
B. Make recommendations regarding the Master Plan of the Township so
that it reflects the needs and wishes of the Township consistent with the
good and welfare of the community.
C. Assist in the preparation and maintenance of an Official Map of the
Township as may be directed by the Township Council.
D. Prepare agenda and reports for Planning Board meetings.
E. Attend all meetings of the Planning Board and meetings of the Council
and other board or agencies as may be required for the proper planning
of the Township.
§ 003.19.110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.20.020
001:27
§ 003.20.030. Powers and duties of Construction Official and
subcode officials.
§ 003.21. Department of Health.
§ 003.21.010. Establishment of Department of Health; head of
Department; compensation; powers and duties.
There shall be a Department of Health, the head of which shall be the
Township Health Officer. He shall be a licensed health officer. The Health
Officer shall be appointed by the Township Manager, who may also appoint
sanitarians and other personnel when authorized by the Council. Salary for
the Health Officer and other employees shall be established in a general
salary ordinance. The Department shall have the functions and powers and
duties of a Municipal Health Officer or Department of Health as prescribed
by the general law.
F. Investigate and prepare reports and recommendations on subdivision
applications and site plans and all other assignments as requested by
the Planning Board.
G. Make recommendations regarding the subdivision, zoning and other
land use development ordinances within the Township.
H. The Director of Planning shall also, under the administrative direction
of the Township Manager, act as Zoning Officer and shall be responsible
for all administrative and legal enforcement of the Township Zoning
Ordinance.
I. The Zoning Officer shall be hereby authorized to appear in court, to
appear before all administrative bodies requiring his advice and to
review all necessary plans and documents to insure compliance with
the Zoning Ordinance.
J. The Department of Planning and Building shall issue all permits
required by law within the jurisdiction of the Department of Planning
and Building and keep a record of all applications and all permits issued
with a notation of any special conditions involved, if any.
A. Subject to administrative control of the Director of Planning and
Township Manager, the Construction Official and the subcode officials
shall perform such duties as outlined in the Uniform Construction Code
Act and shall keep such records as may be necessary to properly comply
with local and state law.
B. The Construction Official and subcode officials shall assist in the
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance under the administrative
direction of the Director of Planning.
C. Building and occupancy permits are to be issued in accordance with the
Uniform Construction Code and applicable local ordinance.
§ 003.20.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.22
001:28
§ 003.22. Department of Parks and Recreation.
§ 003.22.010. Establishment of Department of Parks and
Recreation; head of Department; composition; compensation.
There is hereby established a Department of Parks and Recreation, the
head of which shall be the Director of Parks and Recreation, who shall be
appointed by the Township Manager, and such other officials as shall be
deemed necessary will be appointed by the Manager. Compensation for the
positions within the Department shall be fixed by separate ordinance.
§ 003.22.020. Powers and duties.
The Department of Parks and Recreation, under the direction of a Director,
shall:
§ 003.22.030. Relationship to Advisory Recreation Council.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall serve as liaison to the Advisory
Recreation Board.
§ 003.23. Department of Finance Administration.
§ 003.23.010. Establishment of Department of Finance
Administration; Department head; responsibilities of Department
head; Division of the Treasury.
A. Provide a year-round program of recreation activities for all Township
residents.
B. Plan, develop, maintain and coordinate the use of all Township-owned
and controlled parks, buildings, facilities and public areas.
C. Charge and collect reasonable fees for each person entering or using
park facilities as authorized by the Township Council.
D. Charge and collect reasonable fees for each person participating in
recreation programs and activities as recommended by the Director of
Parks and Recreation and authorized by the Township Manager. Such
fees shall be deposited in a recreational special account to be used for
specific recreation programs or activities when authorized by the
Township Manager. Any surplus moneys which are not to be used
directly for such specific recreation programs or activities shall be
withdrawn and deposited in the Township's current account.
A. There may be a Department of Finance Administration, the head of
which shall be the Director of Finance. The Director shall be appointed
by the Manager and shall be a Certified Municipal Finance Officer
(CMFO).
B. The Director shall be the Chief Financial Officer of the municipality,
supervise the work of the Department and its divisions, be responsible
§ 003.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.23.010
001:29
§ 003.23.020. Division of Revenue Collection.
for the accounting, preauditing, control, receipt, custody and
disbursement of municipal revenues and expenditures. The Director
shall also be responsible for all fiscal matters and financial policies of
the municipality.
C. The Director of Finance shall supervise the work of revenue collection
administration and assessment administration, and within the
Department of Finance Administration, there shall be a Division of the
Treasury. The head of the Division shall be the Municipal Treasurer. He
shall have, perform and exercise all of the functions, powers and duties
as provided by general law and municipal ordinances. He shall keep
and maintain books and records of all financial transactions of the
Township in accordance with the standards and requirements of the
Division of Local Government in the Department of the Treasury of the
State of New Jersey. He shall have custody of all public moneys of the
Township and shall make monthly reports to the director of all receipts,
expenditures, commitments and unexpended appropriations. All
moneys received from any source by, or on behalf of, the Township or
any department board office or agency, except as otherwise provided by
municipal ordinance, shall be paid to the Treasurer, who shall by the
next ensuing bank day after their receipt, deposit them to the credit of
the Township in the authorized public depository of the Township to the
credit of the proper account.
D. Disbursements in payment of bills, claims and demands shall be made
by the Treasurer upon preaudit and warrant of the Director of Finance,
approved by the Manager. Every warrant shall be in the form of a
warrant check and shall bear the signatures of the Mayor or Deputy
Mayor and the Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer or Deputy Treasurer, or
any officer hereafter designated by state statute.
E. The Director shall be responsible for Township compliance with all
statutes, ordinances and rules regulations and directives of the Division
of Local Government Services.
A. Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Division of Revenue
Collection.
B. The head of the Division shall be the Municipal Collector of Revenue.
The Collector of Revenue shall have, perform and exercise all the
functions, powers and duties as are provided by general law and
municipal ordinances. He shall receive and collect all moneys assessed
or raised by taxation or assessment for any purpose. He shall keep
proper records and shall report to the director at least once a month all
receipts and deposits made by him and shall report account for all
moneys for which he is responsible. He shall keep a current record of all
tax title liens, advising the Director promptly as such liens become
subject to foreclosure under law. He shall enforce the payment of
delinquent taxes as soon as the same become delinquent. He shall also
§ 003.23.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.23.020
001:30
§ 003.23.030. Division of Assessment Administration.
Within the Department of Finance Administration, there shall be a Division
of Assessment Administration. The head of the Division shall be the
Municipal Tax Assessor, who shall serve for a term prescribed law. The Tax
Assessor shall have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and
duties prescribed for Assessors by general law and municipal ordinance.
§ 003.23.040. Division of Budget and Management Information;
data processing center.
Within the Department of Finance there may be a Division of Budget and
Management Information, including a data processing operation.
§ 003.24. Planning Board.
§ 003.24.010. Establishment of Planning Board; composition.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., a Planning Board is
hereby created. Membership on the Board shall be in accordance with state
statute.
§ 003.25. Board of Adjustment.
§ 003.25.010. Establishment of Board of Adjustment; composition.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., a Board of
Adjustment is hereby created. Membership on the Board shall be in
accordance with state statute.
§ 003.26. Local Assistance Board.
§ 003.26.010. Establishment of Local Assistance Board;
composition; duties.
There shall be a Local Assistance Board, appointed by the Township
Manager, consisting of three members, one member of which shall serve for
a one-year term and two of which shall be appointed for two-year terms.
Such Board shall have and perform all the powers and duties prescribed by
general law, this chapter and other Township ordinances.
§ 003.27. Library Board of Trustees.
serve as Municipal Tax Searcher and perform such duties as are
prescribed by general law and municipal ordinance. He shall also bill,
receive and collect water, sewer, solid waste, and other revenues.
§ 003.23.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.27.010
001:31
§ 003.27.010. Establishment of Library Board of Trustees;
composition; terms; qualifications of members.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:54-9, there is hereby established a Library Board
of Trustees consisting of seven members, one of whom shall be the Mayor
and one the Local Superintendent of Schools. The five citizen members
shall be appointed by the Mayor for five-year terms. The Mayor and the
Superintendent of Schools may, respectively, appoint an alternate to act
in his place and stead with authority to attend all meetings of the Board
and in his absence to vote on all questions before the Board. Vacancies
occurring on the Board of Trustees shall be filled for the unexpired term
only. All members of the Board except the Superintendent of Schools shall
be residents of the Township.
§ 003.28. Environmental Commission.
§ 003.28.010. Establishment of Environmental Commission;
statutory authority. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16]
There is hereby created an Environmental Commission pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 et seq.
§ 003.28.020. Composition of Environmental Commission; terms;
compensation. [Amended 1-27-1998 by Ord. No. 97-20; 7-27-1999
by Ord. No. 99-16; 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-11]
The Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor,
one of whom shall also be a member of the Planning Board and all of
whom shall be residents of the Township. There shall also be two alternate
members appointed by the Mayor. Alternate members shall be designated
at the time of appointment as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
The members shall serve without compensation. The Mayor shall designate
one of the members to serve as Chairman and presiding officer of the
commission. The members shall be appointed for terms of three years and
until the appointment and qualification of their successors. The Township
Council may remove any member and after a hearing thereon at which
the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by counsel. A
vacancy on the commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term
shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original
appointment.
§ 003.28.030. Powers and duties of Environmental Commission.
[Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-16]
A. The Commission shall have all powers provided for by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
et seq. including the following powers:
(1) To promote the conservation and development of the natural
resources of the Township, including but not limited to; open space
preservation, water resource management, air pollution control,
solid and hazardous waste management, noise control,
§ 003.27.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.28.030
001:32
§ 003.28.040. Records and reports. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-16]
The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an annual report at such time as the Township Council may designate,
and submit the same to the Council, which report shall be comprehensive
and detailed, covering operations, receipts, disbursements and
expenditures for the full year.
environmental appearance, marine resources, protection of flora
and fauna, and recommend the acquisition of property on behalf of
the Township for conservation programs.
(2) To plan, implement and inform the public about local conservation
programs and make presentations to community organizations and
the schools.
(3) To compile and keep an index of all open areas, publicly or privately
owned, including open marshlands, swamps and other wetlands.
(4) To conduct research into the possible use of open areas of the
Township.
(5) To recommend to the Planning Board plans and programs for
inclusion in a Municipal Master Plan and the development and use
of such areas.
(6) To recommend to municipal agencies the advertising, preparing,
printing and distributing of books, maps, charts, plans and
pamphlets, which, in its judgement, it deems necessary for its
purposes.
(7) To act as the coordinating agency of the community on
conservation matters and with various community groups and as
liaison between local conservation needs and regional, state and
federal agencies ministering to those needs.
(8) To make such recommendations as may be necessary to implement
the cause of environmental protection within the municipality, and
investigate environmental problems and offer solutions.
(9) To review and comment on all Environmental Reports as may be
submitted to the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment. To review
and comment on all site plans, subdivisions, conditional use or
variance applications which may come before the Planning Board
or Board of Adjustment.
B. It is understood that, in fulfilling the powers enumerated in this section,
the Commission will act in an advisory capacity and shall not have the
power to bind the municipality in any manner.
§ 003.28.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.28.050
001:33
§ 003.28.050. Annual appropriations; staff. [Amended 7-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-16]
The Commission of the Township shall annually fix, determine and
appropriate a sum sufficient for expenses of such Commission. The
Commission may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may from
time to time require and as shall be within the limits of funds appropriated
to it.
§ 003.28.060. Removal of members. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-16]
The Council of the Township may remove any member of the Commission
for cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a hearing
thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel.
§ 003.28.070. Annual appropriations. [Amended 7-27-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-16]
The Council of the Township shall annually fix, determine and appropriate
a sum sufficient for expenses of such Commission, which shall be raised by
taxation in the same manner as other taxes.
§ 003.29. Senior Citizen Committee.
§ 003.29.010. Senior Citizens Advisory Committee established.
There is hereby created a Senior Citizens Advisory Committee to study
senior citizens' needs and related problems and recommend action to the
Township Council.
§ 003.29.020. Composition; terms; compensation.
§ 003.29.030. Powers and duties.
The Committee shall have the power and duty to study senior citizen
problems and recommend action to the Township Council regarding
taxation, medical and social services, housing, transportation, public
A. The Senior Citizens Advisory Committee shall consist of nine members
to be appointed by the Township Council. The Township Council may
also appoint not more than two nonvoting, honorary members.
B. All appointments of members, except to fill vacancies, shall be for terms
of three years beginning the first day of January of the first year of the
term. Honorary members may be appointed for terms not to exceed
three years, with the appointment retroactive to January 1 in the year of
appointment. All members of the Committee shall serve without
compensation.
§ 003.28.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.29.030
001:34
relations, recreation, employment opportunities and such other areas as
may be necessary to help in the solution of senior citizen problems.
§ 003.29.040. Chairman; bylaws.
The Committee shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman
and presiding officer of the Committee. The Committee is authorized to
adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation.
§ 003.29.050. Removal of members.
The Council of the Township may remove any member of the Committee
for cause, on written charges served upon the member and after a hearing
thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel.
§ 003.29.060. Annual appropriations.
The Council of the Township shall annually fix, determine and appropriate
a sum sufficient for expenses of such Committee, which shall be raised by
taxation in the same manner as other taxes.
§ 003.30. Historic District Commission.
§ 003.30.010. Establishment; composition; terms and
compensation.
§ 003.31. Joint Study Commission.
§ 003.31.010. Establishment; composition; terms; purpose.
There shall be a Joint Study Commission consisting of two members of the
Board of Education, and two members of the Township Council appointed
by the Council for one-year terms. The Commission shall meet from time to
time to discuss matters of mutual concern.
§ 003.32. Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee.
A. For the administration of the provisions of this section the governing
body shall appoint an indeterminate number of members, not to exceed
12, to the Historic Commission, which shall be available for
consultation to the Planning Board as well as the governing body.
B. All members of the Historic District Commission shall be residents of
the Township of Pequannock and shall serve for a term of five years,
which term shall be staggered so that one term expires each year, or so
that the least amount of terms expire at the same time. All members of
the Historic District Commission shall serve without compensation.
§ 003.29.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.32.010
001:35
§ 003.32.010. Establishment; composition; terms; organization.
[Amended 6-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-19; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No.
2011-03]
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall consist of 11 voting
members to be appointed by The Township Council. All members shall be
residents of the Township of Pequannock. Members shall be appointed for
a three-year term. The Township Council may also appoint one resident
under the age of 21 for a one-year term to serve as a non-voting youth
liaison for a one-year term. Members of the Committee shall serve without
compensation. The Recreation Director of the Township shall serve as
Executive Secretary of the Committee. The Committee shall designate one
of its members to serve as chairperson and presiding officer of the
Committee. The Committee may also appoint a Secretary whose
compensation will be determined by the Township Manager. The Committee
is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural operations.
§ 003.32.020. Powers and duties; removal of members. [Amended
6-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-19]
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee shall advise the Recreation
Director and Township Council concerning the planning, implementation,
and promotion of parks and recreation programs and facilities within the
Township of Pequannock. It is understood that the parks and Recreation
Advisory Committee will act merely in an advisory capacity and shall not
have the power to bind the Township in any manner.
§ 003.33. Economic Development Advisory Committee.
§ 003.33.010. Purpose. [Amended 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-07;
9-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-23]
Pequannock Township's Economic Development Advisory Committee
(EDAC) is charged with developing and implementing a strategic business
attraction and retention program for the municipality. Its function is to
match enterprises looking for a new home with a suitable and appropriate
location within the Township of Pequannock's borders. The Economic
Development Advisory Committee's mission is to attract strong and diverse
corporations that will add to the Township's already strong and diverse
business mix. The primary focus of the Economic Development Advisory
Committee is to promote occupancy of existing vacant commercial sites and
to work with currently occupied developed properties toward revitalizing
those properties to aid in enhancing current tax rates. At the direction of
the Township Council, the EDAC also assists with new applications and/
or inquiries for new commercial developments and compiles and provides
timely and useful vacant listings suitable for development. At the direction
of the Township Council, helps foster a business friendly environment,
works to ensure a balance of interest with the environment and to promote
an understanding of economic development and aids the community in
envisioning and realizing a desired economic future.
§ 003.32.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.33.020
001:36
§ 003.33.020. Composition; membership; term of office. [Amended
9-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-23]
There shall be an Economic Development Advisory Committee of the
Township of Pequannock which shall be known as the Economic
Development Advisory Committee. It shall consist of 11 members appointed
by the Township Council, each for a term of five years. Each member
appointed to the Committee shall be, a citizen of the United States and a
qualified voter of this State.
Vacancies in the membership of the Committee shall be filled by the
Township Council for the unexpired term thereof.
§ 003.33.030. Enabling statute. [Amended 9-25-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-23]
The Committee shall function in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:69A-89.
§ 003.33.040. Township Council Representation. [Amended
9-22-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-23; 9-25-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-23]
A member of the Township Council shall be appointed by the Council as
liaison to the Committee.
§ 003.33.050. Selection of officers. [Amended 9-25-2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-23]
The members of the Committee shall choose annually from among its
members a Chair and such other officers as it may deem necessary.
§ 003.33.060. Compensation. [Amended 9-25-2018 by Ord. No.
2018-23]
The members of the Committee shall serve without compensation.
§ 003.34. Fair Housing Committee.
§ 003.34.010. Establishment; composition; powers and duties.
[Amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-01]
A. A Fair Housing Committee (FHC) is hereby established, consisting of
seven citizens of the Township, to be appointed by the Township
Council, to serve three-year terms with no more than two terms
expiring each year.
B. The Committee shall be charged with the following responsibilities:
(1) To assist the developer, owner or tenant association in establishing
procedures and standards, in accordance with this section, for
implementing the affordability control mechanism.
§ 003.33.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.34.010
001:37
§ 003.35. Americans with Disabilities Act.
§ 003.35.010. Appeals procedure.
(2) To monitor affordability control compliance by developers, owners
or tenant associations, fee owners and other parties in interest,
including compliance with deed restrictions and disposition
covenants.
(3) In connection with the first and subsequent occupancy of all setaside
sale and rental units, to review and amend the approved price
stabilization plan, to review implementation of affordability control
standards and procedures and, in its sole discretion, to make biding
recommendations for changes in procedures or to exercise the
right to disapprove occupancy for any and all set-aside sale or
rental units in instances where eligibility is in question.
(4) Thereafter, to review and approve annual set-aside occupancy
reports prepared and filed by the developer, association or any
party in interest as may be required by its practices and procedures
or as contained in its rules and regulations.
(5) To promulgate rules and regulations subject to approval by the
Township Council with implementation in ordinance form.
(6) To file periodic reports with the Township Council concerning the
discharge of its responsibilities and immediately report
noncompliance with affordability control standards and procedures
for such action as the Council may deem appropriate.
(7) To monitor all governmental subsidy programs and make
recommendations to the Township Council and the Planning Board
in connection therewith.
A. All complaints regarding alleged discrimination shall be submitted to
the Township Manager for resolution. A record of the complaint and
action taken shall be maintained. The decision of the Township
Manager shall be rendered within 15 working days after the complaint
is filed for submission.
B. In the event that the complaint is not resolved satisfactorily, all papers
and documents regarding the complaint shall be forwarded by the
Township Manager to the Township Council within 20 days. The
Township Council shall hold a public hearing on the papers submitted
within 30 days. The Township Council shall render a decision on the
papers submitted within 30 days of the public hearing. The decision of
the Township Council shall be final.
C. A complete record of all action(s) taken on each complaint shall be
maintained by the appropriate hearing body.
§ 003.34.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.35.010
001:38
§ 003.36. Flood Control Advisory Committee.
§ 003.36.010. Establishment of Flood Control Advisory Committee.
[Added 7-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-13; amended 6-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-10]
There is hereby established a Flood Control Advisory Committee to study
issues involving the floodplains and recommend action to the Township
Council. The Flood Advisory Committee shall also function as the Township
Program for Public Information (PPI) Committee.
§ 003.36.020. Composition; terms. [Added 7-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-13; amended 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-02; 6-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-10]
§ 003.36.030. Powers and duties. [Added 7-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-13; amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-10]
The Committee shall have the power and duty to study issues involving
flood control and flood protection and to advise the Township Council,
Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, and other Township bodies, agencies
and departments, on matters involving flood control and flood protection.
The Committee shall be responsible for the development of the Township's
Program for Public Information (PPI) which shall be presented to the
Township Council for formal approval upon completion. Upon completion
and approval of the PPI, the Committee shall meet at least annually to
monitor implementation of the program and prepare an annual evaluation
report which shall be transmitted to the governing body.
D. A person's right to the hearing as set forth herein shall not be limited to
the right of the individual to pursue other remedies as are established
by law.
A. The Flood Control Advisory Committee shall be comprised of 11
members, appointed by the Township Council. At least one of the
members shall be a representative from the Township Flood
Management Office and at least one shall be a representative from the
Township Public Information Office. At least half of the members shall
be residents who hold no other Township position.
B. The term of office of the first members of the Advisory Committee shall
be for one, two, or three years, to be designated by the Township
Council in making the appointments so that the terms of approximately
1/3 of the members will expire each year, and their successors shall be
appointed for terms of three years and until the appointment and
qualification of their successors. The members shall serve without
compensation.
§ 003.35.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.36.040
001:39
§ 003.36.040. Chairperson; bylaws. [Added 7-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-13]
The Committee shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairperson
and presiding officer of the Committee. The Committee is authorized to
adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation.
§ 003.36.050. Removal of members. [Added 7-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-13]
The Township Council may remove any member of the Committee for cause,
on written charges served upon that member, and after a hearing thereon
at which the member shall be entitled to be heard in person or by Council.
§ 003.37. Open Space, Recreation, Farmland and Historic
Preservation Trust Fund.
§ 003.37.010. Establishment of the Township of Pequannock Open
Space, Recreation, Farmland and Historic Preservation Trust Fund.
[Added 3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-4]
There is hereby established an account which shall be known as the
Township of Pequannock Open Space, Recreation, Farmland and Historic
Preservation Trust Fund which shall be maintained and administered in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.7 et seq.
§ 003.37.020. Funding for the Township of Pequannock Open
Space, Recreation, Farmland and Historic Preservation Trust Fund.
[Added 3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-4]
The Township of Pequannock Open Space, Recreation, Farmland and
Historic Preservation Trust Fund shall be funded through the dedication of
an amount to be determined annually be the Township Council not to exceed
$0.02 per $100 of assessed valuation for each annual tax levy. The Fund
shall also be permitted to accept donations and testamentary bequests.
§ 003.37.030. Purpose of the Township of Pequannock Open Space,
Recreation, Farmland and Historic Preservation Trust Fund. [Added
3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-4; amended 6-26-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-23]
The Township of Pequannock Open Space, Recreation, Farmland and
Historic Preservation Trust Fund shall be utilized for the purposes set forth
in N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.1 et seq., and administered in accordance with these
statutory provisions without limitation. All expenditures from the Fund shall
be specifically approved by Resolution of the Township Council.
§ 003.36.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.37.040
001:40
§ 003.37.040. Use of land acquired through the Township of
Pequannock Open Space, Recreation, Farmland and Historic
Preservation Trust Fund. [Added 3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-4]
Lands acquired by the Township of Pequannock through the Township of
Pequannock Open Space, Recreation, Farmland and Historic Preservation
Trust Fund shall be held in trust and shall be used exclusively for the
purposes authorized under N.J.S.A. 40:12-15.1 et seq.
§ 003.37.050. Establishment of an Open Space Advisory
Committee. [Added 3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-4; amended
3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-4]
There is hereby established an Open Space Advisory Committee for the
Township of Pequannock which shall consist of eight members. The Open
Space Advisory Committee shall advise the Township Council concerning
open space acquisition issues. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall be
appointed by the Township Council and shall consist of:
§ 003.37.060. Powers and functions of the Township of Pequannock
Open Space, Recreation, Farmland and Historic Preservation Trust
Fund. [Added 3-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-4]
The Open Space Advisory Committee shall advise the Township Council
concerning open space acquisition issues. The Open Space Advisory
Committee shall initially prepare a report recommending which portions
of land should be acquired by the Township and prioritizing their
recommendations. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall hold public
(a) One member of the Township Council.
(b) One member of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
(c) One member of the Environmental Commission.
(d) One member of the Historic District Commission.
(e) One member of the Planning Board.
(f) Five citizens of Pequannock Township.
The citizen members of the Open Space Advisory Committee shall be appointed
for terms of three years beginning the first day of January of the first year of
their appointment. All other members shall be appointed for one year terms.
The terms of the citizen members shall be staggered so that at least one term
expires each year. The terms of the citizen members at initial appointment
shall be staggered by the Township Council appointing one citizen member
to a three-year term. All members of the Open Space Advisory Committee
shall serve without compensation. The Open Space Advisory Committee shall
be provided with a paid part-time secretary to handle clerical tasks. The
Open Space Advisory Committee shall be provided with an unpaid voluntary
secretary who will be responsible for the preparation of committee minutes.
§ 003.37.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.37.060
001:41
meetings in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act and shall give
notice of their meetings.
§ 003.38. Shade Tree Commission.
§ 003.38.010. Definitions. [Added 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
For purposes of this section, the following words and terms are defined as
follows:
PERSON — Every person, firm, association, partnership and corporation.
PLANT CONSTRUCTION — As applied to public utility companies shall
mean poles, wires, cables, subsurface conduits, pipes, manholes and
appurtenant facilities of such companies installed in a street.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — As defined in the Revised Statutes of the
State of New Jersey (R.S. 48:2-13).
RIGHT OF WAY — Any public street as delineated on the Township of
Pequannock Tax Map as well as the boundaries of the right-of-way of any
street so delineated.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the
Township of Pequannock.
STREET —
TREE — Any tree or any root or branch thereof.
§ 003.38.020. Commission; personnel, appointment. [Added
6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
The regulation, planting, care and control of shade and ornamental trees
and shrubbery upon and in (1) the streets, highways, public places and (2)
parks and parkways of the Township of Pequannock except State highways,
unless the Department of Transportation shall assent thereto and except
county highways, parks and parkways, if a county shade tree commission is
operative and gives assent to, shall be exercised by and under the authority
of Pequannock Township Shade Tree Commission which is hereby created.
The Commission shall consist of five members and two alternate members.
The members and alternate members shall be appointed by the Mayor and
shall be residents of the Township and shall serve without compensation
except as hereinafter provided.
Any public street, designated by the governing body to be within the
jurisdiction of the Shade Tree Commission.
(1)
(2) Municipal Parks and Parkways.
(3) County Roads.
(4) State Highways.
§ 003.37.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.38.030
001:42
§ 003.38.030. First commission; subsequent commissions; terms.
[Added 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
The first Commissioners, shall be appointed within 60 days after the
effective date of this ordinance, and their terms of office shall commence
upon the date of their appointment and be for the respective periods:
five members — of one, two, three, four and five years. The terms of each
appointee shall be designated in his appointment. All subsequent
appointments, except fill vacancies, shall be for the full term of five years,
to take effect on January 1, next succeeding such appointment. In the event
that the membership of any commission is increased, the new members
shall be appointed in such manner that the terms shall expire in accordance
with the foregoing.
§ 003.38.040. Organization. [Added 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
The Commission shall organize within 30 days after the appointment of
its total membership for the remainder of the then calendar year, and
thereafter, annually by the election of one of its members as Chairman and
the appointment of a secretary who need not be a member. Members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation.
§ 003.38.050. Vacancies. [Added 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
Any vacancy occurring by reason of death, resignation or removal of any
Commissioner shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor.
§ 003.38.060. Powers of Commission. [Added 6-22-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-7]
The Shade Tree Commission organized under this ordinance shall have
power to:
§ 003.38.070. Trees and improvements in the public right-of-way.
[Added 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
a. Control the regulation, planting and care of shade and ornamental trees
and shrubbery now located, or which may hereafter be planted in any
(1) public street and (2) park or parkway, including the planting,
trimming, spray, care and protection thereof;
b. Regulate and control the use of the ground surrounding the same, so far
as may be necessary for their proper growth, care and protection;
c. Move or require the removal of any tree, or part thereof, dangerous to
public safety;
d. Encourage arboriculture.
e. Make recommendations to the governing body concerning shade trees.
§ 003.38.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.38.070
001:43
§ 003.38.080. Public improvements affecting trees; consent of
commission, county park commissions unaffected. [Added
6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
No statute giving any person or State, county or municipal board, body or
official, power or authority to lay any sidewalk along, or to open, construct,
curb or pave any street, or to do any similar act, shall be construed to
permit or authorize any interference with or injury to a highway shade
tree without the consent of the Shade Tree Commission within whose
jurisdiction such tree shall be located. In all cases, such Commission shall
reasonably cooperate with such person, board, body or official for the
general public good. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be held to
take away or diminish any of the powers or authority of the Township of
Pequannock over the trees or shrubbery within its jurisdiction, or to give
any other commission or board any power or authority with respect to such
trees or shrubbery.
§ 003.38.090. Annual appropriation; estimate; amount. [Added
6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
During the month of December in each year, the Shade Tree Commission
shall certify to the Township Manager of the Township the estimated sum
necessary for the proper conduct of its work during the ensuing fiscal year,
which shall include the sums estimated to be expended for such of the
following items as it is anticipated expenditure will be made for, namely,
§ 003.38.100. Required permits. [Added 6-22-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-7]
a. The Commission may plant and care for trees in the public right-of-way
subject to funding.
b. A property owner who wishes to plant a tree in the public right-of-way
shall obtain the approval of the Commission prior to planting the tree.
a. Expenses of Commission members in discharging official duties
including expenses incident to attendance at professional meetings;
b. Purchase of trees and shrubbery; and
c. Purchase of necessary equipment and materials and the cost of services
for the prudent promotion of the work.
The governing body of the Township shall annually appropriate such sum as it
may deem necessary for said purposes.
A. No person shall do any of the following acts to any tree in a public rightof-
way without the prior permit of the Shade Tree Commission:
(1) Cut, prune, climb with spikes, break, damage or remove or kill
except that no prior approval of the Commission shall be required
§ 003.38.070 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.38.100
001:44
§ 003.38.110. Public utility exception. [Added 6-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-7]
for routine maintenance of trees including pruning of no more than
15% of the tree.
(2) Cut, disturb or interfere in any way with any root.
(3) Spray with any chemical.
(4) Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device. (Nothing herein shall
prevent any governmental agency from affixing in a manner
approved by the Shade Tree Commission a public notice upon a
tree in connection with administering governmental affairs).
(5) Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree
or shrub.
(6) Conduct razing, removal or renovation of any structure if deemed,
by the Commission, to be damaging to neighboring street trees.
(7) Place or distribute chemicals, including, but not limited to, salt
deleterious to tree health.
(8) Maintain a stationary fire or device which vaporizes noxious fumes
deleterious to tree health.
(9) Remove soil, either for trenching or otherwise.
(10) Construct new sidewalks and/or driveways with any material
whatsoever within five feet of a tree.
(11) Plant any tree or shrub within the designated area under the
control of the Commission.
A. The Shade Tree Commission may grant to public utility companies,
upon receiving written permission from the Commission at least 72
hours prior to the start of work, a blanket permit for (1) tree pruning
pursuant to a line clearance program and (2) for the installation of
subsurface and above-ground plant construction if there is interference
with or endangerment from street trees.
B. Public utility companies may, during periods of emergency, and without
specific prior permit (1) undertake emergency tree work to restore
electrical power and eliminate hazardous wire conditions and (2) make
emergency subsurface repairs. In such event the utility company will
notify the Commission of said work within three business days of its
beginning.
C. Each public utility company shall exercise reasonable diligence in the
maintenance of its plant construction so as to avoid damage to trees,
and shall follow A.N.S.I. or New Jersey Board of Tree Experts standards
for tree maintenance, pruning, or removal for line clearance for the
§ 003.38.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.38.110
001:45
§ 003.38.120. Issuance of permits. [Added 6-22-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-7]
Requests for permits required by the provisions of this ordinance for the
performance of work should be directed to the Shade Tree Commission. The
Commission may utilize such application forms as they deem necessary and
may establish an appropriate procedure to process such applications.
§ 003.38.130. Standards for tree removal on the streets and parks
of Pequannock Township. [Added 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
trees under the jurisdiction of the Pequannock Township Shade Tree
Commission.
A. The standards to be used by the Shade Tree Commission to determine
whether a tree under its jurisdiction can or cannot be removed or
pruned shall include the following criteria:
1. The tree is dead.
2. 20% to 30% of the tree crown has declined and it is aesthetically
unattractive.
3. The tree has structural deficiencies.
4. The tree has been repeatedly cut back by utility line clearance
crews, rendering it unattractive.
5. The presence of the tree in some way compromises public health,
safety or general welfare.
In the above instances, any costs incurred for the tree removal or pruning
shall be the responsibility of the Township of Pequannock or a public utility
company (or its authorized contactor), and shall be without any monetary
or other contribution from the property owner.
B. In situations where the Commission issues a permit for the removal of
trees in the public right-of-way that are not dead, unattractive, dying, or
unsafe, the following policy shall apply:
The property owner shall monetarily provide for suitable replacement
tree(s) prior to receiving a permit. Species, size and location planting
of replacement tree(s) or other Commission use of recovered funds will
be determined by the Commission.
Upon receiving a permit from the Commission, the property owner may
proceed with the tree pruning and removal pursuant to the following
conditions:
1. The property owner will be responsible for the full cost of tree,
stump and debris removal.
§ 003.38.110 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.38.130
001:46
§ 003.38.140. Penalty; jurisdiction of courts; copy of ordinance as
evidence. [Added 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
2. The Township of Pequannock is to be held harmless from any
damage, injury, or death that could possibly be sustained by the
tree work.
3. The tree work must be conducted by a fully insured tree removal
contractor.
4. The tree removal contractor shall comply with all New Jersey Board
of Tree Experts and A.N.S.I. pruning standards.
5. The tree removal contractor shall notify the Pequannock Police
Department prior to the temporary closing of any Township street
required for the safe removal of a Township tree.
A. The Commission may recommend a fine for violation of Shade Tree
ordinance in an amount not exceeding $1,500 for each violation and the
Municipal Court of Pequannock shall have jurisdiction over actions for
the violation of such ordinances, and its ordinances shall be enforced by
like proceedings and process as that provided by law for the
enforcement of ordinances of the Township. The officers authorized by
law to serve and execute process for the Municipal Court of the
Township shall be the officers to serve and execute any process issued
out of the Municipal Court for violations of the ordinances of the
Commission.
A copy of any ordinance certified to under the hand of its secretary or
Chairman shall be received in any court of this State as full and legal
proof of the existence of the ordinance, and that all requirements of law
in relation to the ordaining, publishing and making of the same, so as to
make it legal and binding, have been complied with, unless the contrary
be shown.
B. In addition to the penalties authorized by Subsection a. of this section,
the Commission may require a person who removes or otherwise
destroys a tree in violation of a municipal ordinance to pay a
replacement assessment to the Township. The replacement assessment
shall be the value of the tree as determined by the appraisal of a trained
forester or Certified Tree Expert retained by the commission for that
purpose. In lieu of an appraisal, the commission may adopt a formula
and schedule based upon the number of square inches contained in a
cross section of the trunk of the tree multiplied by a predetermined
value per square inch, not to exceed $27 per square inch. The square
inch cross section shall be calculated from the diameter at breast
height and, if there is a multiple stem tree, then each trunk shall be
measured and an average shall be determined for the tree. For the
purposes of this section, "diameter at breast height" shall mean the
diameter of the tree taken at a point 4.5 feet above ground level. The
§ 003.38.130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.38.140
001:47
§ 003.38.150. Disposition of penalties. [Added 6-22-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-7]
All moneys collected, either as fines or penalties, for any violation of a rule
or regulation of a shade tree commission enacted by ordinance, or as a
charge against real estate, under any provision of this ordinance shall be
forthwith paid over to the custodian of the municipal funds.
§ 003.38.160. Public notice. [Added 6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-7]
All regulations adopted by the Shade Tree Commission shall be filed with
the Municipal Clerk for inspection by the public during regular business
hours.
§ 003.39. Flood Control Commission.
§ 003.39.010. Flood Control Commission. [Added 9-25-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-28]
commission shall modify the value of the tree upon its species variety,
location and its condition at the time of removal or destruction.
C. Any public utility or cable television company that clears, moves, cuts
or destroys any trees, shrubs or plants for the purpose of erecting,
installing, moving, removing, altering or maintaining any structures or
fixture, necessary for the supply of electric light, heat or power,
communication, or cable television services upon any lands in which it
has acquired an easement or right-of-way shall not be subject to any
penalty imposed by a commission pursuant to Subsections A. or B. of
this section. This subsection shall not exempt any public utility or cable
television company from any penalty or replacement assessment
imposed for negligent actions.
A. The Township of Pequannock agrees to participate in the creation and
operation of the Central Passaic River Basin Flood Commission,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:14-16 et seq.
B. The Township of Pequannock shall invite the following municipalities
and counties to participate in said Commission: County of Passaic;
County of Essex; County of Morris; Township of Little Falls; Township of
Wayne; Township of Montville; Borough of North Caldwell; Township of
West Caldwell; Borough of Pompton Lakes; City of Paterson; Township
of Livingston; Borough of West Paterson; Borough of Lincoln Park;
Township of Parsippany; Township of East Hanover; Township of
Chatham; Borough of Totowa; Township of Nutley; Borough of Morris
Plains; Township of Fairfield; Borough of Riverdale; Township of
Hanover; Borough of Florham Park; Borough of Roseland; City of
Newark; Borough of Hawthorne.
C. The Central Passaic River Basin Flood Commission shall:
§ 003.38.140 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.39.010
001:48
(1) Collect, study and analyze data on flooding, past floods and the
causes of floods in the area;
(2) Make such data and studies available to the participating members,
to the Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Water
Supply, the Army Corps of Engineers, local and county Planning
Boards and officials concerned with subdivisions and development
of properties within the floodway and drainage area;
(3) Keep itself informed as to the available state and federal funds and
grants and the procedures for applying therefore and shall make
such information available to participating members;
(4) Coordinate the activities of the participating members relating to
flooding, flood prevention, brook cleaning and the like;
(5) Encourage the acquisition of lands within the floodway and lowlying
areas by appropriate county park commissions, counties or
participating municipalities and all federal and state agencies that
have jurisdiction in matters concerning the floodway and low-lying
areas;
(6) Publicize methods of flood control and flood prevention;
(7) Encourage its participating members to support other programs
designed or intended to alleviate flooding;
(8) Lobby federal and state legislators and federal and state agencies
to promote legislation favorable to the Central Passaic River Basin
and also to make available increased funding for flood control
measures in the Central Passaic River Basin;
(9) Perform such other acts and fulfill such other functions as may be
permitted by law and as determined by members, subject to the
limitations in this section and subject to limitations set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:14-16.
D. Any number of members of the Commission shall have the right to meet
at regularly scheduled meetings. Any action taken involving the
expenditure of funds other than clerical and mailing connected with the
usual business of the Commission shall be adopted only at a meeting at
which there are at least two counties represented and at least three
municipalities represented.
E. Each member municipality and county reserves the right to withdraw
from the Commission; provided, however, that at least 90 days' notice of
such intention is given to the Commission, and provided further that
such withdrawal, after the adoption of the Commission budget for a
given year, shall not abrogate the responsibility of the municipality or
county to meet its responsibility and obligation under the budget for
such year.
§ 003.39.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 003.39.010
001:49
F. The general, administrative and other expenses of the Commission
affecting the Commission as a whole shall be apportioned among the
members as follows:
(1) One-fourth thereof to be apportioned among the member counties;
and
(2) Three-fourths thereof to be apportioned to member municipalities
according to a formula taking into account population and frontage
along the Passaic River.
G. Whenever a specific project is to be undertaken involving less than the
interests of all of the participating members, the apportionment of the
costs thereof shall be agreed upon by the participating members
specially benefited thereby in advance of authorization of such project.
H. The apportionments may be changed by agreement among the
participating municipalities and counties; provided, however, that there
shall be no increase in the percentage to be contributed by any
participant in the expenses without the consent of the governing body
of such participating member.
I. Any budget proposed by the Commission must be submitted to the
governing bodies of the participating municipalities and shall become
effective only upon the adoption of resolutions by a majority of the
participating municipalities approving the budget.
J. The Township Council shall appoint two representatives to the
Commission. Either or both of said representatives may be a member of
the Township Council or other elective or appointive office in the
Township.
K. Each representative shall serve for a term of five years or until his/her
successor has been appointed and qualified, except that any appointed
representative who holds another elective or appointive public office
shall serve as such representative for the term of his/her elected or
appointed office and only so long as he/she shall hold such elected or
public office, notwithstanding his/her term of appointment as such
representative. Appointments to vacancies shall be filled for the
balance of the term only.
L. In addition to such representatives, the Council may appoint two
alternate representatives to the Commission who shall serve for a term
of one year each or until the appointment and qualification of their
successors. Such alternates shall have the right to attend all meetings
of the Commission and take part in all discussions. The alternates shall
be designated as first alternate and second alternate, and in such order
may represent the Township and vote in the event of the absence or
disability of one or both of the representatives. No alternative
representative shall automatically succeed to a representative position
upon a vacancy occurring in a regular position.
§ 003.39.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 003.41
001:50
§ 003.41. Teen Advisory Committee.
§ 003.41.010. Purpose. [Added 3-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-05]
The purpose of the Teen Advisory Committee is to represent the diverse
teen voices and focus on enhancing Township activities by developing
programs that link teens with the community.
§ 003.41.020. Composition; membership. [Added 3-27-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-05]
§ 003.41.030. Responsibilities. [Added 3-27-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-05]
The Teen Advisory Committee shall administer, plan and manage the Teen
and Youth initiatives of the Township of Pequannock and shall liaise with
Teens, Adults and Municipal Departments to explore and undertake various
projects to enhance the quality of life for Teens in the Township. The Teen
Advisory Committee shall be a strictly advisory body with no power to
regulate or promulgate rules and regulations. The Executive Committee of
the Teen Advisory Committee shall report to the Township Council and the
Township Manager on a regular basis regarding the Committee's activities.
Chapter 009
CODE OF ETHICS
A. The Teen Advisory Committee shall be comprised of a seven member
Executive Committee and a general membership population
encompassing teen and adult volunteers, who shall serve without
compensation, and shall apply for membership at the Administrative
Offices of the Township of Pequannock.
B. The Executive Committee of the Teen Advisory Committee shall
include:
1. Two adult advisors appointed by the Township Council for a term of
two years and who shall serve until the appointment and
qualification of their successors; and
2. The remaining five members of the Executive Committee shall be
selected by the membership at large for a term of one year and
shall serve until the election and qualification of their successors;
and
3. The Township Council shall appoint a liaison from the Council to
the Executive Committee.
§ 003.41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 009.01
001:51
§ 009.01. Adoption of standards.
The Township of Pequannock hereby adopts the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated, Title 40A:9-22.5 et seq. as the Code of Ethics of the Township of
Pequannock.
Chapter 013
INTERMUNICIPAL POLICE, FIRE AND FIRST AID
ASSISTANCE
§ 013.01. Establishment of reciprocal agreement.
The Township of Pequannock hereby establishes, pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 et seq., a reciprocal agreement with each and every
municipality within the County of Morris and the contiguous County of
Passaic for intermunicipal police, fire and first-aid assistance at times of
any and all emergencies. This chapter shall become effective as to each
and every other municipality within said counties at such time that said
municipality has in the past adopted or may in the future adopt an
ordinance providing the same terms and conditions set forth herein and
including the Township of Pequannock within its coverage.
§ 013.02. Municipal expenses.
The Township of Pequannock agrees to bear all reasonable expenses
incurred by members of its Municipal Police Department, Fire Department
and First Aid Squad for emergency assistance rendered within or without
the boundaries of this community. The Township of Pequannock shall make
no claim for reimbursement from any municipality adopting an ordinance
providing the same terms and conditions set forth herein for damages,
injuries, wages and like in connection with aid rendered by the members
of its Police Department, Fire Department and First Aid Squad through any
other municipality adopting such ordinance.
§ 013.03. Intermunicipal police authority.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.2, the members
of the Police Department of the Township of Pequannock and any other
municipality passing an ordinance with the same terms and conditions as
this chapter, while on duty rendering assistance to any other municipality,
shall have the same powers, authority and immunities as do the members of
the police force of the municipality in which such is being rendered.
§ 013.04. Intermunicipal fire authority.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 et seq., the
members of the Fire Department of the Township of Pequannock and any
other municipality passing an ordinance with the same terms and conditions
as this chapter, while on duty rendering assistance to any other
§ 009.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 013.04
001:52
municipality, shall have the same powers, authority and immunities as do
the members of the Fire Department of the municipality on which such
assistance is being rendered.
§ 013.05. Intermunicipal first aid authority.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 et seq., the
members of the First Aid Squad of the Township of Pequannock and any
other municipality passing an ordinance with the same terms and conditions
as this chapter, while on duty rendering assistance to any other
municipality, shall have the same powers, authority and immunities as
do the members of the first-aid squad of the municipality in which such
assistance is being rendered.
§ 013.06. Senior ranking officers.
At such times that an emergency may occur and intermunicipal aid is
requested, the Chief of Police of the municipality wherein said emergency
exists shall be the senior ranking officer of all members of any Police
Department which may be rendering assistance within the confines of said
municipality; the Chief of the Fire Department of the municipality wherein
said emergency exists shall be the senior ranking officer; and the Officer in
charge of the First Aid Squad of the municipality wherein said emergency
exists shall be the senior ranking officer.
Chapter 016
LAND USE PROCEDURES
§ 016.01. General Provisions.
§ 016.01.010. Short title.
The short title of this chapter shall be the "Pequannock Township Land Use
Ordinance."
§ 016.01.020. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the procedures for site plan,
subdivision, variance, conditional use and all other activities related to land
development in conformance with the Municipal Land Use Law (Chapter
291 of the Laws of New Jersey 1975).
§ 016.02. Planning Board.
§ 016.02.010. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55d-23 and the amendments
thereof and supplements thereto, a Planning Board is hereby created.
§ 013.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 016.02.020
001:53
§ 016.02.020. Membership; vacancies. [Amended 8-25-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-09]
§ 016.02.030. Compensation; terms of office; effect on present
members; qualifications.
A. The Planning Board shall consist of nine members designated into the
four following classes:
(1) Class I: the Mayor or the Mayors designee.
(2) Class II: an official of the Township as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.
(3) Class III: a member of the Township Council to be appointed by the
Council.
(4) Class IV: six citizens of the Township to be appointed by the
Township Council who shall hold no other municipal office,
position, or employment except as provided for in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-23.
B. There shall be two alternate members of the Planning Board appointed
by the Township Council and meeting the qualifications for Class IV
members.
C. If a vacancy of any class shall occur other than by expiration of the
term, it shall be filled by appointment as provided above for the
unexpired term.
A. All members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation.
B. Terms of the members shall be as follows:
(1) Class I: one-year term expiring on December 31 of the year
appointed or upon completion of the term of office of Mayor, and
until a successor is appointed and qualifies.
(2) Class II: one-year term expiring on December 31 of the year
appointed or upon the completion of the official's term of office,
whichever comes first.
(3) Class III: one-year term expiring on December 31 of the year
appointed or upon completion of the term of office on the Council,
and until a successor is appointed and qualifies.
(4) Class IV.
(i) The Class IV member who is a member of the Environmental
Protection and Flood Control Commission, a three-year term
expiring on December 31 of the third year of the term or upon
completion of his term of office on the Environmental
Commission, whichever occurs first.
§ 016.02.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 016.02.030
001:54
§ 016.02.040. Bylaws; officers.
§ 016.02.050. Powers and duties.
The Planning Board shall perform all of the duties and functions of:
(ii) If there is a Class IV member who is a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education, a four-year term which
shall expire on December 31 of the fourth year of the term or
upon completion of his term of office on the Board of
Adjustment or Board of Education, whichever occurs first.
(iii) For all other Class IV members, a four-year term, which shall
expire on December 31 of the fourth year of the term for which
they were appointed.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall, however, be construed to affect the term
of any present member of the Planning Board, all of whom shall
continue in office until the completion of the term for which they are
appointed.
D. All Planning Board members shall be 18 years of age or older.
A. The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its
procedural operation, which shall not be inconsistent with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or the provisions of this chapter.
B. It shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the members of Class
IV and select a Secretary who need not be a member of the Planning
Board.
A. Preparation and, after appropriate deliberation and public hearings,
adoption of a Master Plan for the development of the Township. Such
plan, in all respects, shall comply with and take into consideration the
matters mentioned in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28. With a frequency of at least
once in every six years, the Planning Board shall review, revise as
necessary and adopt a Master Plan for the Township.
B. Subdivision approval as required by the Township Subdivision
Ordinance.
C. Site plan approval as required by the Township Zoning Ordinance,
except where the Township Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have
jurisdiction over a site plan or subdivision pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-76 by reason of a use variance being involved in the application.
D. Granting conditional uses as permitted by the Township Zoning
Ordinance except where the Township Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall have jurisdiction over a conditional use pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-76 by reason of a use variance being involved in the application.
E. Following the review and adoption of the Master Plan, and not less than
one year from the date of such adoption, the Planning Board shall
§ 016.02.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 016.02.050
001:55
review and recommend to the Township Council, any amendments to
the Official Map which are needed in order to bring the Official Map
into conformance with the Master Plan.
F. The Planning Board, when reviewing an application for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan or conditional use, shall have the power, to
grant, grant conditionally or deny:
(1) Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
(2) Applications seeking the issuance of a construction permit for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street, public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area as established on
the Township Official Map pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
(3) Applications for the issuance of a construction permit for a building
or structure not on an improved and accepted street.
G. Prior to a hearing on adoption of a Zoning Ordinance any development
ordinance or any amendments or revisions thereto, the Township
Council shall refer any such proposed ordinance or amendment thereto
to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall make and transmit to
the Council, within 35 days of referral, a report, including
recommendations concerning the proposed ordinance or amendment
for, among other matters, conformance to the adopted Master Plan, and
any report to the Council shall include findings on the manner in which
said ordinance or amendment thereto conforms or does not conform to
the adopted Master Plan. The governing body shall review the report of
the Planning Board and may disapprove or change any
recommendations by a vote of the majority of its full authorized
membership. Failure of the Planning Board to act within 35 days shall
relieve the Council from the requirements of this section.
H. The Township Council may authorize the Planning Board to prepare or
review a program of municipal capital improvements projects over a
term of at least six years, and amendments thereto.
(1) The capital improvements program shall classify projects with
regard to the urgency and need for realization, and shall
recommend a time sequence for their implementation. Any such
program shall include an estimate of the displacement of persons
and establishments caused by each recommended project, and
shall otherwise conform to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-29.
Whenever the Planning Board is authorized and directed to prepare
a capital improvements program, every municipal department,
authority or agency shall, upon request of the Planning Board,
transmit to said Board a statement of all capital projects proposed
to be undertaken by such municipal department, authority or
agency, during the term of the program for study, advice and
recommendation by the Planning Board. When the Planning Board
has prepared a capital improvement program, it shall recommend
§ 016.02.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 016.02.050
001:56
§ 016.03. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
§ 016.03.010. Establishment.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 and the amendments
thereof and supplements thereto, a Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby
created. The Board of Adjustment shall constitute a continuation of the
Board of Adjustment in existence at the time of passage of this section.
§ 016.03.020. Membership; alternates.
§ 016.03.030. Compensation; terms of office.
said program to the Township Council which may adopt such
program with any modification as may be approved by affirmative
vote of the full authorized membership of the Council.
(2) Before taking action necessitating the expenditures of any public
funds incidental to the location, character or extent of a capital
project, within the Township, the Township Council or other public
agency having jurisdiction over the project, including the School
Board, county, state, or special district or authority shall refer such
action to the Planning Board for review and recommendation on
the proposed project and its conformance with the adopted Master
Plan. The Planning Board shall have 45 days upon which to act in
making a recommendation on the project.
I. The Planning Board may assemble data on a continuing basis as part of
a continuous planning process.
J. The Planning Board shall perform such other advisory duties as are
delegated to it by ordinance or resolution of the Township Council for
the aid and assistance of the Council or other agencies or officers.
K. The Board shall follow the procedures outlined in this chapter, the
Subdivision Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance* of the Township of
Pequannock for public hearings whenever any hearings shall be
required.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of seven members
appointed by the Township Council. One member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment may be appointed by the Council to the Township Planning
Board. All members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
residents of the Township and shall be 18 years of age or older.
B. In addition to the seven members aforesaid constituting the Zoning
Board of Adjustment proper, there shall be appointed by the Township
Council two alternate members, who shall be subject to all conditions
and requirements to which the original seven-member Board is subject.
Alternate members shall be designated by the Township Council as
"Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2."
§ 016.02.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 016.03.030
001:57
§ 016.03.040. Bylaws; officers.
§ 016.03.050. Powers and duties.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers and duties:
A. All members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall serve without
compensation.
B. Terms of the members shall be for four years. All terms shall expire on
December 31 of the last year of the term for which they were appointed.
C. The term of each such alternate member shall be for a period of two
years. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote.
D. All members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment in office at the effective
date of this article shall continue in office until the completion of the
term of office for which they were appointed. Any vacancy occurring
other than by the expiration of the term shall be billed for the unexpired
term only.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment is authorized to and shall adopt bylaws
governing its procedure operations. Said bylaws shall include such
rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of
the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and this
chapter.
B. The Board shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from among its
members and a Secretary who need not be a member of the Board or a
municipal employee.
A. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by
an administrative officer based on or made in the enforcement of the
Zoning Ordinance. The Board may reverse, affirm, wholly or in part, or
may modify any order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from and, to that end, have all the powers of the administrative officer
from whom appeal was taken.
B. To hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Zoning Ordinance or to make decisions on other special questions upon
which the Board is authorized to pass by any Zoning or Official
Township Map Ordinance adopted in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq.
C. Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or slope of a
specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional topographic
§ 016.03.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 016.03.050
001:58
conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of
property or by reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation
uniquely affecting a specific piece of property or the structure lawfully
existing thereon, the strict application of any regulation pursuant to
the Zoning Ordinance would result in peculiar and exceptional practical
difficulties or exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of
such property, to grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to
such property, a variance from such strict application of such regulation
so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship; or where, in an application
or appeal relating to a specific piece of property, the purposes of this
article would be advanced by a deviation from the Zoning Ordinance
requirements and the benefits of the deviation would substantially
outweigh any detriment, to grant a variance to allow departure from
the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, provided that no use variance
shall be granted under this subsection, and provided further that the
proposed development does not require approval by the Planning Board
of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in conjunction with which
the Planning Board has power to review a request for a variance
pursuant to C.40:55D-60a and Section 16-7 of the Ordinance.
D. In particular cases and for special reasons, to grant a variance to allow
departure from the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance to permit a use
or principal structure in a district restricted against such use or
principal structure; an expansion of a nonconforming use; deviation
from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a conditional use;
an increase in the permitted floor area ratio; an increase in density,
except as applicable to the required lot area for a lot or lots for
detached one- or two-dwelling-unit buildings, which lot(s) is either an
isolated undersized lot or a lot resulting from a minor subdivision; and,
where the height of a principal structure which exceeds 10 feet or 10%
of the maximum height permitted in the district for a principal
structure. A variance under this section shall be granted only by an
affirmative vote of 2/3 of the full authorized membership of the Board.
No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and the purpose of the Zone Plan and Zoning
Ordinance.
E. To grant, to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the
Planning Board, subdivision or site plan approval or conditional use
approval pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance whenever the proposed
development requires approval by the Board of Adjustment of a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
F. To direct the issuance of a permit for a building or structure:
(1) In the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, flood control
basin or public area reserved on the Official Township Map
(pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34).
§ 016.03.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 016.03.050
001:59
§ 016.03.060. Criteria for granting of variance.
No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
article unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially impair
the intent and purpose of the Zone Plan and Zoning Ordinance.
§ 016.03.070. Public hearings.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall follow the procedures outlined in this
chapter for public hearings whenever a hearing shall be required.
§ 016.04. Provisions applicable to both Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
§ 016.04.010. Conflicts of interest.
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 016.04.020. Meetings.
(2) Not related to a street (pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36).
A. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month and shall be held as
scheduled unless cancelled for lack of development applications to
process.
B. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
C. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
D. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members of the Board
present at the meeting except as otherwise required by any provision of
Chapter 291, Laws of New Jersey 1975 and subsequent amendment
thereto. *(C.40.55D-32, C.40:55D-34, C.40:55D-62, C.40:55D-17e,
C.40:55D-26a and b, C.40:55D-69d)
E. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the public
except when the public has been specifically excluded from a meeting
pursuant to Chapter 231, Laws of New Jersey 1975.* Notice of all such
meetings shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the
§ 016.03.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 016.04.020
001:60
§ 016.04.030. Minutes.
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Board, the findings,
if any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be
made available for public inspection during normal business hours at the
office of the Municipal Clerk and copies reproduced at a fee set by the
Township.
§ 016.04.040. Hearings.
Open Public Meeting Law, Chapter 231, Laws of New Jersey 1975, and
with any additional requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
A. Bylaws. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
adopt bylaws governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies
which rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. or of this chapter.
B. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigation Law, P.L.
1953, c. 1938 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.).
C. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses. Any maps
and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file
and available for public inspection at least 10 days before the date of
the hearing during normal business hours of the Planning Department.
D. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Record. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographic, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or a duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense, provided that
this charge does not exceed the maximum permitted by N.J.S.A.
2A:11-15. Such transcript shall be certified in writing by the transcriber
to be accurate.
F. Absence at hearing. A member of the Board who is absent for one or
more of the meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to
§ 016.04.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 016.04.040
001:61
§ 016.04.050. Notice requirements for hearings. [Amended
3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-2]
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall give notice thereof as
follows:
vote on the matter upon which the hearing was conducted, provided
that such Board member has read or listened to a recording of all of
the hearing from which he was absent and certified this to the Board in
writing.
A. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
B. Method of service.
(1) Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on
the current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of the hearing and
whether located within or without the municipality in which
applicant's land is located. Such notice shall be given by:
(i) Serving a copy thereof on the owner as shown on the current
tax duplicate or his agent in charge of the property; or
(ii) Mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner
at his address as shown on said current tax duplicate. A return
receipt is not required.
(2) Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon its
President, a vice President, secretary or other person authorized by
law to accept service on behalf of the corporation.
(3) Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime,
community trust or homeowners' association, because of its
ownership of common elements or areas located within 200 feet of
the property which is the subject of the hearing, may be made in
the same manner as to a corporation without further notice to unit
owners, co-owners, or homeowners. The requirement for individual
notice is limited to owners whose units could have been on
separate lots, such as townhouses.
C. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to this section to the citizens of lands in such
adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the subject
premises.
§ 016.04.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 016.04.050
001:62
D. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application:
(1) For property contiguous to an existing county road or proposed
road shown on the Official County Map or on the County Master
Plan.
(2) For property adjoining other county land.
(3) For property situated within 200 feet of an adjoining municipal
boundary.
E. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property contiguous to a state highway. This notice
shall not be required if municipal notice and notice to property owners
within 200 feet is not required.
F. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of an application for development of
property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units. Such notice
shall include a copy of any maps or documents required to be on file
with the Administrative Officer pursuant to Section 6b of P.L. 1975, c.
291. This notice shall not be required if municipal notice and notice to
property owners within 200 feet is not required.
G. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing.
H. Mailing and/or posting of notice.
(1) Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
(2) Notice of hearings on applications for subdivision or a site plan
approval not defined as a minor site plan shall be given to a public
utility, cable television company or local utility which possesses a
right-of-way or easement within the municipality and which has
registered with the municipality pursuant to Chapter 291, Laws of
N.J. 1975 (C.40:55D-12.1)*
I. Form of notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
§ 016.04.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 016.04.060
001:63
§ 016.04.060. List of property owners.
Upon the request of an applicant, the administrative officer shall, within
seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax duplicates of
names and addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give
notice pursuant to this chapter. The applicant shall be entitled to rely on the
information contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any owner
not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or proceedings. A sum not
to exceed $0.25 per name or $10, whichever is greater, may be charged for
such a list.
§ 016.04.070. Form of decisions.
§ 016.04.080. Publication of decision.
Within 10 days of the rendering of a decision, a brief notice of every final
decision shall be published in the official newspaper of the municipality.
Such publication shall be arranged by the Township Planner.
§ 016.04.090. Proof of payment of taxes.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 55D-65, every
application submitted to the Planning Board or to the Zoning Board of
adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments
for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property which is the
subject of such application.
§ 016.05. Variances.
§ 016.05.010. Power to grant variances.
The Board of Adjustment shall be empowered to grant variances from the
bulk or use provisions of the Township Zoning Ordinance and Official Map
Ordinance in a manner consistent with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
A. Each decision on any application shall be reduced to writing by the
Board in the form of a resolution which shall include findings of fact and
legal conclusions based there.
B. A true copy of the aforesaid resolution shall be mailed by the Board
within 10 days of the date of the adoption of the resolution to the
applicant, or to the applicant's attorney, without charge. A true copy of
the resolution shall also be mailed to those persons who have requested
and have paid the fee prescribed by the Board for such services. A true
copy of the resolution shall be filed in the office of the *[Municipal
Clerk]* Township Planner and be available to the public.
§ 016.04.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 016.05.020
001:64
§ 016.05.020. Expiration of variance. [Amended 11-23-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-26; 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-2]
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the Board
of Adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any structure or
structures or permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire by
limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by said variance, or
unless such permitted use has been actually been commenced, within one
year from the date of the entry of the judgment or determination of the
Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the running of the period of
limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal
from the decision of the Board of Adjustment to a court of competent
jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of such appeal or
proceeding; except further, in the case of a variance which also involves
a subdivision or site plan approval, the variance shall extend for the full
period of preliminary or final approval or any extension thereof pursuant to
the Municipal Land Use Law.
§ 016.05.030. Time limitations for official action.
The Board of Adjustment shall act on any variance before it within 120
days of the date the application is deemed by the administrative officer to
be complete or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. The administrative officer shall be, for purposes of the Zoning
Ordinance, the Township Zoning Officer and shall rule upon the
completeness of an application within 45 days of its submission.
§ 016.06. Fees.
§ 016.06.010. Fee schedule.
A development fee schedule is established per Chapter 79 of this "Code."
§ 016.07. Appeals.
§ 016.07.010. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment.
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance
or Official Township Map. Such appeal shall be made within 20 days of the
notice of decision by the administrative officer, by filing a notice of appeal
in the manner set forth in Section 16.03 of this chapter and in accordance
with the Municipal Land Use Law Chapter 291, Laws of N.J. 1975.
§ 016.05.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 016.07.020
001:65
§ 016.07.020. Appeals from Planning Board decisions. [Amended
3-24-2008 by Ord. No. 2009-2; 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-2]
An appeal from a decision of the Planning Board shall be made directly to
the court of competent jurisdiction. All appeals shall be made in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 016.07.030. Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment decisions.
[Amended 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-2]
An appeal from a decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be made
to a court of competent jurisdiction. All appeals shall be made in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 016.07.040. Appeals from governing body decisions.
Any appeal made from the decision of the governing body, as provided by
16.07.010 and 16.07.020, shall be made directly to the Superior Court of
the County of Morris as provided by law.
Chapter 019
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 019.01. Licenses and permits issued by Health Officer.
The following shall be issued by the Health Officer:
A. Retail food establishment license.
B. Vital statistic licenses, permits, and certifications.
C. Pet shop, kennel, and shelter licenses.
D. Individual sewage disposal operation license.
E. Individual sewage disposal construction permit.
F. Individual and public non-community water supply permit.
G. Public recreational bathing license and construction permit.
H. Leaf depository permit.
I. Incineration license.
J. Septage pumping permit.
K. Dog license.
L. Tattoo Parlor license.
§ 016.07.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 019.02
001:66
§ 019.02. Licenses and permits issued by Zoning Officer.
The following shall be issued by the Zoning Officer:
§ 019.03. Licenses and permits issued by Township Clerk.
The following shall be issued by the Township Clerk:
§ 019.04. Licenses and permits issued by Police Chief.
§ 019.05. Licenses and permits issued by Director of Public Works.
Right-of-Way construction permits.
§ 019.06. Licenses and permits issued by Uniform Fire Official.
§ 019.07. Licenses and permits issued by Uniform Construction
Official.
A. Gasoline license, station.
B. Gasoline license, private.
C. Motel and tourist court.
D. Special sales.
E. Number of horses.
F. Riding academy and livery stable.
A. Canvass and solicitor license.
B. Taxi license.
C. Garage sale permits.
D. Miniature golf license.
E. Hawkers and peddlers.
F. Raffle license.
G. Bingo license.
H. Liquor license.
A. Burglar alarm installation.
B. Burglar alarm maintenance.
A. Blasting.
B. Opening burning.
A. Construction permits to include plumbing, electrical, fire, and building.
§ 019.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 019.07
001:67
Chapter 029
SALARIES AND PERSONNEL
§ 029.01. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter the following word and terms are defined:
AVERAGE WEEKLY HOURS — Calculated as the arithmetic mean of the
weekly hours, excluding overtime hours, worked by an employee for 12
work weeks immediately prior to the benefit period in question. Average
weekly hours for newly hired employees will be calculated for a six-month
period from their date of hire for the benefit period in question.
CLASS I EMPLOYEE — Employment for a period of at least 35 hours per
week for 52 weeks per year.
CLASS II EMPLOYEE — Employment for a period less than 35 hours but
more than 10 hours per week for 52 weeks per year.
CLASS III EMPLOYEE — Employment for a period more than 10 hours per
week at least 26 but not more than 51 weeks per year.
CLASS IV EMPLOYEE — Employment for a period less than 11 hours per
week or less than 26 weeks per year.
HOURLY — Compensation paid an employee for work performed in the
identified job description computed on the basis of every hour or part
thereof.
SALARIED — Fixed compensation for work performed in the identified job
description computed on a fixed number of hours or fixed job description.
§ 029.02. Time sheets for employees.
Time sheets shall be prepared by the appropriate department heads and
submitted to the Township Manager or designee biweekly for all employees.
§ 029.03. Certification of payroll vouchers; issuance of checks.
The Township Manager shall prepare or have prepared under his direction
all payroll vouchers showing distribution of charges, to the Township
Treasurer, who is hereby authorized to issue one-signature checks to the
parties and in the amount so certified.
B. Sign permits.
C. Underground storage tank permits.
D. Swimming pool permits.
E. Fence permits.
F. Certificate of occupancies.
§ 019.07 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 029.04
001:68
§ 029.04. Confirmation and ratification by Council.
At each regular meeting of the Township Council, the Township Treasurer
shall submit for confirmation and ratification the necessary payroll for the
amount paid the officers and employees for compensation. The Payroll shall
be considered by the Township Council and in due course approved. In case
of error or adjustment in the payroll, the Township Treasurer shall see that
such error or adjustment is properly corrected and an appropriate record
made thereof.
§ 029.05. Salary schedule.
All employees of the Township of Pequannock shall be paid in accordance
with the salary schedule as adopted by ordinance of the Township Council
based upon their classification. Applicants with outstanding qualifications
or experience may be hired above the minimum with the approval of the
Township Manager.
§ 029.06. Eligibility for salary increases.
An employee shall be eligible for a salary increase on the first year
anniversary date of the employee's hire and thereafter on January 1st of
each year. Additional salary adjustments resulting from hiring, promotion,
demotion, individual merit, or negotiated contracts may be provided as
approved.
§ 029.07. Approval of salary increases.
A salary increase, within the limits authorized by the Township Council,
before becoming effective must be approved by the Township Manager
based upon merit and satisfactory job performance. All compensation for
the Township Manager and all other unclassified positions shall be approved
by the Township Council.
§ 029.08. Employees covered by agreements.
Employees represented by recognized collective bargaining units shall be
paid such wages and receive such benefits as set forth in agreements
between the Township and said bargaining units, such agreements being
incorporated herein by reference as negotiated and executed in accordance
with applicable state law.
§ 029.09. Fees for issuing forms.
No employee or officer shall receive any fee for issuing licenses, permits or
other forms unless provided by law.
§ 029.10. Paid time off. [Amended 8-26-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1;
1-27-1998 by Ord. No. 97-21; 3-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-9;
5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10; 7-25-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-15]
§ 029.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 029.10
001:69
A. Class I employees earn paid time off with pay for each full calendar
month of service in accordance with the following schedule or as
provided for in approved agreements:
Months of Continuous Service
(months)
Days of Paid Time Off Leave
Earned
(days/month)
1 to 48 1.83
49 to 108 2.25
109 to 192 2.67
193 to 228 2.75
229 to 240 2.83
241 to 252 2.92
253 to 264 3.00
265 plus 3.08 *
* Class II employees shall earn prorated paid time off with pay
based on the above schedule. Prorating for Class II employees
shall be determined by calculating the average work week during
the prior twelve-month period of, or from, the employment start
date, whichever is lesser.
B. Earned paid time off may be taken only at such time as the employee's
department head and the Township Manager may approve.
C. Paid time off may be taken in increments not less than 1/2 day as
approved by the employee's department head and the Township
Manager. A minimum of one-week written notice is required to request
paid time off in excess of two consecutive days. Paid time off in excess of
21 consecutive work days is prohibited in any twelve-month time frame
unless approved by the Township Manager.
D. Any employee, who is terminated from the service of the Township for
any cause, not involving moral turpitude, shall be paid for unused paid
time off accumulated under this section at their current rate of pay up
to a maximum of 35 days.
E. In case of death in the immediate family, a Class I, II or III employee
shall be granted up to three days bereavement leave. Immediate family
shall be defined as the employee's spouse, child, stepchild, mother,
father, brother or sister, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law or
sister-in-law, maternal and paternal grandparents. In the event of a
death in the immediate family in which extenuating circumstances
exist, additional days may be granted by the Township Manager.
F. All vacation and sick leave benefit time accumulated prior to the
enactment of this ordinance will be converted to paid time off.
§ 029.10 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 029.12
001:70
§ 029.12. Holidays. [Amended 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-10]
§ 029.13. Health benefits; life insurance. [Amended 3-23-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-9; 12-27-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-24; 12-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-34; 12-26-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-28; 6-25-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-15; 10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-16]
A. The following official holidays shall be observed by the Township for
Class I employees: New Year's Day; Martin Luther King's Birthday;
Presidents' Day; Good Friday; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor
Day; Veteran's Day; Thanksgiving Day; Day after Thanksgiving;
Christmas Day.
In addition, the Township Manager may, at his discretion, provide one
floating holiday.
Each Class II employee shall observe the above referenced Holidays
on a prorated basis provided the employee was normally scheduled to
work on the day of observance for the Holiday.
B. In the event that a holiday falls on a Saturday, the holiday shall be
observed on the preceding Friday. In the event that the holiday falls on
a Sunday, the holiday shall be observed on the following Monday or as
designated by the Township of Pequannock.
A. All Class I employees shall receive Health and Insurance benefits as
prescribed by the Township Council of the Township of Pequannock. All
other employee classifications shall not be entitled to such benefits
unless provided by approved agreement.
B. The Township shall implement the provisions of P.L. 2011, Chapter 78
which requires employee contributions towards health benefit costs.
The associated phase in of contributions and percentage of premiums
are hereby recognized and are established in accordance with state law.
C. After 25 years of full-time service to the Township, a Class I employee
upon retirement will be eligible to receive paid health benefits in effect
at time of retirement and pursuant to paragraph B of this section (Major
Medical and Hospitalization) until he/she is eligible for Medicare/
Medicaid coverage.
D. Effective January 1, 2002 all employees that qualify for hospitalization
coverage upon retirement from the Township shall be entitled to
receive the same coverage for the retired employee's spouse at a cost to
the retired member of $4,200 per year payable at a rate of $350 per
month. Said cost will be adjusted from time to time.
E. Effective January 1, 2011 all employees that qualify for health benefits
(Major Medical and Hospitalization) and are not covered by a separate
employment contract are eligible to elect to opt-out of the coverage.
Each eligible employee who elects to opt-out of the Township's health
benefit coverage will be paid an incentive of $1,200 per year, paid in
§ 029.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 029.13
001:71
§ 029.14. Longevity pay. [Amended 8-26-1997 by Ord. No. 97-1]
In addition to the salaries as provided herein, all Class I employees not
covered by agreements and hired prior to the effective date of this
ordinance shall be entitled to receive longevity payments in accordance
with the following schedule, based upon continuous and complete years of
service with the Township.
equal monthly payments. Should the employee elect to re-enroll in
the Township sponsored health benefits program the employee will be
subject to the program as offered at the time of re-enrollment without
preexisting conditions.
F. Effective January 1, 2014 accumulated paid time off benefit time in
excess of 45 days may be used by the employee to buy back benefit time
at the employees current rate of pay to offset any mandatory health
benefit costs. Benefit costs shall be calculated on a quarterly basis to
allow the employee an opportunity to determine the employees selected
method of payment. At any time accumulated paid time off is reduced
below the minimum 45 days, payroll deductions shall be made at the
employees then current rate of pay to cover the employees mandatory
health benefits costs, except the minimum of 45 days shall be waived
when an employee either; declares their retirement date and such date
is accepted by the Township; or, the employee is pension eligible.
G. Retired employees who are eligible for health insurance as provided for
in paragraph C of this section shall, when they become eligible for
Medicare/Medicaid be enrolled in such program and shall maintain that
enrollment. The Medicare/Medicaid shall then become the primary
health insurance program. The Township shall only provide
reimbursement for secondary Part B coverage for the employee as a
supplement to Medicare/Medicaid. However, should there be a younger
spouse for whom the retired employee would otherwise be entitled to
purchase continuing health benefits coverage under the provisions of
paragraph D of the section, that provision shall continue until such time
that the spouse is eligible for Medicare/Medicaid at which time the
Township plan for the spouse shall be terminated.
H. Retired employees who are eligible for continued health coverage
under the terms of paragraph C of this section and become eligible for a
group health plan as a result of post retirement employment shall enroll
in the employer sponsored health plan and notify the Township of the
effective date of the alternate coverage. The retiree can resume
coverage under the Township's plan in the event that group coverage is
no longer available to them.
§ 029.13 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 029.14
001:72
Years
Amount
(per year)
1 to 3 No compensation
4 to 9 $600 per year
10 to 14 $700 per year
15 to 19 $900 per year
Over 20 $1,400 per year
Employees hired after the effective date do not qualify for longevity pay.
§ 029.15. Service years credit. [Added 1-27-1998 by Ord. No. 97-21]
Employees who become reclassified from Class II, III, or IV to a Class I
employee shall be entitled to service years credit according to the following
formula for that period of uninterrupted service immediately preceding
reclassification. Service years credit will be used for calculation of benefit
days and longevity.
# years service x hours
worked part time
_______
1,820
= SERVICE YEARS CREDIT
Chapter 039
AIR POLLUTION
§ 039.01. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Air Pollution Control
Ordinance of the Township of Pequannock."
§ 039.02. Purpose and policy.
It is hereby found that pollution of the air presents a menace to the health,
welfare and comfort of the residents of the Township of Pequannock and
a cause of substantial damage to property located within the Township. In
order to prevent and reduce to some degree pollution of the atmosphere,
it is hereby declared to be the policy of the Township of Pequannock to
minimize such pollution as is hereinafter defined and to set forth and
establish standards governing the installation, maintenance and operation
of equipment and appurtenances which relate to combustion, which the
Township regards to be a potential source of air pollution.
§ 029.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 039.03
001:73
§ 039.03. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined otherwise from the context, the words or phrases
used in this chapter shall have the respective meanings assigned to them
hereunder:
AIR CONTAMINANT — Solid particles, liquid particles, vapors or gases
which are discharged into the outdoor atmosphere.
AIR POLLUTION — The presence in the outdoor atmosphere of one or
more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are or tend to
be injurious to human health or welfare, animal or plant life or property or
would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property.
ASBESTOS — Actinolite, amosite, anthophyllite, chrysotile, crocidolite,
tremolite.
DIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred to a substance being heated so that the
latter is contacted by the products of combustion and may contribute to the
total effluent.
DIRECTOR OF AIR POLLUTION CONTROL or DIRECTOR — The person
or persons who are authorized by this chapter to exercise the powers
prescribed by this chapter.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FRIABLE MATERIAL — Any material which can be crumbled, pulverized or
reduced to powder by hand pressure.
FUEL — Solid, liquid or gaseous materials used to produce useful heat by
burning.
GARBAGE — Animal waste or vegetable matter from houses, kitchens,
restaurants, hotels, produce markets or any other source of food of any kind
to be thrown away.
INCINERATOR — Any device, apparatus, equipment or structure used for
destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or substance,
including but not limited to refuse, garbage, trade waste, debris or scrap;
or a facility for cremating human or animal remains.
INDIRECT HEAT EXCHANGER — Equipment in which heat from the
combustion of fuel is transferred by conduction through a heat-conducting
material to a substance being heated, so that the latter is not contacted by
and adds nothing to the products of combustion.
INTERNAL CROSS-SECTIONAL DIMENSION — Any maximum linear
perpendicular distance from an inside wall of a stack or chimney to the
inside of an opposite wall, such as the diameter for a circular cross-section
or the length or width of a rectangular cross section.
LIQUID PARTICLES — Particles which have volume but are not of rigid
shape and which, upon collection, tend to coalesce and create uniform
homogeneous films upon the surface of the collecting media.
§ 039.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 039.03
001:74
MANUFACTURING PROCESS — Any action, operation or treatment
embracing chemical, industrial, manufacturing or processing factor,
methods or forms, including but not limited to furnaces, kettles, ovens,
converters, cupolas, kilns, crucibles, stills, dryers, roasters, crushers,
grinders, mixers, reactors, regenerators, separators, filters, reboilers,
columns, classifiers, screens, quenchers, cookers, digesters, towers,
washers, scrubbers, mills, condensers or absorbers.
MOTOR VEHICLES — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, except such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks.
ODOR — The property of a substance which affects the sense of smell.
OPACITY — The property of a substance which renders it partially or wholly
obstructive to the transmission of visible light expressed as the percentage
to which the light is obstructed.
OPEN BURNING — Any fire wherein the products of combustion are
emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or
chimney of an incinerator.
OPERATOR — Any person who has care, custody or control of a building or
premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without knowledge of the
owner thereof.
OUTDOOR ATMOSPHERE — Air space outside of buildings, stacks or
exterior ducts.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or shall have charge or control of any dwelling
or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or a fiduciary, including
but not limited to executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver
or guardian of the estate; or as a mortgagee in possession, regardless of
how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or
reassigning any part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed
to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall have a joint responsibility over
the portion or the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
PARTICLES — Any material, except uncombined water, which exists in
finely divided form as liquid particles or solid particles at standard
conditions.
PERSON — Includes corporations, companies, associations, societies, firms,
partnerships and joint-stock companies as well as individuals, and shall
also include all political subdivisions of this state or any agencies or
instrumentalities thereof.
PLANT LIFE — Vegetation, including but not limited to trees, tree branches,
leaves, yard trimmings, shrubbery, grass, weeds, and crops.
REFUSE — Rubbish, garbage, trade waste and plant life.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Ringelmann's Scale for Grading the
Density of Smoke, as published by the United States Bureau of Mines,
or any chart, recorder, indicator or device which is approved by the New
§ 039.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 039.03
001:75
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection as the equivalent of said
Ringelmann's Scale for the measurement of smoke density.
RUBBISH — Waste solids not considered to be highly flammable or
explosive, including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, rubber,
carpets, wood, excelsior, papers, ashes, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery,
masonry and other similar materials.
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any operation or activity from which is salvaged
or reclaimed any product or material, including but not limited to metals,
chemicals, or shipping containers.
SMOKE — Small gas borne or airborne particles, exclusive of water vapor,
arising from a process of combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
SOLID PARTICLES — Particles of rigid shape and definite volume.
SOURCE OPERATION — Any manufacturing process or any identifiable part
thereof emitting an air contaminant into the outdoor atmosphere through
one or more stacks or chimneys.
STACK or CHIMNEY — A flue, conduit or opening designed and constructed
for the purpose of emitting air contaminants into the outdoor air.
STANDARD CONDITIONS — 70° F. and one atmosphere pressure [14.7 psia
or 760 millimeters mercury].
TRADE WASTE — All waste solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations, or the prosecution of any business,
trade or industry, including but not limited to plastic products, cartons,
paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and
other forms of solid or liquid waste material.
VISIBLE SMOKE — Smoke which obscures light to a degree readily
discernible by visible observation.
§ 039.04. Restricted activities.
A. Air pollution. No person or owner of property, or person or persons
having possession or control thereof shall cause, suffer, allow or permit
to be emitted into the open air substances in such quantities as shall
result in air pollution. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
the use of economic poisons.
B. Open burning. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit a salvage
operation by open burning. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit the disposal of rubbish, garbage or trade waste, or buildings or
structures, by open burning. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or
permit the disposal of any type of plant life by open burning. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to:
(1) Variances approved and issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:27-2.
§ 039.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 039.04
001:76
§ 039.05. Standards for emission of solid particles.
§ 039.06. Smokestacks and chimneys.
(2) Open burning of refuse for training or research exercises when
conducted at a permanent facility or training center designed to be
used solely for such purposes on a continuing basis.
C. Smoke from combustion of fuel.
(1) No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit smoke to be emitted
into the outdoor air from combustion of fuel in any stationary
indirect heat exchanger, except as hereinafter provided.
(2) No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke, the shade or
appearance of which is darker than No. 1 on the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, or greater that 20% opacity, exclusive of water vapor,
to be emitted into the outdoor air from the combustion of fuel in
any stationary indirect heat exchanger having a rated hourly
capacity of 200 million British thermal units or greater gross heat
input, and discharging through a stack or chimney having all
internal cross-sectional dimensions of 60 inches or greater.
(3) The provisions of this Subsection C shall not apply to smoke which
is visible for a period of not longer than three minutes on a
consecutive thirty-minute period, nor shall they apply to direct heat
exchanger or manufacturing processes or any motor vehicle
operating on the public highways.
(4) Any person responsible for the construction, installation, alteration
or use of an indirect heat exchanger shall, when requested by the
Director, provide the facilities and necessary equipment for
determining the density or opacity of smoke being discharged into
the open air.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit particles to be emitted
from any stack or chimney into the outdoor air the shade or appearance
of which is greater than 20% opacity, exclusive of water vapor.
B. The provisions of this section shall not apply:
(1) To particles the shade or appearance of which is greater than 20%
opacity, exclusive of water vapor, for a period of not longer than
three minutes in any consecutive thirty-minute period.
(2) To source operations issued a variance by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection in accordance with
Subchapter 6.5 of the New Jersey Administrative Code.
(3) To indirect heat exchangers.
(4) To incinerators.
§ 039.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 039.06
001:77
§ 039.07. Incinerators.
A. Except as herein provided, persons burning solid or liquid fuel whose
products of combustion are discharge into the open air from a stack or
chimney shall submit to the Director information for each such stack or
chimney relating to place, type of fuel burned, heat content in fuel
burned, quantity of fuel burned per hour and/or year, description of
combustion equipment, usual period of operation, height and size of
outlet and description of air pollution control equipment, and such
other and pertinent information as may be requested, on forms
provided for that purpose by the Director. The application forms shall
also require submission of name, address and telephone number of the
person or persons responsible for day-to-day operation and, also, of the
person or persons responsible for maintenance of any such equipment.
Any change in the name, address or telephone number of such person
or persons shall be reported within 10 days of the occurrence of such
change to the Director.
B. Such information shall be submitted to the Director within 90 days after
either new installations are placed into service or existing installations
are altered. Nothing herein shall be construed as relieving any person
from the requirements of the Building Ordinance of the Township of
Pequannock. Additional reports concerning these items may be
requested by the Director.
C. The provisions of 39.07 shall not apply to equipment designed or used
for a heat input rate not more than 1,000,000 British thermal units
(Btu's) per hour unless the equipment is designed for or actually using
No. 4, 5 or No. 6 fuel oil or coal.
A. Permits.
(1) No person shall operate or permit the operation of an incinerator in
the Township of Pequannock without a permit issued by the
Director in accordance with this chapter.
(2) The Director shall issue a permit for the operation of an incinerator
after examining the application and inspecting the facility and
being satisfied that it may be operated in accordance with this
chapter.
(3) Said permit may be conditioned on improvements being made
within prescribed time or on certain operating restrictions, if
necessary, to comply with this chapter.
(4) All permits shall be issued by the Health Officer and shall expire
September 15 following their issuance, or at such time prior
thereto as any conditions or restrictions shall not be complied with.
(5) Each incinerator shall require a permit for which the annual fee
shall be $25, payable to the Township of Pequannock Health
Department.
§ 039.06 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 039.07
001:78
§ 039.08. Asbestos surface coatings.
B. No person shall operate or permit the operation of an incinerator in the
Township of Pequannock for a period of time more than eight hours per
day, five days a week, said time of operation shall be such time as in the
judgement of the Director of Air Pollution Control shall cause the least
inconvenience to surrounding residents.
Startup time shall not occur before 7:00 a.m. and complete shut-down
shall occur no later than 3:00 p.m., with the last charge occurring so
that there will be no emissions occurring after shutdown, including
complete extinction of the fire and removal of materials from the firebox
to a noncombustible container and in safe manner.
The Director may, by special permit, because of exceptional
circumstances, permit different hours of operation under such
conditions as he shall deem necessary for the health, safety and welfare
of the public or of persons in the vicinity.
C. Where the operation of an incinerator constitutes an immediate and
substantial menace to public health and safety, or is a substantial
source of air pollution causing irritation and discomfort to persons in
the vicinity, and the owner or operator fails upon written or oral notice
to take immediate corrective measures, the Director may take all
necessary measures to abate the condition, including but not limited to
ordering the cessation of use of the equipment and sealing the same,
pending a hearing in the Municipal Court.
D. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any
incinerator the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 of the
Ringelmann Smoke Chart to be emitted into the open air; or emissions
of such opacity within a stack or chimney, or exclusive of water vapor, of
such opacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree greater than the
emission designated as No. 1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart.
E. The provisions of Subsection D of this section shall not apply to smoke
emitted during the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of
which is not greater than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart for a
period of three consecutive minutes; or emissions of such opacity within
a stack or chimney, or exclusive of water vapor, of such opacity leaving
a stack or chimney to a degree greater than the emission designated as
No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period no greater than
three consecutive minutes.
F. No person shall cause suffer, allow or permit the emission of particles of
unburned waste or ash from any incinerator which are individually
large enough to be visible while suspended in the atmosphere.
G. No person shall construct, install, use, or cause to be used any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell
in any area human use or occupancy.
§ 039.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 039.08
001:79
§ 039.09. Director of Air Pollution Control.
The Health Officer of the Township of Pequannock shall, in addition to his
other duties, enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter and, in
exercising his powers and duties hereunder, shall be known as the "Director
of Air Pollution Control."
§ 039.10. Inspections and right of entry.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit surface coating by
spraying on any building, structure, facility, installation or internal or
external portion thereof, asbestos or friable material containing in
excess of 0.25% (by weight) asbestos.
B. Testing.
(1) Any person responsible for the manufacture, application or use of
any coating, which the Director, or any agent thereof, has reason to
believe contains asbestos shall, when requested by the Director,
conduct such tests as are necessary, in the opinion of the Director,
to determine the presence and the amount and/or kinds of asbestos
in the coating. Such tests shall be conducted in a manner approved
by the Director and shall be made at the expense of the person
responsible.
(2) The Director may waive the testing requirements of Subsection
B(1) of this section upon receipt of a materials specification report
from the material manufacturer certifying that the asbestos
content of the surface coating for which testing is required
complies with the provisions of Subsection A of this section.
A. Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the
Director has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an
immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall only
take place where the time taken to apply for and secure the issuance of
a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to
abate the condition.
B. Emergency inspections may also be authorized by the Governor in
times of air pollution emergencies in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:2C-32.
C. Where the Director or his agent is refused entry or access, or is
otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator
from conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in
violation this chapter and subject to the penalties hereunder.
D. Search warrant.
(1) The Director may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Township
of Pequannock for a search warrant setting forth factually the
actual conditions and circumstances that provide a reasonable
§ 039.08 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 039.10
001:80
§ 039.11. Construal of provisions.
Chapter 041
basis for believing that a violation of the chapter may exist on the
premises, including one or more of the following:
(i) That the premises requires inspection according to the cycle
established by the Township for periodic inspections of the
premises of the type involved.
(ii) That observation of external conditions (smoke, ash, soot,
odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the
belief that violations of this chapter exist.
(iii) Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning
equipment and/or the system, type of incinerator, particular
use of the premises or other factors which render systematic
inspections of such buildings necessary in the interest of public
health and safety.
(2) If the Judge of the Township of Pequannock is satisfied as to the
matter set forth in said affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of
a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of
the premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
E. All buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject to
inspection from time to time by the Director of Air Pollution Control or
his duly authorized representatives. All rooms and areas in the building
shall be available and accessible for such inspection, which shall be
made during usual business hours if the premises are used for
nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that inspections may be
made at other times if the premises are not available during the
foregoing hours for inspection; there is reason to believe that violations
are occurring on the premises which can be determined and proved by
inspection only during other than the prescribed hours; or there is
reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an immediate
threat to health or safety requiring inspection and abatement without
delay.
A. This chapter is to be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose
herein described. Nothing herein is to be construed as repealing or
abridging the emergency powers of any agency of government except
to the extent expressly set forth herein.
B. This chapter is promulgated and adopted in accordance with N.J.S.A.
26:2C-8, P.L. 1954, c. 212 (N.J.S.A. 26:2C-1 to 2C-23), amended by P.L.
1962, c. 215; P.L. 1967. c. 105; and P.L. 1967, c. 106; and nothing
contained herein, or any action taken hereunder is to be interpreted as
being in conflict with the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Act and the
New Jersey Administrative Code.
§ 039.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 039.11
001:81
ALARM SYSTEMS
§ 041.01. General Provisions.
§ 041.01.010. Purpose. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-6]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, fire and other emergency alarm devices
which will directly or indirectly cause a response by the Police Department,
Fire Department or other municipal agencies.
§ 041.01.020. Scope. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-6]
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains or owns any location which requires a response to any type of
alarm signal. The terms of this chapter shall in no way prohibit alarm
companies from providing service by private source to other offices within
or without the Township of Pequannock, provided it/they comply with the
rules and regulations of alarm systems.
§ 041.01.030. Promulgation of rules.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and empowered to adopt such
rules as he may deem reasonably necessary to fulfill the purposes of this
chapter. Such rules shall be in writing and shall be given to each permittee
at the time of the issuance or renewal of such permits or at the time of the
promulgation or amendment thereof.
§ 041.02. General Alarm Regulations.
§ 041.02.010. Registration; fees. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-6]
A. Any person, firm or corporation which owns or operates an alarm
device shall make application for continuance thereof in writing to the
Chief of Police on the form provided by the Police Department, which
application shall contain at least the location of the device, the person
responsible for maintenance of the device, the type of device,
provisions relating to false alarms and testing procedures, a list of
persons to be contacted in the event of an alarm, and other information
as may be required by the Chief of Police.
B. Alarms shall be registered, but no fee shall be charged therefor.
C. Any registration permitted hereunder shall be accepted upon the
express condition that the registrant shall indemnify and hold the
Township of Pequannock harmless from and on account of any and all
damages arising out of the activities of the registrant, its alarm
contractor.
§ 039.11 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 041.02.010
001:82
§ 041.02.020. Limitation of obligation of Township, permit
revocation.
§ 041.02.030. General regulations. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-6]
§ 041.03. Private Alarm Systems.
§ 041.03.010. Definitions. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-6]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any system installed to serve an improved property,
dwelling, building, or other facility and designed or used for detection of
fire, smoke or similar hazards, the detection of unauthorized entry, the
commission of an unlawful act, or the detection of any one or more of the
foregoing, or for reporting any emergency, which system communicates or
causes the communication of information, either directly or indirectly, to a
dispatch center authorized by the Township.
D. Alarm permits shall not expire. The Chief of Police shall be notified in
writing of any change in the alarm registration information.
A. Notwithstanding the payment of any fee as herein required and/or the
receiving or issuance of any permit as herein required, the Police
Department of the Township of Pequannock shall be under no obligation
whatsoever concerning the adequacy, the operation or maintenance of
the alarm system so installed, and the Township of Pequannock and its
authorized agents hereby assume no liability whatsoever for any failure
of any such alarm system, failure to respond to any such alarms or for
any act of omission or commission as a result of any such alarm, device
or system.
B. The applicant or permittee, upon the acceptance of such permit, hereby
agrees to hold and save harmless the Township of Pequannock, its
agents or employees from any liability whatsoever in connection with
any such alarm system or the operation of the same.
C. Any individual permit issued hereunder may be revoked at any time by
the Chief of Police, provided that 30 days' notice is given in writing to
said permittee.
A. Time delay. All audible alarms shall be equipped with a time delay or
battery to limit the sounding of an alarm to 10 minutes or less.
B. Business owners, occupants of commercial establishments, home
owners, or residents of Pequannock Township shall be deemed
responsible for any and all false alarms generated by an alarm system
located on their premises. This provision shall apply whether or not an
alarm has been properly registered in accordance with the applicable
ordinances.
§ 041.02.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 041.03.010
001:83
DISPATCH CENTER — The Township police department, the Township fire
department, any communications center operated by the County of Morris
or any central alarm monitoring facility which communicates the activation
of an alarm to the police dispatch center.
FALSE ALARM — Any signal or message by an alarm system or central
alarm monitoring facility to the police dispatch center to which a response
is initiated, which signal or message was directly or indirectly caused or
produced by an alarm system in the absence of any smoke, fire, similar
hazard, unauthorized entry, commission of an authorized act, or the
existence of any other emergency, and whether caused by intentional act,
negligence, mechanical failure, malfunction or improper installation or
maintenance of the system. Activations caused by power shall not be
considered false alarms, provided, however, that an activation resulting
from a failure to install an anti-power surge device or any other equipment
or device required by applicable State regulation(s) shall constitute a false
alarm unless carelessness, improper installation or incorrect care or
maintenance is determined to be the cause of the activation.
§ 041.03.020. Permit required for private alarm system. [Amended
3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-6]
An alarm system may be any one of the following types:
DIGITAL SYSTEM — Which through telephone lines activates an
audible alarm at a dispatch center and provides both an
information read-out and printout.
(1)
TAPE DIALER SYSTEM — Which automatically selects a telephone
trunk line of a dispatch center and then reproduces a prerecorded
message.
(2)
TELEPHONE CALL SYSTEM — Which automatically alerts a
person, beyond the limits of the property served, who is engaged
in the business of relaying information by telephone to a dispatch
center.
(3)
A.
A device used by a Township resident for the sole purpose of giving
notification of a medical emergency and summoning medical assistance
shall not be considered to be an alarm system as defined herein and
shall not be subject to any of the provisions of this section. Which
automatically alerts a person, beyond the limits of the property served,
who is engaged in the business of relaying information by telephone to
a dispatch center.
B.
A. No person shall install, maintain, use or cause or permit to be used any
alarm system within the Township unless a permit has been issued in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
B. Permits shall be updated in writing with the Chief of Police at any time
when the original information has changed. Failure to update alarm
information shall constitute a violation.
§ 041.03.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 041.03.020
001:84
§ 041.03.030. Application for permit. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-6]
Any person desiring to use an alarm system upon improved property owned
or occupied by such person shall submit a written application to the police
department and Bureau of Fire Safety for a permit for the system. An
application form shall be available in the office of the Township police
department and shall require the following information over the signature
of the applicant:
§ 041.03.040. Review of application and issuance of initial permit.
[Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-6]
The Chief of Police, the Fire Official or his designee shall cause each initial
application for a permit to be reviewed for the purposes of determining
whether the system proposed by the application meets applicable standards
for the private alarm system set forth in Subsection 041.03.050. The Chief
of Police shall issue an initial permit for the proposed private alarm system
within five calendar days after the receipt of the application unless he is
of the opinion that the proposed system will not meet applicable standards
in which case the Chief of Police/Fire Official shall advise the applicant in
writing of the reason or reasons for refusing to issue the permit.
C. No person shall use an alarm system that has not been registered with
the Chief of Police.
D. The issuance of a permit shall not relieve any person from the
requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code as amended and
regulations enacted thereunder for a permit under the Electrical
Subcode and/or Fire Subcode to install, alter or repair an alarm system.
E. A permit application shall be considered to be approved after being
reviewed and accepted by the Chief of Police. No paper copy of an
approved permit shall be issued.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
B. The location of the property to be served.
C. The name, address and telephone number of the company which will
supply and maintain the alarm system.
D. The name, address and telephone number of the company providing
monitoring service to the alarm system.
E. The particular type of alarm system.
F. The name and telephone number of a person or persons to be notified of
a faulty alarm system at any time when no one is present on the
property served by the system.
§ 041.03.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 041.03.050
001:85
§ 041.03.050. Inspection of installation, alteration or repair of
private alarm system.
Installation, alteration or repair of a private alarm system shall be inspected
by the electrical subcode official or fire protection subcode official in
accordance with the regulations promulgated under the State Uniform
Construction Code. Copies of reports of inspections shall be filed with the
Township chief of police. Copies of reports of inspection(s) should be filed
with the Chief of Police and fire official.
§ 041.03.060. Prohibition against new tape dialer systems.
No application for an initial permit shall be filed or accepted for any tape
dialer system. This prohibition shall not affect the renewal of a permit for
any such system provided that an initial permit for the system was issued
prior to August 31, 1994.
§ 041.03.070. Terms and conditions of permits. [Amended
3-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-6]
All permits for alarm systems shall be issued upon the following terms and
conditions:
A. A permit shall be issued for each separate improved property and no
permit shall be transferred or assigned in any manner.
B. All alarm systems installed in the Township shall utilize equipment and
methods of installation substantially equivalent to or exceeding the
minimum applicable current American National Standards Institute
(ANSI), Underwriters Laboratories (UL) or National Fire Protection
Association (NFPA) Standards and/or standards of the State Uniform
Construction Code and regulations promulgated thereunder; all of said
standards shall be available in the office of the Township Construction
Code official. The type of system, level of protection, grade of service
and area protected shall be selected by the owner or occupant of the
property served by the system. If required, an applicant shall furnish
complete information and specifications for the system. Such
information shall include specific data relating to testing procedures
and the prevention of false alarms.
C. Every permit shall be subject to rules and standards which may be
promulgated by the Township Chief of Police/Township fire official.
These rules shall be in writing and shall be given to each person who
may apply for an initial or renewal permit or to each permittee at the
time of said promulgation or amendment.
D. Every alarm system shall be maintained in proper working condition.
All alarm systems shall be inspected, tested and maintained in strict
compliance with the manufacturer's instructions, approvals and
minimum standards referred to in Subsection 41.03.070B. All system
§ 041.03.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 041.03.070
001:86
§ 041.03.080. False alarms and fines. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-6; 5-24-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-13; 4-22-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
components shall be inspected, tested and serviced at least once each
year by an authorized servicing agent.
E. Whenever, by reason of a false alarm or alarms, the Chief of Police/
Township fire official may determine that an alarm system is not in
proper operating condition, the person responsible for the alarm shall,
upon receiving written notice from the Chief of Police/Township fire
official, have the system inspected and serviced by an authorized
servicing agent within 48 hours after receiving such notification. A copy
of the agent's report shall be filed with the Chief of Police/Township fire
official.
F. Any prerecorded message resulting from the operation of an alarm
system shall be worded in a form approved by the Chief of Police/
Township fire official. No prerecorded telephone message shall repeat
for a continuous period of more than three minutes.
G. Whenever following the issuance of an initial permit or renewal permit
there is a change in the information previously furnished by the
applicant, the permittee shall promptly notify the Chief of Police/
Township fire official of such change.
H. Every permittee shall accept the provisions of 41.03.080, which shall
appear on the permit.
A. Reports of False Alarms. The Chief of Police at his discretion shall cause
a report of constantly recurring false alarms by an alarm system in the
Township to be prepared and submitted to the police department on a
form provided by the Chief of Police. Sufficient information shall be
furnished to enable the Chief of Police to determine whether inspection
and servicing of the system should be required as provided in
Subsection 41.03.070.
A copy of the agent's report shall be filed with the Township fire official
and Chief of Police.
B. Fees for False Alarms; Violations for Failure to Pay.
1. The Chief of Police and Fire Official shall be responsible for
maintaining records of false alarms pursuant to the provisions of
41.03.070.
2. There shall be a false alarm fee charged after the first false alarm
in a calendar month. The fee shall be billed by the Police
Department by notice mailed to the responsible party. The
following false alarm fees shall be assessed upon the residential
property owner, business owner, or person responsible for the
system:
§ 041.03.070 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 041.03.080
001:87
§ 041.03.090. Suspension of permit. [Amended 3-28-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-6]
Residential Alarm Fee Schedule
For 1 false alarm in a calendar
month:
No fee
For 2 false alarms in a calendar
month:
$20
For 3 false alarms in a calendar
month:
$50
For 4 to 6 false alarms in a calendar
month:
$100
For 7 or more false alarms in a
calendar month:
$200
Commercial Alarm Fee Schedule
For 1 false alarm in a calendar
month:
No fee
For 2 false alarms in a calendar
month:
$20
For 3 false alarms in a calendar
month:
$50
For 4 to 6 false alarms in a calendar
month:
$200
For 7 or more false alarms in a
calendar month:
$350
3. Alarm fees shall be paid within 10 calendar days after mailing of
notice. The failure to pay the alarm fees within 10 calendar days
after mailing shall be a violation of this chapter. An individual
violating this chapter shall be subject to a penalty to be enforced in
the Municipal Court of a fine not to exceed $100 for the first offense
and a fine up to $500 for each subsequent offense which shall be
paid in addition to the false alarm fee.
A. Any permit issued for an alarm system may be suspended by the Chief
of Police/fire official if it shall appear that:
1. The permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this
section, the terms and conditions of the permit or the rules or
standards promulgated by the Chief of Police/fire official with
respect to private alarm systems.
2. The permittee or his agent knowingly installed or maintains a faulty
private alarm system. Six false alarm activations within any 12
§ 041.03.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 041.03.090
001:88
§ 041.03.100. Disclaimer of responsibility. [Amended 3-28-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-6]
The Township shall not assume any responsibility whatsoever with respect
to the adequacy of operation or maintenance of any alarm system. No action
taken by the Township or any of its officials or employees pursuant to the
provision of this chapter shall create any liability upon the Township by
reason of any failure of any alarm system, any failure to respond to any
emergency or any act of omission or commission relating to any alarm
system. Every person who accepts a permit for an alarm system agrees to
hold and save harmless the Township, its officials and employees from any
liability whatsoever in connection with the system covered by the permit or
its operation.
§ 041.03.110. Monthly reports by the Chief of Police/fire official.
The Chief of Police shall furnish monthly reports to the Township Manager
regarding the number of false alarms reported to the Chief of Police
subsequent to the previous monthly report, as well as such details
respecting false alarms as the Township Manager may from time to time
request.
month period shall constitute prima facie evidence that the private
alarm facility is faulty.
3. The permittee has failed to pay a fee for a false alarm or alarms as
required by Subsection 41.03.080, within 15 days of the receipt of a
notice from the Chief of Police/fire official that such a fee is due.
4. The permittee or his agent has failed to comply with a request by
the Chief of Police to render necessary services within 48 hours
after such request is made by the Chief of Police or Township fire
official or has failed to disconnect such system within such period
and until such system has been serviced.
B. In the event that the Chief of Police/fire official shall determine that a
permit for an alarm system should be suspended by reason of the
provisions of this subsection, the Chief of Police/fire official shall notify
the permittee of the suspension in writing by certified mail forwarded to
his last known address, setting forth the reason or reasons for the
suspension.
C. A suspension shall be terminated by the Chief of Police/fire official when
he is satisfied that the conditions stated in the notice of suspension
have been corrected or the reasons for the suspension eliminated. Prior
to terminating a suspension the Chief of Police/fire official may in his
discretion require that the system be inspected by a qualified expert
employed by the Township in order to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, terms and conditions applicable to permits
for alarm systems and rules or standards promulgated by the Chief of
Police/fire official with respect to such systems.
§ 041.03.090 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 041.03.110
001:89
Chapter 043
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 043.01. Alcoholic Beverages; General Regulations.
§ 043.01.01. License required.
No person shall sell, serve or distribute alcoholic beverages within the
Township without first obtaining a license under this chapter.
§ 043.01.02. Fees. [Amended 7-22-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-13;
2-24-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-05; ]
The annual fees for licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be as
follows:
Type 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
Retail
consumption
$1,120 $1,344 $1,612 $1,934 $2,320 $2,500
Retail
distribution
$1,200 $1,344 $1,612 $1,934 $2,320 $2,500
Club license $100 $100 $100 $100 $100 $100
§ 043.01.03. Certain classes of licenses not to be granted.
No limited retail distribution license and no seasonal retail consumption
license shall be granted within the Township.
§ 043.01.04. Number of licenses issued limited.
A. Not more than five plenary retail consumption licenses, not more than
three plenary retail distribution licenses and not more than three club
licenses shall be issued and outstanding at the same time in the
Township. No more than two plenary retail distribution licenses shall be
issued for premises on the road known as the "Turnpike." This
limitation shall not prevent the renewal of plenary retail consumption
licenses presently outstanding or the transfer or the renewal of such
licenses so transferred.
B. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the granting of a
new plenary retail consumption license to a person operating a hotel or
motel containing at least 50 sleeping rooms, provided that there shall
be no renewal or transfer of a license newly issued hereunder except
for or to a hotel or motel containing at least 50 sleeping rooms.
§ 041.03.110 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 043.01.05
001:90
§ 043.01.05. Restrictions on plenary retail distribution in
connection with mercantile establishments.
No plenary retail distribution license shall be issued to permit the sale of
alcoholic beverages in or upon any premises in which any other mercantile
business is carried on, except that it shall be lawful for a licensee to sell
cocktail cherries, onions, olives, hors d'oeuvres, packaged snacks, nuts and
similar food items normally associated with the retail liquor business.
§ 043.01.06. Limitations on premises holding plenary retail
consumption licenses.
§ 043.01.07. Club licenses.
The issuance of club licenses shall be governed by the following provisions:
A. No plenary retail consumption licenses shall be issued for or
transferred to premises:
1. Located within 1,500 feet of premises for which a plenary retail
distribution license or a plenary retail consumption license shall be
outstanding. The distance shall be measured in the normal way that
a pedestrian would properly walk from the nearest entrance of the
licensed premises to the nearest entrance of the premises sought to
be licensed.
2. With less than 1,500 square feet of service area.
3. With a bar of less than sufficient size to service 12 persons or
equipped with less than 12 stools or seats.
4. With less than the minimum sanitary facilities required by state and
local Board of Health regulations concerning restaurants.
B. This section shall not prevent the renewal or person-to-person transfer
for premises licensed under a plenary retail consumption license as of
January 12, 1964.
A. For the purpose of this section, the following words and terms shall be
deemed to have the meanings herein given to them:
CLUB — An organization, corporation or association consisting of 60
or more persons operating solely for benevolent, charitable, fraternal,
social, religious, athletic or similar purposes, and not for private gain.
CLUB MEMBER — Any person in good standing who has been admitted
to membership in the manner regularly prescribed by the bylaws of
a club and who maintains his membership in a bona fide manner and
whose name and address is entered on the list of members.
B. Club licenses shall be issued only to bona fide clubs.
C. Except as provided in Subsection E of this section, no license shall be
issued to any club unless it shall have been in active operation in the
§ 043.01.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 043.01.07
001:91
state for at least three years continuously immediately prior to the
submission of its application for a license.
D. Except as provided herein or in Subsection E of this section, no license
shall be issued to any club unless it shall have been in exclusive
possession and use of a clubhouse or club quarters for at least three
years continuously immediately prior to the submission of its
application for a license. A bona fide club which has been in active
operation in this state for the period of time required as aforesaid, but
which has been deprived of continuous possession and use of its
clubhouse or club quarters by reason of foreclosure, dispossess or other
removal for a cause other than violation of the laws of the state or of a
provision of this chapter or any other Township ordinance, shall not be
prevented thereby from obtaining a club license upon presenting to the
satisfaction of the issuing authority proof of such facts and proof that
possession of suitable premises has been obtained.
E. Any constituent unit, chartered or otherwise duly enfranchised chapter
or member club of a national or state order, organization or association,
which is in possession of suitable premises, shall not be prevented from
obtaining a club license by reason of the fact that the unit, chapter or
member club has not been in active operation in this state for at least
three years continuously or has not been exclusive continuous
possession and use of a clubhouse or club quarters for the same period
of time if such unit, chapter or member club obtains from the Director
of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage control of the state and presents to
the issuing authority, at the time of or before the issuance of the license,
a certificate stating that satisfactory proof has been submitted to the
director that such unit, chapter or member club has been duly
credentialed by a national or state order, organization or association
which has been in active operation in this state for at least three years
continuously immediately prior to submission of the application for a
license.
F. Nothing in Subsection C or D of this section shall prevent the issuance
of a club license to a bona fide club if special cause for such issuance is
shown in writing to the director and if the Director's written approval of
such issuance is first obtained.
G. No club license shall be issued to any corporation, association or
organization unless all officers and members of the governing body
thereof qualify as individual applicants in all respects except as to
residence or age or citizenship.
H. A list containing the names and address of all members of the club as of
date of filing a club license application shall be submitted with the
application. The charter or articles of association of the club shall also
be presented for inspection or certified copy of the same submitted with
the application.
§ 043.01.07 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 043.01.07
001:92
§ 043.01.08. Hours of sale.
No licensee under this chapter shall sell, deliver or allow, permit or suffer
the sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or permit the
consumption of any alcoholic beverage on any licensed premises on New
Year's Day, when it is a Sunday, between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00
noon, there being no restriction as to hours on New Year's Day when it is a
weekday; on other weekdays, between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
on other Sundays between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
§ 043.02. Alcoholic Beverages; Underage Persons.
§ 043.02.01. Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by
underage person on private property prohibited. [Added 4-24-2001
by Ord. No. 2001-03]
It is hereby unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property.
I. No club licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the
sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage to any person not a
bona fide member of the club or a bona fide guest of such member.
J. No club licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the
sale, service or delivery of any alcoholic beverage except for
consumption on the licensed premises.
K. No club licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, permit or suffer the
sale, service, delivery or consumption of any alcoholic beverage on the
licensed premises during hours or on days when plenary retail
consumption licensees in this Township are prohibited from such
activity by the provisions of this Code or other Township ordinance.
L. No club licensee shall sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic beverage to
the holder of any permit authorizing sale of alcoholic beverages at a
social affair to be conducted by the permittee, or to any person
attending such social affair on the club licensed premises unless such
person is in fact a bona fide member of the licensee-club or a bona fide
guest of such member.
M. All club licensees shall have and keep a true book or books of account
wherein there shall be entered all money received and the source of
such receipts and wherein there shall also be entered all money
expended from such receipts and the name of the person receiving such
expenditures and the purpose for which such expenditures were made.
All books and records pertaining to such receipts or expenditures shall
be made available for inspection by the Director of the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control or other issuing authority, as the case may
be, or by his or its deputies, inspectors, investigators and agents.
§ 043.01.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 043.02.02
001:93
§ 043.02.02. Violation and penalties. [Added 4-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-03]
§ 043.02.03. Exceptions. [Added 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-03]
A. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this ordinance shall be
subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense and a fine of $350 for any
subsequent offense. In addition, the court may, upon a finding of guilty,
in addition to the fine authorized for this offense, suspend or postpone
for six months the driving privileges of the defendant. Upon the
conviction of any person and the suspension or postponement of that
person's driver's license, the court shall forward a report to the Division
of Motor Vehicles stating the first and last day of the suspension or
postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to this section. If a
person at the time of the imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years
of age, the period of license postponement, including a suspension or
postponement of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall
commence on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period
of six months after the person reaches the age of 17 years. If the
defendant at the time of the imposition of the sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately collect
the license and forward it to the Division of Motor Vehicles along with
the report. If for any reason the license cannot be collected, the court
shall include in the report the complete name, address, date of birth,
eye color, and sex of the person, as well as the first and last date of the
license suspension period imposed by the court.
B. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of license
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. The defendant shall be required
to acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to
receive a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt
of the written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
C. If the person convicted under this ordinance is not a New Jersey
resident, the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Division the required report. The court shall
not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this article.
Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Division shall notify the
appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or
postponement.
A. This ordinance shall not prohibit an underage person from consuming
or possession an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic
beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 043.02.02 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 043.02.03
001:94
§ 043.02.04. Definitions. [Added 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-03]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated.
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt or uncle, sibling, or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
Chapter 045
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 045.01. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MACHINE or DEVICE — Any coin-operated automatic amusement game,
including but not to the exclusion of others devices known as roulette,
baseball, pinball, shooting games and the like; provided, however, that
nothing herein contained shall be construed to refer to vending machines
for cigarettes, foods, confections, music or merchandise.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, voluntary
association, incorporated association and principal or agent thereof.
PUBLIC BILLIARD ROOM — Any area, hall, room, or place open to the
public and containing one or more tables upon which may be played
billiards, pool, bumper pool, fascination or any such similar games.
§ 045.02. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a license to provide for the control
and regulation of the use and maintenance of certain amusement devices,
machines and public billiard rooms as herein defined or designated.
B. This ordinance shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages
by any underage person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the revised
statutes, or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while
enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a county
vocational school or post-secondary educational institution; however,
this ordinance shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a
penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law
against a person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage
activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
§ 043.02.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 045.03
001:95
§ 045.03. License required.
No person shall maintain, place or allow to be used any machine defined
or designated herein, or any table upon which may be played the games of
billiards, pool, bumper pool, fascination or any such similar games in any
public or quasi-public place or in any building store or other place where
the public is invited or wherein the public may enter, without first obtaining
a license therefor.
§ 045.04. License applications; forms; oath required.
§ 045.05. Investigation of applicants.
The Township reserves the right to investigate all applicants.
§ 045.06. License transferability.
§ 045.07. Fees; license term.
A. Any person desiring to obtain a license as required by this chapter shall
first obtain an application Director of Administration of the Township of
Pequannock.
B. Such form shall require the following information:
(1) The name and signature of the applicant.
(2) The residence of the applicant.
(3) The name and nature of business conducted by the applicant on the
premises for which the license is sought.
(4) The address of the premises where the machine or table will be in
use.
(5) The name and nature of the machine or table.
(6) The description of each machine or table with manufacturer's serial
number.
(7) The name and address of the person owning said machine or table.
C. All statements by the applicant shall be made under oath.
A. No license provided for by this chapter shall be transferable, either
from person to person or from place to place.
B. Upon substitution of any machine or table for the machine or table so
licensed, the applicant shall, within 24 hours thereafter, furnish the
Township with data as indicated in Section 045.04B and C. Said
substitution shall be attached to the original license issued.
§ 045.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 045.07
001:96
§ 045.08. Display of license.
Every person holding a license issued under the provisions of this chapter
shall display the licensed machine or table in a conspicuous place in the
place of business of the licensee, and every license shall likewise be
required to be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business of
the licensee in close proximity to the machine or table for which the license
was issued.
§ 045.09. Restrictions.
§ 045.10. Maintenance or order in premises.
Each licensee shall maintain good order and decorum, shall observe all
existing laws, and shall not harbor, suffer or allow the congregation of
more than three nonplaying persons in or around the licensed premises.
The presence of alcoholic beverages in or around the licensed premises is
hereby expressly prohibited.
Chapter 056
BUILDING SAFETY AND HABITABILITY
A. The license fee shall be determined in accordance with the number of
machines, tables, or devices which are to be operated at each location,
in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) One to four amusement machines, devices or tables: $25 per unit
per year.
(2) Five to 10 amusement machines, devices or tables: $50 per unit per
year.
(3) Eleven or more amusement machines, devices or tables: $100 per
unit per year.
B. The term of each license shall be for a maximum of one year and shall
commence on June 1 or date of issuance and shall terminate on May 31
of the following year.
A. No licensee or other person shall offer any prize or other reward to any
person playing any machine or table required to be licensed by the
provisions of this chapter, nor shall any licensee permit said machine or
table to be used for any gambling purposes whatsoever.
B. Amusement games and public billiard rooms may be operated from
12:00 noon until 11:30 p.m. on the same day.
C. No machine or table or device covered by this chapter shall be located
within premises distant less than 500 feet of any church or school.
§ 045.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 056.01
001:97
§ 056.01. Definitions. [Added 2-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BUILDING — Any building or structure or part thereof, whether used for
human habitation or otherwise, and includes any appurtenances belonging
to or usually enjoyed therewith.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL — The Health Officer of the Township of
Pequannock.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or
intended to be used for living or sleeping quarters by human occupants.
§ 056.02. Standards of habitability. [Added 2-24-1998 by Ord. No.
98-1]
A building shall be deemed unfit for human habitation if conditions exist in
such building which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the
occupants of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings or other
residents. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the
generality of the foregoing): defects therein increasing the hazards of fire,
accident or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects; uncleanliness; failure
to comply with the requirements of the building code or the certificate of
occupancy. The enforcement official shall use the New Jersey State Housing
Code as a reference in determining habitability.
§ 056.03. Enforcement. [Added 2-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
The enforcement official shall have the authority to exercise all powers
authorized in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq. and all powers necessary or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of that
Act.
§ 056.04. Procedure for determining habitability; correction of
defects. [Added 2-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
A. The health officer shall investigate the habitability of any building
within the Township whenever he deems it necessary to do so or
whenever a petition is filed by at least five residents of the Township
charging that the building is unfit for human habitation.
B. If the health officer's preliminary investigation discloses a basis for
such charges, a complaint shall be served upon the owner of and parties
in interest in such building stating the charges and containing the
notice that a hearing will be held.
C. The health officer shall hold a hearing on the complaint not more than
30 days or less than 10 days after service. The owner and party in
interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to
§ 056.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 056.04
001:98
appear in person or otherwise and give testimony. Formal rules of
evidence shall not apply.
D. Findings and orders. If, after notice and hearing, the health officer finds
that the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation, the
health officer shall issue findings of facts in support of such
determination and shall cause to be served upon the owner thereof and
parties in interest an order stating:
(1) Repairs, alterations or improvements of said building to be made by
the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in
the order, or at the option of the owner to vacate or have said
building vacated and closed within the times set forth in the order.
(2) If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner
fails to repair, alter or improve said building within the time
specified in the order, then the owner shall be required to remove
or demolish said building within a reasonable time as specified in
said order of removal.
E. Failure to comply with order of the enforcement official.
(1) If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve
or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
public officer may cause such building to be repaired, altered or
improved or to be vacated and closed. The health officer may cause
to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed a
placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this
building is prohibited and unlawful."
(2) If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the building, the enforcement official, with the consent of the
Township Council, may cause such building to be removed or
demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition thereof
after advertisement for, and receipt of, bids therefor.
F. Demolition or correction of defects by Township; recovery of costs.
Where demolition, correction of a defect in the premises or work
necessary to place the premises in a proper condition so as to conform
to ordinances of the Township or applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey requires expending Township moneys, the health officer shall
present a report of work proposed to be done to accomplish the
foregoing to the Township Council with an estimate of cost along with a
summary of the proceedings undertaken by notices served upon the
occupants, owners, operators or other agents, as the case may be. The
Township Council may thereupon, by resolution, authorize the
demolition, correction of the defect or work necessary to place the
premises in proper condition and in compliance with this code. The
health officer or the Superintendent of Public Works, depending upon
the volume of work to be performed, may thereafter proceed to have
§ 056.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 056.04
001:99
§ 056.05. Appeals. [Added 2-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
Any person affected by any order issued by the health officer shall be given
an opportunity to be heard by the Township Council, provided that a written
request for a hearing is made to the Township Clerk, and shall specify in
detail the reasons why the person affected believes the order of the health
officer was not justified. The Township Council may affirm, modify or revoke
the order.
§ 056.06. Emergency conditions. [Added 2-24-1998 by Ord. No.
98-1]
Whenever the health officer finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health or safety, the official may,
without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary
to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
chapter, such order shall be effective immediately but, upon petition to the
Township Council, the owner shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
After such hearing, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions
of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto
have been complied with, the Township Council shall continue such order in
effect or modify it.
§ 056.07. Search warrant. [Added 2-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-1]
the work performed in accordance with the resolution, at Township
expense, not to exceed the amount specified in the resolution and shall,
upon completion thereof, submit a report of the moneys expended and
costs to the Township Council. After review of the report, the Township
Council may approve the expense and costs, whereupon the same shall
become a lien against the premises, collectible as provided by law.
A copy of the resolution approving the expenses and costs shall be
certified by the Township Clerk, whereupon the same shall be filed
with the Tax Collector of the Township, who shall be responsible for
the collection, and a copy of the report and resolution shall be sent
by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner. The above
remedy shall not be the exclusive remedy available to the Township,
and the Township may take other action that it deems appropriate.
A. The health officer may, upon receipt of a petition to determine fitness in
accordance with 056.04A, apply to the Municipal Judge of the Township
of Pequannock for a search warrant.
B. The health officer may apply to the Municipal Judge of the Township of
Pequannock for a search warrant to gain access to any structure where
he has probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter is
occurring or where such inspections are required as part of a routine
inspection survey.
§ 056.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 056.07
001:100
Chapter 064
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODES
§ 064.01. Establishment of enforcing agency.
There is hereby established in the Township of Pequannock a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency, consisting of a Construction Official,
Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and other subcode officials for
such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be the
chief administrator for the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction
Code and shall be within the Township Department of Planning and
Building. All other subcode officials or other Township employees or onsite
inspection services responsible for the enforcement of the Uniform
Construction Code within the Township shall be employees of the
Department of Planning and Building.
§ 064.02. Qualifications of officials; inspection agencies.
Each official position created in § 064.01 hereof shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as amended, and
N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular subcode official, an
on-site inspection agency may be retained by contract pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23. More than one such official position may be held by the same person,
provided that such person is qualified pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and
N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such position.
§ 064.03. Public access to agency and officials.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location within the Township except for emergencies and
unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances. The Construction Official and all
subcode officials shall have regular office hours, the schedule of which shall
be made public and shall be posted with the Township Clerk.
§ 064.04. Fees. [Amended 11-28-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-25;
6-22-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-22; 11-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-34;
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-22; 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06;
5-23-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-06]
There is hereby established the following fee schedule adopted pursuant to
the State Uniform Construction Code.
A. Plan review fee. The fee for plan review shall be 20% of the amount to
be charged for a new construction permit. Plan review fees are nonrefundable.
§ 056.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 064.04
001:101
B. The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts computed on
the basis of the volume or cost of construction, the number of plumbing
fixtures and pieces of equipment, the number of electrical fixtures and
devices, the number of sprinklers, standpipes and detectors (smoke and
heat), at the unit rates provided herein, plus any special fees. The
minimum fee for a basic construction permit covering any or all of
building, plumbing, electrical or fire protection work shall be $50.
C. The fees for new construction or alteration are as follows:
(1) Fees for new construction shall be based upon the volume of the
structure. Volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.28. The new construction fee shall be in the amount of
$0.045 per cubic foot of volume for buildings and structures of all
use groups and types of construction as classified and defined in
Articles 3 and 4 of the building sub-code; except that the fee shall
be $0.030 per cubic foot of volume for Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3,
A-4, F-1, F-2, S-1 and S-2, and there shall be $0.015 per cubic foot
for structures on farms, including commercial farm buildings under
N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d) used exclusively for the storage of food or grain
or the sheltering of livestock with the maximum fee for such
structures on farms not to exceed $1,443.
(2) Fees for renovations, alterations and repairs shall be based upon
the estimated cost of the work. The fee shall be in the amount of
$26 per $1,000. From $50,001 to and including $100,000, the
additional fee shall be in the amount of $22 per $1,000 of the
estimated cost above $50,000. Above $100,000 the additional fee
shall be in the amount of $20 per $1,000 of the estimated cost
above $100,000. For the purpose of determining estimated cost,
the applicant shall submit to the Construction Official such cost
data as may be available produced by the architect or engineer of
record, or by a recognized estimating firm or by the contractor. A
bona fide contractor's bid, if available, shall be submitted. The
Construction Official shall make the final decision regarding
estimated cost.
(3) Fees for additions shall be based upon the volume of the addition.
Volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28.
The construction fee shall be in the amount of $0.055 per cubic foot
of volume for buildings and structures of all use groups and types
of construction as classified and defined in Articles 3 and 4 of the
building sub-code; except that the fee shall be $0.040 per cubic foot
of volume for Use Groups A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, F-1, F-2, S-1 and S-2,
and there shall be $0.025 per cubic foot for structures on farms,
including commercial farm buildings under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2 (d)
used exclusively for the storage of food or grain or the sheltering of
livestock with the maximum fee for such structures on farms not to
exceed $1,443.
§ 064.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 064.04
001:102
(4) Fees for a combination of renovations and additions shall be
computed as the sum of the fees computed separately in
accordance with Subsection C(2) and C(3).
(5) The fee for tents, in excess of 900 square feet or more than 30 feet
in any dimension, shall be $116.
(6) The fee for residential roofing and siding shall be based upon
estimated cost of work, $18 per thousand.
(7) The fee for an above-ground swimming pool shall be $100. The fee
for an in-ground swimming pool shall be $189.
(8) Fees for retaining walls shall be as follows:
(a) The fee for a retaining wall with a surface area greater than
550 square feet that is associated with a Class 3 residential
structure shall be $189;
(b) The fee for a retaining wall with a surface area of 550 square
feet or less that is associated with a Class 3 residential
structure shall be $95;
(c) The fee for a newly constructed retaining wall of any size at
other than a Class 3 residential structure shall be based on the
cost of the construction as per C(2) above.
(9) The fee for the removal or abandonment of residential storage
tanks shall be $75.
(10) The fee for the removal or abandonment of nonresidential storage
tanks shall be $200.
(11) The minimum building subcode fee shall be $50.
D. Plumbing fixtures and equipment. For the purpose of computing fees:
(1) Plumbing fixture shall include, but not be limited to stacks,
lavatories, kitchen sinks, slop sinks, sinks, urinals, water closets,
bathtubs, shower stalls, laundry tubs, floor drains, washing
machine connections, hose bibs and similar fixtures.
(2) Plumbing appurtenances shall include, but not be limited to
devices, a manufactured device, or an on-the-job assembly of
component parts, which is adjunct to the basic piping system and
plumbing fixtures, pressure-reducing valves, backflow prevention
devices, backwater valves, vacuum breakers, grease traps,
interceptors and similar devices.
(3) Plumbing appliances shall include but not be limited to hot-water
heaters, tankless heaters, heat exchangers, water storage tanks,
solar panels, water pressure-booster systems, sump pumps,
dishwashers, ice makers, instant hot water coils, sewerage
ejectors, garbage disposal units, sterilizers, aspirators, water-
§ 064.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 064.04
001:103
cooled air-conditioning units, water conditioners and similar
equipment.
(4) The fee for the installation or the replacement of a plumbing fixture
shall be $15 for each plumbing fixture.
(5) The fee for the installation or replacement of a plumbing
appurtenance and/or special device shall be $85 per each plumbing
appurtenance and/or special device. Exception: The fee for
backflow preventers that do not require ongoing inspections shall
be $15. For cross-connections and backflow preventers that are
subject to testing, requiring reinspection every three months, the
fee shall be $75 for each device when they are tested (thrice
annually) and $100 for each device when they are broken down and
tested (once annually).
(6) The fee for the installation or replacement of a plumbing appliance
shall be $45. Exception: when installed in Use Groups R-3 and R-4
in new construction or a complete renovation that is not considered
an ordinary repair, the fee for dishwashers, ice makers and instant
hot water coils shall be $15.
(7) The fee for the installation of a house or building sewer and/or a
water service pipe shall be $75.
(8) The fee for the installation or replacement of subsoil drains shall be
$35.
(9) The fee for the removal or abandonment in place of a sewerage
disposal system and/or septic tank shall be $35.
(10) The fee for the installation or replacement of roof drains and/or
area drains shall be $35 per drain.
(11) The fee for gas piping shall be $15 per each gas appliance
connection.
(12) The fee for the installation or replacement of oil lines and/or oil
tank piping shall be $45.
(13) The minimum plumbing subcode fee shall be $50.
E. Electrical fixtures and devices. The fees shall be as follows:
(1) From one to 50 receptacles or fixtures, the fee shall be in the
amount of $50; for each 20 receptacles or fixtures in addition to
this, the fee shall be in the amount of $15. For the purpose of
computing this fee, receptacles or fixtures shall include lighting
outlets, wall switches, fluorescent fixtures, convenience
receptacles or similar fixture and motors or devices of less than one
horsepower or one kilowatt.
§ 064.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 064.04
001:104
(2) For each motor or electrical device one horsepower or greater than
one horsepower and less than or equal to 10 horsepower, and for
transformers and generators one kilowatt or greater than one
kilowatt and less than or equal to 10 kilowatts the fee shall be $15.
(3) For each motor or electrical device greater than 10 horsepower
and less than or equal to 50 horsepower; for each service panel,
service entrance or subpanel less than or equal to 200 amperes and
for all transformers and generators greater than 10 kilowatts and
less than or equal to 45 kilowatts, the fee shall be $65.
(4) For each motor or electrical device greater than 50 horsepower
and less than or equal to 100 horsepower, for each service panel,
service entrance or subpanel greater than 200 amperes and less
than or equal to 1,000 amperes and for transformers and
generators greater than 45 kilowatts, the fee shall be $116.
(5) For each motor or electrical device greater than 100 horsepower,
for each service panel, service entrance or subpanel greater than
1,000 amperes and for each transformer or generator greater than
112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $576.
(6) For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors except those in
plug-in appliances shall be counted, including control equipment,
generators, transformers and all heating, cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electrical current.
(7) The fee charged for electrical work for each permanently installed
private swimming pool as defined in the building subcode, spa, hot
tub or fountain shall be a flat fee of $95, which shall include any
required bonding, and associated equipment such as filter pumps,
motors, disconnecting means, switches, required receptacles, and
heaters, etc., excepting panelboards and underwater lighting
fixtures. For public swimming pools, the fee shall be charged on the
basis of number of electrical fixtures and rating of electrical
devices involved in accordance with E(1) through (5) above.
(8) The fee charged for the installation of single and multiple station
smoke or heat detectors and fire, burglar or security alarm systems
in any one or two-family dwelling shall be a flat fee of $29 per
dwelling unit. For fire, burglar and security alarm systems and
detectors in buildings other than one or two-family dwellings, the
fee shall be charged in accordance with E(1) and (2) above.
(9) For installations consisting of multimeter stacks, the fee shall be
based on the ampere rating of the main bus and not upon the
number of meters or rating of disconnects on the meter stack.
Individual load side panel boards shall be charged in accordance
with E(3), (4) or (5) above. There shall be no additional fee charged
for the concurrent installation of individual feeder conductors.
§ 064.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 064.04
001:105
(10) For motors or similar devices requiring concurrent installation of
individual controls, relays and switches, the fee shall be based only
upon the rating of the motor or device. There shall be no additional
fee charged for the concurrent installation or individual circuit
components, for example, controllers, starters, and disconnecting
means.
(11) For electrical work requiring replacement of service entrance
conductors or feeder conductors only, the fee shall be based on the
designated ampere rating of the overcurrent device of the service
or feeder as follows:
(a) 225 amperes or less, the fee shall be $58;
(b) 226 to 1,000 amperes, the fee shall be $116; and
(c) Greater than 1,000 amperes, the fee shall be $576.
(12) The fee charged for process equipment shall be based on the
ampere rating of the overcurrent device protecting the conductor
feeding the process equipment or the cutoff device.
(13) For the purpose of computing these fees, all electrical and
communication devices, utilization equipment and motors which
are part of premises wiring, except those which are portable plugin
type, shall be counted.
(14) For photovoltaic systems, the fee shall be based on the designated
kilowatt rating of the solar photovoltaic system as follows:
(a) One to 50 kilowatts, the fee shall be $58;
(b) Fifty-one to 100 kilowatts, the fee shall be $116; and
(c) Greater than 100 kilowatts shall be $576.
(15) The minimum electric subcode fee shall be $50.
F. Fire protection and other hazardous equipment. Sprinklers, standpipes,
detectors (smoke and heat) preengineered suppression systems, gas
and oil fired appliances not connected to the plumbing system, kitchen
exhaust systems, incinerators and crematoriums:
(1) The fee for 20 or fewer sprinkler heads shall be $82; the fee for 21
to and including 100 heads shall be $151; the fee for 101 to and
including 200 heads shall be $289; the fee for 201 to and including
400 heads shall be $748; the fee for 401 to and including 1,000
heads shall be $1,036. The fee for over 1,000 heads shall be $1,323.
(2) The fee for 20 or fewer alarm system devices (smoke detectors,
heat detectors, pull stations, water flow, tampers, low/high air,
horns, strobes, bells or any other alarm system device) shall be
$75; the fee for 21 to and including 100 devices shall be $125; the
fee for 101 to and including 200 devices shall be $300; the fee for
§ 064.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 064.04
001:106
201 to and including 400 devices shall be $650; the fee for 401 to
and including 1,000 devices shall be $850; the fee for over 1,000
devices shall be $1,200.
(3) For single and multiple station smoke or heat detectors and fire
alarm systems in any one or two-family dwellings, there shall be a
flat fee of $50.
(4) The fee for each solid fuel burning appliance such as a fire place,
wood stove or pellet stove shall be $75 and shall include the
installation of a chimney, flue or vent.
(5) The fee for residential storage tank installations shall be $75 each.
(6) The fee for nonresidential storage tank installation shall be $200.
(7) The fee for each standpipe shall be $289.
(8) The fee for each preengineered system shall be $116.
(9) The fee for each gas or oil fired appliance not connected to the
plumbing system shall be $58.
(10) The fee for each kitchen exhaust system will be $85.
(11) The fee for each incinerator shall be $460.
(12) The fee for each crematorium shall be $460.
(13) The minimum fire subcode fee shall be $50.
G. Certificates and other permits. The fees are as follows:
(1) The fee for a demolition or removal permit shall be $100 for a
structure of less than 5,000 square feet in area and less than 30
feet in height, for one or two family residences (Use Group R-5 of
the Building Subcode), structures on farms, including commercial
farm buildings under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d) used exclusively for
storage of food or grain, or sheltering of livestock; and $200 per
story for all other use groups.
(2) The fee for a mechanical inspection in a structure of Group R-3 or
R-5 by a mechanical inspector shall be $54 for the first device and
$13 for each additional device.
(3) The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the amount of $2
per square foot surface area of the sign, computed on one side only
for double-faced signs. The minimum fee shall be $75.
(4) The fee for lead abatement shall be $176. The fee for lead
abatement certificate shall be $35.
(5) The fee for asbestos abatement shall be $106. The fee for asbestos
abatement certificate shall be $21.
§ 064.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 064.04
001:107
(6) The fee for a radon mitigation system shall be $106. The fee for a
radon mitigation certificate shall be $26.
(7) The fee for the annual inspection of swimming pools, spas, or hot
tubs shall be $100 each.
(8) The fee for a partial permit to begin construction shall be $50.
(9) The fee for the installation of a central air conditioner shall be $50,
plus the applicable electric and plumbing fees.
(10) The fee for fences over six feet in height or for fences which are
required barriers surrounding public or private pools shall be
based on the cost of construction as per C(2) above.
(11) The fee for temporary structures and all structures for which
volume cannot be computed shall be based upon the estimated cost
of work.
(12) The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be in the amount of 10%
of the new construction permit fee which would be charged by the
enforcing agency pursuant to these regulations. The minimum fee
shall be $100 except for one or two-family (Use Group R-5 of the
Building Subcode) structures of less than 5,000 square feet in area
and less than 30 feet in height and structures on farms, including
commercial farm buildings subject to N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d) used
exclusively for storage of food or grain or sheltering of livestock,
for which the minimum fee shall be $75.
(13) The fee for certificate of occupancy granted pursuant to a change
of use group shall be $200.
(14) The fee for certificate of continued occupancy pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.23 (e) shall be $200.
(15) The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be $30 (*see
exception).
* Exception: There shall be no fee for the first issuance of the
temporary certificate of occupancy provided the certificate of
occupancy fee is paid at that time.
(16) There shall be no fee for a certificate of compliance issued for each
elevator device inspected on a routine periodic basis.
(17) The fee for a change of contractor shall be $10.
(18) The fee for plan review of a building for compliance under the
alternate systems and nondepletable energy source provisions of
the Energy Subcode shall be $250 for one and two-family homes
and for light commercial structures having the indoor temperature
controlled from a single point and $550 for all other structures.
§ 064.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 064.04
001:108
(19) The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $150 for a Class 1 structure and $75 for
a Class 2 structure and Class 3 structures. The fee for resubmitting
of an application for a variation shall be $250 for Class 1 structures
and $50 for Class 2 and Class 3 structures.
(20) The fee to be charged for an annual construction permit shall be
charged annually. This fee shall be a flat fee based upon the number
of maintenance workers employed by this facility and who are
primarily engaged in work that is governed by a subcode.
Managers, engineers and clericals shall not be considered
maintenance workers for the purpose of establishing the annual
construction permit fee. Annual permits may be issued for building/
fire protection, electrical and plumbing. Fees shall be as follows:
(a) One to 25 workers (including foreman), $500 and each
additional worker over 25, $200.
(b) Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training
registration fee of $125 per subcode shall be submitted by the
applicant to the Department of Community Affairs,
Construction Code Element, Training Section, along with a
copy of the construction permit (form F-170). Checks shall be
made payable to "Treasurer, State of New Jersey."
(21) All fees collected pursuant to this chapter are nonrefundable.
(22) All suspensions of permits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.16 (b) will be
nonrefundable in whole or in part.
(23)Waiver of Enforcing Agency Fees:
(a) No person shall be required to pay municipal or state
surcharge fees pursuant to this chapter for any construction,
reconstruction, alteration or improvement designed and
undertaken solely to promote accessibility by disabled persons
to an existing structure or any facilities contained therein.
(b) No disabled person, parent or sibling of a disabled person shall
be required to pay municipal or state surcharge fees pursuant
to this chapter for any construction, reconstruction, alteration
or improvement which promotes accessibility to his or her own
living unit.
(c) For the purposes of this section "disabled person" shall be
defined as a person who has the total and permanent inability
to engage in any substantial gainful activity by reason of a
medically determinable physical or mental impairment,
including blindness. This shall include but not be limited to,
persons disabled pursuant to the Social Security Act, Railroad
Retirement Act, or by the United States Veterans Act,
§ 064.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 064.04
001:109
§ 064.05. Surcharge fee; report. [Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-22]
In order to provide for the training and certification and technical support
programs required by the State Uniform Construction Code Act the
enforcing agency shall collect a surcharge fee to be based upon the volume
of new construction or the value of construction for other types of
construction within the municipality. Said fee shall be accounted for and
forwarded to the Division of Codes and Standards. The fee shall be in the
amount as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19(b). For the purpose of calculating
this fee, volume shall be computed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28.
The municipality shall remit fees to the Division on a quarterly basis,
in conjunction with report number R-84OB State Training Fee Report in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.5(e). Fees remitted shall be for the quarter.
Checks shall be made payable to "Treasurer, State of New Jersey".
§ 064.06. Construction record clearance. [Added 9-27-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-16]
Blindness for the purposes of this section means central visual
acuity of 20/200 or less in the better eye.
(24) Construction fees not specifically listed in this schedule shall be as
per N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20.
A. Definitions. The following words and terms are defined as follows:
CONSTRUCTION RECORDS CLEARANCE (CRC) — A certificate issued
by the Township Construction Official certifying that there are no open
permits or pending violations on the subject property.
B. When required. No building shall be occupied in whole or in part prior
to the issuance of a certificate of Construction Records Clearance
(CRC); A CRC shall be required prior to the sale of any residential or
commercial structure and prior to the rental of any tenant space in a
commercial structure within the Township.
C. Exceptions. The following transactions are exempt from obtaining a
CRC as long as no change in physical occupancy occurs:
(1) Transfer of title to correct a previously recorded deed.
(2) Title eligible to be recorded as an ancient deed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
46:16-7.
(3) Transfer of title between husband and wife, whether or not relating
to divorce, or between former spouses if the transfer is incident to
an order or judgment from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(4) Transfer of title relating to new construction for which a Certificate
of Occupancy is required.
§ 064.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 064.06
001:110
Chapter 067
CHICKENS
§ 067.10. Standards for keeping chickens. [Added 9-13-2016 by
Ord. No. 2016-12]
(5) Transfer of title by or to an executor, administrator or court order,
which affects a distribution of a descendant's estate in accordance
with the provisions of the descendant's will or the intestate laws of
the state.
(6) Transfer of title due to refinancing, home equity loans, second
mortgages.
(7) Transfer of title by or to a receiver, trustee in bankruptcy or
liquidation, or assignee for the benefit of creditors.
(8) Residential tenants.
D. Responsibility. No owner shall permit the sale of a residential or
commercial premises or rental of commercial premises covered under
this section unless the requisite CRC has been issued. No purchaser or
tenant shall occupy any premise covered under this section until the
requisite CRC has been issued. Owners, tenants and occupants shall be
jointly and separately responsible for failure to obtain the requisite CRC
required hereunder. The owner or his authorized agent shall submit a
written application and payment of fees at least 10 business days prior
to the change of ownership and/or occupancy on the form provided by
the Township.
E. Pre-occupancy records inspection. Prior to the issuance of any such
certificate for any transaction, the enforcing agency shall conduct a
records inspection to ensure that there are no open Construction
Permits on subject premises. Should there be open permits on subject
premises, all final inspections and prior approvals shall be obtained and
appropriate Uniform Construction Code Certificates shall be issued
prior to issuance of the CRC.
F. Fees. The applicant shall submit with the application fees for the CRC
as follows to cover the administrative cost:
CRC: $35
G. Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine
not exceeding $1,000, or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90
days and/or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
A. Number of Allowable Chickens. Up to 10 female chickens are permitted
on residential lots of up to three acres.
§ 064.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 067.10
001:111
B. Roosters, Cockerel. Roosters and Cockerel are prohibited.
C. Slaughtering. Slaughtering chickens in public view is prohibited.
D. Required Shelters/Coops. Chickens shall be housed in a fully enclosed
shelter with a fenced enclosure/run. Coops and runs shall be located in
the rear yard and constructed to provide relief from the elements, such
as excessive wind, excessive temperature and excessive precipitation
which will result in hyperthermia or hypothermia detrimental to the
bird's health. Only one coop shall be permitted on any one residential
lot.
(1) Shelters/coops and enclosures/runs shall be located at least five
feet off the property line for fenced in yards and 10 feet from any
property line for non-fenced in yards and 30 feet from any
residential dwelling on an adjoining property.
(2) Shelters/coops shall provide a minimum of two square feet of space
per chicken, and not exceed 60 square feet in size.
(3) Fences/runs shall not exceed six feet in height.
(4) Constructed shelters shall:
a. Be of sufficient size, to provide adequate space for each bird
seeking shelter within to stand, lie down, get up, walk, spread
its wings, move its head freely, turn around and rest;
b. Be structurally sound;
c. Have a safe interior surface, reasonably free of injurious
matter;
d. Maintain air quality by natural or mechanical ventilation;
e. Minimize extremes in environmental temperature;
f. Be maintained at a level of repair such that they continue to
fulfill the requirements of 067.10D(1) through 067.10D(5) of
this Chapter.
(5) Shelters/coops shall not be counted towards the permitted number
of accessory structures and shall not be included in lot coverage or
impervious surface.
(6) Cage housing shall be prohibited.
(7) Floor housing shall provide:
a. Each bird enough room to stand, lie down, get up, walk, spread
its wings, move its head freely, turn around and rest; and
b. A sufficient number of nesting boxes for laying hens seeking
access to a nesting box.
§ 067.10 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 067.10
001:112
Chapter 068
ANIMAL AND RABIES CONTROL
§ 068.01. Definitions. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-22]
ANIMAL — Dog or cat, for the purpose of this ordinance.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Any person appointed by the Township of
Pequannock who possesses a certification of animal control officer issued
by the New Jersey Department of Health and who shall be responsible
for animal control within the Township of Pequannock pursuant to these
regulations.
ANIMAL OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog or cat which has attained the age
of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
BITE — To seize with the teeth or jaws so as to enter, nip or grip the person
or thing seized; also to cut, wound, pierce or impress deeply the person or
thing seized.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female, or
neutered.
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
IMMEDIATE — That the pet solid waste is removed at once, without delay.
E. Waste Storage. Storage of manure, excreta, other waste, odor or dust
producing substances associated therewith shall be located at least 15
feet from any lot line or 30 feet from any residential structure of an
adjoining property, and shall be properly composted per health code
and USDA guidelines or kept in a watertight container until it can be
disposed of in a proper fashion off site.
F. Feed Storage. Animal feed stored outdoors shall be kept in metal
containers with tight fitting lids.
G. Running at large. No person owning, keeping, maintaining, or
harboring a chicken shall permit, suffer or allow a chicken to run at
large other than in the fenced-in rear yard of the owner.
H. Penalty. Any person owning, keeping, maintaining or harboring a
chicken, who violates or fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of
this section, shall be liable for a penalty as provided by law.
I. The restrictions of this ordinance shall not apply to agricultural
properties qualifying under the Right to Farm Act.
J. Sick or injured birds must be promptly treated or removed within 24
hours and humanely euthanized. If a flock of chickens perishes due to
disease or suspected disease the homeowner shall immediately notify
the Health Department.
§ 067.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 068.01
001:113
KENNEL — Any establishment wherein or whereon the business of
boarding or selling dogs or breeding dogs for sale is carried on, except a pet
shop.
NEUTERED — To render permanently incapable of reproduction as certified
by a licensed veterinarian.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of an animal shall include
every person having a right of property (or custody) in such animal and
every person who has such animal in his/her keeping, or who harbors or
maintains an animal or knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about
any premises occupied by that person. A person shall be deemed to have
an animal in his keeping or under his control whenever the ownership or
custody of such animal is an unemancipated infant or other member of his/
her household.
OWNER'S PREMISES — Includes the building or plot of land on which said
building stands in which the owner of an animal has a place of abode or
place of business in the Township.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association of
persons, or institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
PET — A domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance animal)
kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SHOP — Any room or group of rooms, cage or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein animals for sale are kept or displayed.
PET SOLID WASTE — Waste matter expelled from the bowels of the pet;
excrement.
POUND — An establishment for the confinement of animals seized either
under the provisions of this ordinance or otherwise.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Placement in a designated waste receptacle, or other
suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container which is regularly
emptied by the municipality or some other refuse collector; or disposal into
a system designed to convey domestic sewage for proper treatment and
disposal.
SHELTER — Any establishment where animals are received, housed, and
distributed.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Pequannock, in the County of Morris.
VICIOUS ANIMAL — Any animal which at any time, without provocation,
has attacked or shall attack a human being or another domestic pet, either
while upon or off the premises occupied by the person owning, keeping,
harboring or having the custody or possession of the attacking animal.
"Vicious Animal" shall also mean and include any animal which has caused
any human being engaged in a lawful activity or occupancy to be fearful for
his own safety by chasing or snapping at such person without provocation.
§ 068.02. Animal Control Officer.
§ 068.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 068.02
001:114
§ 068.03. License required.
No person shall keep or harbor or suffer the keeping or harboring within the
limits of the Township of Pequannock any dog or cat of licensing age without
first obtaining a license therefor to be issued by the Health Department of
the Township of Pequannock upon application by the owner or some person
on behalf of the owner and payment of the prescribed fee, and no person
shall keep or harbor any dog or cat in the Township except in compliance
with the provisions for the control of animals contained in Title 4, Chapter
19, Sections 15.1 through 15.29 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey and
any amendments thereof.
§ 068.04. Obtaining license and registration tag.
§ 068.05. Fees; renewal; expiration date of license; "seeing eye,"
"service" and "hearing ear" dogs; acceptance of license in
municipality in others.
A. The position of Animal Control Officer is hereby established under the
jurisdiction of the Department of Health.
B. The Animal Control Officer shall be an employee of the Township and
subject to the control and direction of the Health Officer or his
authorized representative.
C. The Duties of the Animal Control Officer shall be the enforcement of the
measures and provisions for the control of the animal contained in Title
4, Chapter 19, Sections 15.1 through 15.29 of the Revised Statutes of
the State of New Jersey and any amendments thereof and the provisions
of this chapter.
A. Any person who shall own, keep or harbor or suffer the keeping or
harboring of any dog of licensing age within the Township of
Pequannock shall, in the month of January and annually thereafter,
apply for and procure from the Health Department a license and official
registration tag for each such dog so owned, kept or harbored and shall
place upon each dog a collar, or other device with the license number
securely fastened or displayed thereto.
B. Any person who shall own keep or harbor or suffer the keeping or
harboring of any cat of licensing age within the Township of
Pequannock shall, in the month of January and annually thereafter,
apply for and procure from the Health Department a license and official
registration tag for each such cat so owned, kept or harbored and shall
place upon such cat a collar, or other device with the license number
securely fastened or displayed thereto. Acceptable methods of
displaying license number shall include, but not be limited to, breakaway
or elastic collars.
A. The person applying for license and registration tag shall pay a fee for
each dog or cat as provided for in Section 68.15 of this chapter.
§ 068.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 068.05
001:115
§ 068.06. Rabies vaccination required.
B. The person applying for license and registration tag shall pay the fee
fixed or authorized. The fee for renewal of license and registration tag
shall be the same as for the original and said license, registration tag
and renewal thereof shall expire on January 31st, in the following year.
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog or cat owned in Pequannock Township, and such
license and registration tag issued by any municipality in the State of
New Jersey shall be accepted as evidence of compliance of this section.
C. Any dog or cat owner or person harboring a dog or cat found to have an
unlicensed dog or cat by the Township Animal Control Officer or any
other municipal official on or after February 1st, shall be required to
pay an additional delinquent fee as established in Section 68.15 plus
the required license fee as provided in this chapter for his animal
license, together with any other fines due to summons issued that may
be imposed on him as provided in this chapter for failure to obtain an
animal license by January 31st. The aforementioned fee shall not apply
to animals which have been acquired by the owner after February 1st,
provided said license is obtained within 10 days after acquisition and
sufficient proof is presented to establish the date the dog or cat is
acquired.
D. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeingeye"
dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly
known as "service dogs", or dogs used to assist deaf persons and
commonly known as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other animals herein above provided for, except that the owner of
keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee thereof.
E. The owner or keeper of any newly acquired animal of licensing age shall
make application for such license and registration tag for such animal
within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
F. Any owner or keeper of a licensed dog or cat whose current licensed tag
has been lost may obtain a replacement tag by applying to the Health
Department immediately. A charge as established in Section 68.15 of
this chapter is made for replacement of this tag.
G. No person shall make use of, or have in his possession or under his
control, a stolen, counterfeit or forged dog or cat license receipt, animal
license registration tag or rabies vaccination certification or other
forms issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
H. Any person applying for a dog or cat license for a neutered dog or cat
must present to the licensing agent a veterinarian's certification that
said animal of reproductive age has had its reproductive capacity
permanently altered through sterilization.
§ 068.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 068.06
001:116
§ 068.07. Impounding or taking animals into custody; grounds;
notice; destruction: disposal; report if rabid.
A. All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Section 68.06D of this chapter.
B. Any person applying for a dog or cat license and registration tag must
provide evidence to the Health Department that said animal has been
inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by and
administered in accordance with the recommendations of the United
States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of
Human Services, or has been certified exempt as provided for by
Section 68.06D of this chapter. The rabies inoculation shall be
administered by a duly licensed veterinarian, or by such other
veterinarian permitted by law to do the same. Such vaccine shall be
repeated at intervals as provided by regulations of the New Jersey State
Department of Health.
C. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the owner of each dog or
cat vaccinated on a form recommended by the State of New Jersey.
D. Any dog or cat may be exempt from the requirement of such vaccination
for a specified period of time by the Health Department upon
presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of an
infirmity or other physical condition, or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such animal shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Any person appointed for the purpose by the Township of Pequannock
shall take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody
and impounded, and thereafter destroyed or disposed of as provided in
this section:
(i) Any dog off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring said dog which said official or his agent or agents has
reason to believe is a stray dog;
(ii) Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner or of the person
keeping or harboring said dog or cat without a current registration
tag on his collar;
(iii) Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring said dog;
(iv) Any dog or other animal which is suspected of being rabid;
(v) Any dog or other animal off the premises of the owner reported to,
or observed by, a certified Animal Control Officer to be ill, injured
or creating a threat to public health, safety or welfare, or otherwise
interfering with the enjoyment of property.
§ 068.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 068.07
001:117
§ 068.08. Seizure of animals.
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any animal or animals which he may lawfully seize and impound
when such officer is the immediate pursuit of such animal or animals, except
upon the premises of the owner of the animal if said owner is present and
forbids the same.
§ 068.09. Rabies control.
B. If any animal so seized wears a collar or harness having inscribed
thereon or attached thereto the name and address of any person or a
registration tag, or the owner or the person keeping or harboring said
animal is known, any person authorized by the Township shall forthwith
serve on the person whose address is given on the collar, or on the
owner or person keeping or harboring said animal, if known, a notice in
writing stating that the animal has been seized and will be liable to be
disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the
service of the notice.
C. A notice under this section may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at the person's usual
or last known place of abode, or at the address given on the collar, or by
forwarding it by post in a prepaid letter addressed to that person at his
usual or last known place of abode, or to the address given on the collar.
D. When any animal so seized has been detained for seven days' after
notice, when notice can be given as above set forth, or has been
detained for seven days after seizure, when no notice has been given as
above set forth and if the person keeping or harboring said animal has
not claimed said animal and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, including maintenance, and if the animal be unlicensed at
the time the seizure and the owner or person keeping or harboring said
animal has not produced a license and registration tag for said animal,
any person authorized by the Township may cause the animal to be
destroyed in a manner causing as little pain as possible and consistent
with the provisions of Title 4, Chapter 22, Section 19 of the Revised
Statutes of the State of New Jersey, and any amendments thereof.
A. Whenever a dog, cat or other animal is affected by rabies or suspected
of being affected by rabies or has been bitten by an animal known or
suspected to be affected by rabies, the owner or person in charge of the
animal, or any person having knowledge thereof, shall forthwith notify
the Health Department of the place where the animal is located.
B. Whenever a dog, cat or other animal bites a person, the owner or
person in charge of the animal, the person bitten or parent or guardian
or the physician having professional attendance upon every person
bitten shall notify the Health Department of the name, age, sex, color,
and precise location of the person so bitten pursuant to the Revised
§ 068.07 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 068.09
001:118
§ 068.10. Defiling or damaging property, requirement for disposal
of pet solid waste; dogs running at large prohibited. [Amended
9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-22]
§ 068.11. Vicious or potentially dangerous dog.
Chapter 307 of the laws of the State of New Jersey, 1989 (N.J.S.A. 4:19-17
through 4:19-35 et seq.) and the amendments and supplements thereto are
hereby adopted, enacted and incorporated herein.
§ 068.12. Howling or barking dogs.
No person shall keep within the Township any dog causing a nuisance and
disturbing the peace and quiet of the neighborhood in which it shall be kept
by chronically howling, barking and/or making and causing other sounds or
noises.
§ 068.13. Kennel; pet shop; shelter; pound.
Statutes of the State of New Jersey, Title 26, Chapter 4, Section 78
through 95.
A. No person shall suffer, permit or allow any animal to injure or damage
or soil or defile any lawn or shrubbery or flowers or grounds, or any
property, either public or private, of any person other than that of its
owner. All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and
properly dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property,
public or private, not owned or possessed by that person except for any
owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
who shall be exempt from this section while the animal is being used for
that purpose.
B. No person shall suffer, permit, or allow any dog to be upon any private
or public property other than the premises of the owner without the
consent of the owner or tenant of the private or public property or
permit the dog to run unleashed off the premises of the owner.
A. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, a
pet shop, a shelter or pound shall apply to the Health Department for a
license entitling him to keep or operate such establishment and shall
pay an annual fee as established in Section 68.15 of this chapter. The
application shall describe the premises where the establishment is
located or is proposed to be located and the purpose for which it is to be
maintained.
B. All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall expire
on the last day of June of each year, and be subject to revocation by the
Township for failure to comply with rules and regulations governing
kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds pursuant to the New Jersey
Administrative Code, Title 8, Chapter 23, Subchapter 3 and this
chapter. Any person holding such license shall not be required to secure
§ 068.09 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 068.13
001:119
§ 068.14. Canvass of dogs and cats.
The Health Officer or any person appointed for the purpose which person
may include the Chief of Police, shall annually cause a canvass to be made
of all dogs and cats owned, kept or harbored within the limits of the
Township, and shall report on or before September 1st of each year to the
licensing official and to the Department of Health, and to the New Jersey
State Department of Health the results thereof, setting forth in separate
columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring
unlicensed dogs or cats, the number of unlicensed dogs or cats owned, kept
or harbored by each said persons, together with a complete description of
each of said unlicensed animals.
§ 068.15. Fees. [Amended 9-25-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-19;
5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-19; 7-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-25;
4-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
The following fees shall be paid to the Township of Pequannock for
compliance of this chapter:
individual licenses for animals owned by such licensee and kept at such
establishment; such licenses shall not be transferable to another owner
or different premises.
C. No animal kept in kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted
off the premises, except on leash or in a crate or other method of safe
control.
A. Dog License and Registration Tag - Annual.
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
(i) Neutered $10 $13 $16 $19 $22
(ii) All others $13 $16 $19 $22 $25
B. Cat License and Registration Tag - Annual.
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
(i) Neutered $10 $13 $16 $19 $22
(ii) All others $13 $16 $19 $22 $25
C. Late charge for dog or cat license and registration tag effective
February 1: $5.
D. Replacement dog or cat license and registration tag: $1.
E. Animal redemption fee: $50.
F. Pound maintenance per day: $10.
G. Animal adoption per animal: $25.
§ 068.13 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 068.15
001:120
§ 068.16. Enforcement; interfering with persons performing duties
under chapter. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-22]
The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by the Pequannock
Township Health Department and/or Animal Control Officer.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 068.17. Violations of rules; penalty. [Amended 10-26-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-32; 7-24-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-25; 10-27-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-21; 8-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-11]
Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $500 for each offense; except:
Chapter 070
CLOTHING BINS
§ 070.01. Permit required. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-37]
Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no person shall place,
use or employ a donation clothing bin, for solicitation purposes, unless all
of the following requirements are met:
H. Disposal fee per dog: $100; disposal fee per cat: $60.
I. Kennel license - annual:
(i) Ten or less dogs: $10.
(ii) Greater than 10 dogs: $25.
J. Pet shop - annual: $10.
K. Potentially dangerous dog license and registration tag - annually: $250.
A. Dogs running at large wherein the first offense shall be $50, the second
offense shall be $150, and the third and subsequent offenses shall be
$200.
B. Fines for unlicensed dogs and/or cats shall be no more than $50 per
animal plus court cost per animal payable through the Violations
Bureau for the first offense and a fine of not more than $500 for each
subsequent offense.
C. The penalty for failure to immediately and properly dispose of a pet's
solid waste shall be $100 for the first offense, $250 for the second
offense, and $500 for the third offense and any subsequent offense.
§ 068.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 070.01
001:121
§ 070.02. Issuance of a permit. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-37]
§ 070.03. Permit renewal. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-37]
An expiring permit for a donation clothing bin may be renewed by a
charitable organization on an annual basis upon payment of the $25. The
application shall include the following information:
A. The donation clothing bin is owned by a charitable organization
registered with the Attorney General of the State of New Jersey
pursuant to P.L. 1994, c. 16; and
B. The registered charitable organization has obtained a permit for a
period of one year, issued by the Township Clerk upon the approval of
the Township Council.
A. An application for a permit shall include the following information:
a) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible;
b) The manner in which the charitable organization anticipates any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin would be used,
sold or dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of
collected donations would be allocated or spent;
c) The name and telephone number of the bona fide office of the
applicant and of any entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin;
d) The schedule of pick-ups removing the articles from the bins, which
can be no less often than once per week, and the name and
telephone number of the person to be notified if the bin is
overflowing prior to the scheduled date of pick-up; and
e) Written consent from the property owner, or the owner's
authorized representative, to place the bin on his/her property; and
f) Proof of registration with the Attorney General as a charitable
organization.
B. The Council shall not grant an application for a permit to place, use, or
employ a donation clothing bin if it determines that the placement of
the bin could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall include, but
are not limited to, the placement of a donation clothing bin in parking
spaces, in any area that interferes with pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
or any place which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other
flammable liquids or gases.
C. The fee for such application for the permit shall be $25.
§ 070.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 070.03
001:122
§ 070.04. Display of information on bin. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-37]
The following information shall be clearly and conspicuously displayed on
the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
§ 070.05. Complaints. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-37]
A. The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible, and, if
applicant intends to move it, the new location where the bin would be
situated after the renewal is granted;
B. The manner in which the entity has used, sold or dispersed any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin, the method by which the
proceeds of collected donations have been allocated or spent, and any
changes the entity anticipates it may make in these processes during
the period covered by the renewal;
C. The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office of the applicant
and any entity which shared or profited from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, and of any entities which may do so
during the period covered by the renewal;
D. The schedule of pick-ups removing the articles from the bins, which can
be no less often than once per week, and the name and telephone
number of the person to be notified if the bin is overflowing prior to the
date of pick-up;
E. Written consent from the property owner, or the owner's authorized
representative, to place the bin on his/her property; and
F. Proof of charitable registration with the Attorney General as a
charitable organization.
A. The permit number and expiration date;
B. The information required to be displayed on the bin in N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.61.
A. The Township Council shall receive and investigate, within 30 days, any
complaints from the public about a clothing bin.
B. Whenever it appears to the Township Council that a person or entity has
engaged in, or is engaging in any act or practice in violation of this
ordinance, the entity who placed the bin shall be issued a warning,
stating that if the violation is not rectified or if a hearing before the
Township Council is not requested within 45 days, the clothing bin will
be seized or removed at the expense of the entity who placed the bin,
and any clothing or other donations collected via the bin will be sold at
public auction or otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means
used to notify the person or entity who placed the bin, such warning
shall be affixed to the exterior of the bin itself. In the event that the
§ 070.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 070.05
001:123
§ 070.06. Penalties. [Added 12-23-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-37]
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by law, any person
or entity who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be a) subject to
a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60
et seq. The Township may bring this action in the Municipal Court or the
Superior Court as a summary proceeding under the Penalty Enforcement
Law of 1999. Any penalty moneys collected therefrom shall be paid to the
Chief Financial Officer of the Township. An entity violating this chapter
shall be deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin
for solicitation purposes pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61 et seq. An entity
disqualified from placing, using, or employing a donation clothing bin by
violating the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. may apply to the
Township Council to have eligibility restored. The Township Council may
restore the eligibility of an entity who a) acts within the public interest; and
b) demonstrates that they have made a good faith effort to comply with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. and all other applicable laws and
regulations and has no fraudulent intentions.
Chapter 071
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 071.01. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Drug Paraphernalia
Ordinance of the Township of Pequannock."
§ 071.02. Purpose and policy.
It is hereby found that the availability of drug paraphernalia has reached
substantially significant levels in Northern New Jersey and, as a result, an
entirely separate industry has in fact developed promoting the illegal use
of drugs and drug paraphernalia by adults and minors alike. Sales of such
items have been reported in the billions of dollars and as a result, proposals
aimed at controlling such use are essential. The provisions of this chapter
intend to comprehensively define all items which may be deemed drug
paraphernalia and regulate and restrict their presence within the confines
of the Township of Pequannock.
§ 071.03. Definitions.
entity who placed the bin does not rectify the violation or request a
hearing within 45 days of the posting of the warning, the Township
Council may order the bin seized, remove it, or have it removed at the
expense of the entity who placed the bin, and sell it at public auction or
otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations collected via the bin
shall be paid to the Chief Financial Officer of the Township.
§ 070.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 071.03
001:124
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — All equipment, products and materials of
any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use in
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing in the human
body a controlled dangerous substance (as defined by the statutes of
New Jersey therefore provided) in violation of the provisions of this
chapter. It shall include, but not be limited to:
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled dangerous substance or from which a
controlled dangerous substance can be derived.
(1)
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled dangerous substances.
(2)
Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled dangerous substance.
(3)
Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled dangerous substances.
(4)
Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled dangerous substances.
(5)
Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed
for use in cutting controlled dangerous substances.
(6)
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or
refining marijuana.
(7)
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
dangerous substances.
(8)
Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled dangerous substances.
(9)
Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled dangerous substances.
(10)
§ 071.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 071.03
001:125
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
dangerous substances into the human body.
(11)
Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls.
(a)
(b) Water pipes.
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices.
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks.
Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand.
(e)
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials.
(g) Chamber pipes.
(h) Carburetor pipes.
(i) Electric pipes.
(j) Air-driven pipes.
(k) Chillums.
(l) Bongs.
(m) Ice pipes or chillers.
(12)
B. In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
(1) Statements by the owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
(2) Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
dangerous substance.
(3) The proximity of the object in time and space to direct violation of
this chapter.
(4) The proximity of the object to controlled dangerous substances.
(5) The existence of any residue of controlled dangerous substances on
the object.
§ 071.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 071.03
001:126
§ 071.04. Prohibitions.
Chapter 072
(6) Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he
knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of this chapter, and the innocence of an owner,
or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this
act shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
(7) Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use.
(8) Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use.
(9) National and local advertising concerning its use.
(10) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
(11) Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such
as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products.
(12) Direct or circumstantial evidence to the ratio of sales of the objects
to the total sales of the business enterprise.
(13) The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community.
(14) Expert testimony concerning its use.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to
use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest,
manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled dangerous
substance as defined by statute of New Jersey therefor provided, in
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or dispense, or possess
with intent to distribute or dispense, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or
under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be
used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack,
repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled dangerous substance as
defined by statute of New Jersey therefor provided in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 071.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 071.04
001:127
EMERGENCY FUEL OIL AND FURNACE REPAIR FOR CERTAIN
RESIDENTIAL TENANTS
§ 072.01. Emergency fuel oil delivery.
The Township Health Officer, or other Officer designated by the Health
Officer, shall whenever necessary to protect the health and safety of
residential tenants act as agent for a landlord in engaging a fuel oil dealer
to deliver fuel oil at a reasonable price per gallon and to refire the burner
to restore the proper heating of any residential property rented by said
landlord, provided, however, that at least 12 hours have lapsed, if the
outside air temperature is between 33° F. and 55° F., inclusive, or at least
four hours have elapsed, if the outside air temperature is 32° F. or less,
since the tenant has lodged a complaint with any municipal officer or
agency prior to which complaint a bona fide attempt has been made to
notify the landlord of the lack of heat, and the landlord has failed to take
appropriate action. Lack of heat means maintaining less heat than required
by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.
§ 072.02. Engaging repairman and the ordering of necessary parts
for furnace, boiler, or other equipment.
The Health Officer of Pequannock Township, or other Officer designated
by the Health Officer, shall whenever necessary to protect the health and
safety of residential tenants, act as agent for the landlord in engaging of
repairman and the ordering of any parts necessary to restore to operating
condition the furnace, boiler or other equipment essential to the proper
heating of any residential unit rented by said landlord, provided, however,
that at least 24 hours have elapsed since the tenant has lodged a complaint
with the local board of health, prior to which a bona fide attempt has been
made by the tenant to notify the landlord of the failure of the heating
equipment, and the landlord has failed to take appropriate action, and the
outside air temperature is less than 55° F.
§ 072.03. Billing to landlord of municipality for delivery of fuel oil,
refiring a burner, engaging repairman, and the ordering of any
parts.
Any fuel oil dealer who delivers fuel oil or refires the burner in accordance
with Section 72.01, or any repairman who restores the operating condition
of a furnace, boiler, or who provides equipment and services essential to
the proper heating of any residential unit in accordance with Section 72.02
of this chapter may bill the landlord directly, or the Township may issue a
voucher to the fuel oil dealer or repairman who delivered the fuel oil or
made the repairs, for monies due.
§ 071.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 072.04
001:128
§ 072.04. Penalty for landlords negligence of failure of act
resulting in Township action.
Any landlord or his agent whose negligence or failure to act results in
Township action pursuant to Section 72.01, 72.02, or both shall be liable to
a civil penalty of not more than $300 for each affected dwelling unit in the
residential property. Such penalty shall be recovered by the Township in a
civil action by summary proceedings under the "Penalty Enforcement Law"
(N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et seq.). Any action to collect or enforce such penalty may
be brought in the Superior Court, or Municipal Court. The amount of such
penalty shall be paid to the municipality and be used for general municipal
purposes.
§ 072.05. Penalty enforcement proceeding; reimbursements;
collection of reimbursements.
In any penalty proceeding brought pursuant to this chapter, the Court shall
also order the landlord or his agent to reimburse the municipality for actual
costs for any fuel oil delivered, the service charge for refiring the boiler, if
any, and any charges for parts necessary to restore to operating condition,
the furnace, boiler or any equipment essential to the proper heating of
any residential unit, including any service charges. The Court shall further
be empowered to issue any appropriate injunctive order, and to authorize
immediate collection of reimbursable costs due the municipality out of
the goods and chattels of the landlord, including all sums due, or which
may come due, as present or future rents. Any landlord who prevails in
such action shall be entitled to reimbursement by the municipality for all
reasonable costs and expenses. Such landlord, however, shall still remain
responsible for the cost of any fuel oil delivered, any charge for refiring
the burner, any parts ordered, and any charges for restoring the heating
equipment, incurred by the Township.
§ 072.06. Immunity of Township or its employees in enforcing the
ordinance.
The Township of Pequannock and its employees shall not be liable to any
person or for damage to property in enforcing this chapter, except for
gross negligence or malfeasance of any Township official, and under no
circumstances shall the Township be held liable for damages from lack of
heat in a residential unit.
§ 072.07. Application of chapter.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to owner occupied residential
rental properties containing five units or less.
Chapter 073
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT
§ 072.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 073.01
001:129
§ 073.01. Purpose.
Growing public demand to assess environmental impacts before land use
decisions are made has precipitated the need of identifying and anticipating
environmental problems. With sound information at hand, environmental
degradation can be minimized. The environmental impact report
legitimately places the burden of identifying environmental ills and offering
feasible alternatives upon the individual, corporation or agency which
proposes to alter the environment. The environmental assessment
methodology will facilitate the fulfillment of the statutorily required
planning, review and approval functions of the Township of Pequannock
in order to maintain the health, safety and public welfare not only for the
citizens of Pequannock Township, but for the surrounding area.
§ 073.02. Submission of environmental impact report prior to other
approvals.
Prior to preliminary approval of any major subdivision, final approval of any
site plan, major or minor, final approval of any minor subdivision, granting
of a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the Planning Board, Board
of Adjustment of the Township of Pequannock or the Township Planner may
require that an environmental impact report is submitted in conjunction
with the application for development as required by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., and in accordance with the standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 073.03. Contents of report.
When required, such report shall provide the information needed to
evaluate the effects of a proposed project upon the environment. The
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, or Planning Director may
require that any or all of the information listed below be included in the
Environmental Impact Report.
A. A project description, which shall specify what it is to be done and how
it is to be done during construction and operation, as well as recital of
alternative plans deemed practicable to achieve the objective.
B. An inventory of existing environmental conditions and a description of
how these components interact at the project site and in the
surrounding region, which shall describe air quality, water supply,
hydrology, geology, soils and properties thereof, including capabilities
and limitations, sewerage systems, topography, slope, vegetation,
wildlife, wildlife habitat, food sources, and corridors, aquatic
organisms, noise characteristics, history and archaeology. Air and
water quality shall be described with reference to standards
promulgated by the Department of Environmental Protection of the
State of New Jersey, and soils shall be described with reference to
criteria contained in the Morris County Soil Conservation District
Standards and Specifications.
§ 073.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 073.03
001:130
§ 073.04. Action by municipal body.
The local municipal body requesting said report shall review the same
within the time frame established for the review of the application pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and shall consider as part of its review of
the application whether or not the project, as applied for, will have an
adverse effect upon the environment. Nothing herein, however, shall be
construed to limit or replace any other area of the municipal bodies' review
and consideration of said application, and no approval shall be granted
for any project use, subdivision or site plan, unless all other requirements,
including local, state and county, have been complied with. In the event
that the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment determines that expert
review of the environmental impact report or inspection of approved
construction activity is necessary to insure that the impact on the
environment will be minimized, the cost for this review and/or inspections
will be charged the applicant's review deposit fee as established in Chapter
79 of the Township Code.
Chapter 074
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE
C. An assessment of the probable impact of the project upon all topics set
forth in "B" above.
D. A listing and evaluation of adverse environmental impacts, with
particular emphasis upon air or water pollution; increase in noise;
damage to plant, tree and wildlife systems; damage to natural
resources; displacement of people and businesses; displacement of
existing farms; increase in sedimentation and siltation; increase in
municipal services; and consequences to municipal tax structure. Offsite
impact shall also be set forth and evaluated.
E. A description of steps to be taken to minimize adverse environmental
impacts during construction and operation, both at the project site and
in the surrounding region, such description to be accompanied by
necessary maps, schedules and other explanatory data as may be
needed to clarify and explain the actions to be taken.
F. A statement concerning any irreversible and irretrievable commitment
of resources which would be involved in the proposed action should it
be implemented.
G. A statement of alternatives to the proposed project which might avoid
some or all of the adverse environmental effects, including a no-action
alternative.
§ 073.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 074.01
001:131
§ 074.01. Emergency Medical Service, established. [Added
8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
The Pequannock Township Emergency Medical Service is hereby created
and established.
§ 074.02. Definitions. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The right to issue orders, give commands, enforce
obedience, initiate actions, and make necessary decisions commensurate
with rank or assignments as provided for in the Emergency Medical Service
rules, policies and procedures. Authority may be delegated by those
designated. Acts performed without proper authority or authorization shall
be considered to be in violation of the rules.
CHAIN OF COMMAND — Vertical lines of communication, authority and
responsibility within the organizational structure of the Emergency Medical
Service. The Pequannock Township Emergency Medical Service shall fall
under the direct supervision and the responsibility of the Director of the
Pequannock Health Department.
DIRECTIVE — A document detailing the performance of a specific activity
or method of operation. "Directive" includes:
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE — Herein to be known as the
Pequannock Township Emergency Medical Service, (EMS).
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES — Any service, including transportation
provided by the Emergency Medical Service, to a potentially ill, or injured
person in response to a call for service.
EMPLOYEE/EMPLOYEE — A person who performs in the capacity of an
emergency medical responder.
MAY/SHOULD — The action indicated is permitted.
ORDER — Any written or oral directive issued by a supervisor to any
subordinate or group of subordinates in the course of duty.
PATIENT — Any person who receives Emergency Medical Services from the
Emergency Medical Service.
GENERAL ORDER — Broadly based directive dealing with policy and
procedure and effecting one or more organizational subdivisions of the
Emergency Medical Service.
A.
PERSONNEL ORDER — A directive initiating and announcing a change
in the assignment, rank, or status of personnel.
B.
SPECIAL ORDER — A directive dealing with a specific circumstance or
event that is usually self-canceling.
C.
§ 074.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 074.02
001:132
POLICY — A statement of Emergency Medical Service principles that
provides the basis for the development of procedures and directives.
PROCEDURE — A written statement providing specific direction of
performing Emergency Medical Service activities. Procedures are
implemented through policies and directives.
SHALL/WILL — The action indicated is mandatory.
SUPERVISOR — Employee assigned to a position requiring the exercise of
immediate supervision over the activities of other employees.
THIRD PARTY BILLING AGENCY — A business entity engaged by the
Township of Pequannock for the purpose of affecting the billing of patients
and collecting payments there from, which payment shall be remitted to the
Township of Pequannock.
§ 074.03. Employees. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
The Pequannock Emergency Medical Service shall consist of employees as
are or may be appointed and approved by the Township Manager of the
Township of Pequannock.
§ 074.04. Ownership of assets; expenses; and operating costs.
[Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
All Emergency Medical Service vehicles, currently owned or purchased by
the Township of Pequannock will remain the property of the Township of
Pequannock. All expenses and costs for proper maintenance and operation
of the Emergency Medical Service vehicles and equipment shall be funded
through revenue generated by the Township of Pequannock EMS services.
§ 074.05. Qualifications for employees. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-21]
No person shall be eligible to become an employee of the Pequannock
Emergency Medical Service unless such person possesses and provides
proof of the following qualifications:
A. All applicants for employment shall be between the age of 18 and the
state maximum permitted age.
B. Be physically fit to perform the duties of an emergency medical
technician. The applicant shall submit to a medical evaluation by a
licensed physician the costs of which will be borne by the Township.
C. Be subject to a criminal background check and have no prior
convictions for any offense or crime.
D. Be subject to a motor vehicle background check with no prior record of
careless or reckless driving, driving under the influence of drugs or
alcohol or any other serious moving violation.
E. Be subject to pre-employment and random drug testing.
§ 074.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 074.05
001:133
§ 074.06. Application and approval for employment. [Added
8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
§ 074.07. Health officer of the Township of Pequannock. [Added
8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
Pursuant to municipal ordinance, the Health Officer shall be the head
of the Emergency Medical Service and shall be directly responsible to
the Township Manager for the efficiency and day-to-day operations of the
Emergency Medical Service. Pursuant to policies established by the
appropriate authority, the Health Officer shall:
F. Be a certified emergency medical technician of the State of New Jersey
with at least two years' experience as an emergency medical
technician. Any lapse in certification will be cause for immediate
suspension of duties. Reinstatement will only occur upon certification is
reinstated.
G. Possess a valid New Jersey driver's license.
A. The name of the applicant shall be provided to the EMS Program
Coordinator who will ensure that the application process is followed as
established in the Township of Pequannock ordinance; with the
recommendations of the Health Officer of the Health Department.
B. Applications will be accepted through completion of the standard
Pequannock employment application.
A. Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the Emergency
Medical Service and any special emergency directives for the
disposition and discipline of the Service and its employees;
B. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of the
Emergency Medical Service.
C. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all employees;
D. Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the efficient
operation of the Emergency Medical Service to be exercised under the
direction and control of the Health Officer.
E. Report at least monthly to the Township Manager in such form as shall
be prescribed on the operation of the Emergency Medical Service
during the preceding month and make such other reports as may be
requested by the appropriate authority.
F. Prepare and submit the annual budget and proposed expenditure
programs to the Township Manager.
§ 074.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 074.08
001:134
§ 074.08. Appointment of an EMS program coordinator. [Added
8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
The Township shall appoint an EMS Program Coordinator. He/she shall be
a Township employee and be designated as a Coordinator of the Emergency
Medical Service Program.
A. Qualifications:
(1) Be not less than 18 years of age.
(2) Be subject to a criminal and motor vehicle background check.
(3) Possess a valid New Jersey driver's license.
(4) Possess knowledge of emergency medical care and the process and
procedures of Emergency Medical Services and shall have a
minimum of five years' experience as an emergency medical
technician with a minimum of two years in a supervisory role.
(5) Possess knowledge in computers and common programs including
Microsoft Word, Excel, and emsCharts.
(6) Be available to manage absences and other problems involving
shift schedules.
(7) Possess knowledge in Emergency Management to include at a
minimum completion of ICS 100, 200 and NIMS 700.
B. Responsibilities:
(1) Maintain the staffing schedule of the Emergency Medical Service
insuring that all shifts are fully staffed without exception.
(2) Maintain a roster of all employees with their availability to cover
regular shifts and shifts that must be staffed due to sickness,
vacations, and other absences.
(3) Maintain a call out roster of those employees available to respond
to general calls.
(4) Collect, review, and forward all run sheets and forward them to the
authorized agency.
(5) Collect and forward to appropriate official all personnel and
training records as prescribed in the Rules and Regulations.
(6) Collect, review, and forward all time sheets.
(7) Any and all other functions necessary to insure that shifts are
staffed and information is provided to the billing agent.
(8) The EMS Program Coordinator will be an employee subject to all
requirements, allowances and regulations of such employee.
§ 074.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 074.08
001:135
§ 074.09. General supervision of Emergency Medical Service.
[Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
The EMS Program Coordinator shall have the general supervision of the
Service. Said general supervision by the EMS Program Coordinator shall
not conflict with such rules and regulations for the government and
management of the Emergency Medical Service. The EMS Program
Coordinator shall coordinate with the Health Officer in the management of
the Emergency Medical Service.
§ 074.10. Command at calls for service. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-21]
§ 074.11. Monthly report. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
The EMS Program Coordinator shall report monthly to the Health Officer,
including the number of calls for service for the month, the condition of
apparatus and equipment, personnel status and any other business deemed
appropriate.
§ 074.12. Response to calls for service. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-21]
The on-duty crew employees shall respond immediately to the call for
service, unless otherwise directed.
§ 074.13. Training and drills. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-21]
The EMS Program Coordinator or his/her designee shall maintain a
schedule of training and drills and shall activate the Emergency Medical
Service for drills or training when and where it becomes necessary. These
(9) The appointee shall serve a probationary period of six months.
(10) The EMS Program Coordinator will submit a monthly activity
report to the Health Officer. The Health Officer will include this
report in his/her monthly report to the Township Manager.
C. Compensation. The EMS Program Coordinator will be compensated at a
yearly rate established by the Salary Ordinance.
A. In all cases of calls for service, the EMS Program Coordinator shall
have full power and absolute command and control under authority of
this chapter.
B. When the EMS Program Coordinator is absent from the call for service,
the on-duty crew leader shall assume the duties of command until
relieved.
C. When all officers are absent from the call for service the on-duty crew
shall assume the duties of command.
§ 074.08 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 074.13
001:136
training sessions may include any and all mandated training courses as set
forth in the rules and regulations of the Emergency Medical Service and
any elective training sessions as the Health Officer may deem necessary or
beneficial. Employees will be compensated for the time required to maintain
required certifications. The Township will pay any fees or costs for the
training that is not covered by the State or other agencies.
§ 074.14. Record of calls for service and training exercises. [Added
8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
The EMS Program Coordinator shall keep a permanent record of the duty
time and attendance at training sessions of each active employee of the
Emergency Medical Service.
§ 074.15. Authorized drivers. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-21]
Any employee of the Emergency Medical Service who drives any Township
vehicle must complete the required driver training as set forth in the
rules and regulations of the Emergency Medical Service. All drivers are
subject to an annual driver's license abstract check to be conducted by the
Pequannock Police Department.
§ 074.16. Request for repairs or supplies. [Added 8-28-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-21]
All requests for repairs or supplies for the Emergency Medical Service shall
be presented to the Health Officer for approval. Purchases shall be made in
accordance with applicable state and municipal regulations.
§ 074.17. Unauthorized repairs; emergencies. [Added 8-28-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-21]
No employee of the Emergency Medical Service shall be permitted to
tamper with, fix or repair any apparatus unless directed to do so by the
EMS Program Coordinator or Health Officer, and then only in the case of an
emergency.
§ 074.18. Rules of conduct. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
A. General conduct.
(1) Performance of duty. All employees shall promptly perform their
duties as required or directed by law, Emergency Medical Service
rules, policy or directive and by lawful order of a supervisor.
(2) Obedience to laws and rules. Employees shall obey all laws,
ordinances, rules, policies, procedures and directives of the
Emergency Medical Service and the Township of Pequannock.
(3) Reporting violations of laws and rules. Employees knowing of other
employees violating laws, ordinances or rules of the Emergency
§ 074.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 074.18
001:137
§ 074.19. Alcoholic beverages and drugs. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-21]
Employees shall be subject to the Township's Employee Drug and Alcohol
Testing Policy.
§ 074.20. Judicial appearance and testimony regarding EMS
matters. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
Medical Service shall report said violations in writing to the Health
Officer.
(4) Insubordination. Employees shall not;
(a) Fail or refuse to obey a lawful order given by a supervisor;
(b) Use of any disrespectful or abusive language or action.
(5) Conduct toward other department employees. Employees shall
treat other Emergency Medical Service employees with respect.
They shall be courteous and civil at all times in their relationships
with one another.
(6) Fitness for duty. Personnel shall maintain sufficient physical and
psychological condition in order to handle the variety of activities
required of an emergency medical technician.
(7) Driver's license. Employees operating Township motor vehicles
shall possess a valid driver's license. Whenever a driver's license is
revoked, suspended or lost, the employee shall immediately notify
the appropriate supervisor, giving full particulars.
(8) Address and telephone numbers. Employees are required to have a
telephone or other method of twenty-four hour contact. Changes in
address or telephone number shall be reported in writing to the
appropriate supervisor within 24 hours of the change.
A. Employees shall not volunteer to testify in actions arising out of
Emergency Medical Service employment and shall not testify unless
subpoenaed. If the subpoena arises out of Township employment or if
employees are informed that they are a party to a civil action arising out
of Township employment, they shall immediately notify the appropriate
supervisor and shall consult with the Township Manager and the
Township Attorney before responding to any such subpoena, giving a
deposition, or signing any affidavit.
B. Court appearance. When appearing in court on Emergency Medical
Service business, employees shall wear either the Emergency Medical
Service uniform or appropriate business attire.
C. Department investigations. Employees are required to answer
questions, file reports or render material and relevant statements in an
Emergency Medical Service investigation when such questions and
§ 074.18 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 074.20
001:138
§ 074.21. Policy for Emergency Medical Services billing. [Added
8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
§ 074.22. Billing for service. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-21]
statements are directly related to job responsibilities. Employees shall
be advised of and permitted to invoke, all applicable constitutional and
statutory rights, including consultation with Counsel at the employee's
expense.
D. Truthfulness. Employees are required to be truthful regarding their
words and actions relating to the conduct of their duties at all times
whether under oath or not.
A. The Township of Pequannock recognizes the need to bill for the
provision of Emergency Medical Services to aid in the provision of those
services.
B. No person requiring EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES shall be
denied services due to a lack of insurance or ability to pay.
C. Whereas, the Emergency Medical Service is funded by local taxes, it is
in the best interest of the residents of Pequannock to establish the
Payment Plan in accordance with the Health Care Finance
Administration (HCFA) guidelines so that residents will not be
responsible for any out of pocket expenses.
A. The Emergency Medical Service (the "Program") shall obtain licensure
from the New Jersey State Department of Health. The Emergency
Medical Service is a Division of the Pequannock Township Health
Department.
B. The Township of Pequannock shall apply for a "Provider Number" from
the Federal and State Medicare/Medicaid programs enabling the
municipality to institute a Third Party Payment Plan (the "Payment
Plan").
C. All patients; whether or not residents of the Township of Pequannock,
and/or their financially responsible parties, insurers or carriers, will be
billed for emergency medical services provided by the Emergency
Medical Service according to the Fee Schedule established herein or at
rates established by the Township of Pequannock from time to time.
D. A patient who receives Emergency Medical Services from the
Emergency Medical Service is obligated at the time of service or as
soon as practicable thereafter, to provide the Emergency Medical
Service with all pertinent insurance and payment information to
facilitate the Township's billing of third party payment sources for
services rendered. The Township may, at its option and shall, where
required by law, bill insurers or carriers on a patient's behalf and may
accept payment on an assignment basis.
§ 074.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 074.22
001:139
§ 074.23. Procedure for third party emergency medical services
billing. [Added 8-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-21]
E. All patients who are not residents of the Township of Pequannock, shall
be liable for any co-payment or deductible amounts not satisfied by
public or private insurance and the Township shall make reasonable
collection efforts for all such balances according to the most current
rules or regulations set forth by applicable Health Care Financing
Administration federal policies and regulations. The Township may bill
any applicable coinsurance carriers for such amounts. Exceptions
include only those instances where the Township has knowledge of a
particular patient's indigence or where the Township has made a
determination that the cost of billing and collecting such co-payments
or deductibles exceeds or is disproportionate to the amounts to be
collected.
F. The Township shall not bill any Pequannock resident for any fee,
balance, deductible, or co-payments not satisfied by public or private
insurance including Medicare/Medicaid, nor will the Township bill a
Pequannock resident for Emergency Medical Services provided if the
resident is not covered by private or public insurance.
G. The Township of Pequannock may, either directly or through any third
party billing agency with which it has contracted for billing and/or
collections for emergency medical services, make arrangements with
patients and/or their financially responsible party for installment
payments of bills or forgive any bill or portion thereof so long as the
Township determines that: (1) the financial condition of the patient
requires such an arrangement; and (2) the patient and/or financially
responsible party has demonstrated a willingness to make good faith
efforts towards payment of the bill.
H. A patient, including a Township resident, for whom the Township of
Pequannock has not received payment from a third party payer on
assignment, and who receives payment directly from a third party payer
for Emergency Medical Services rendered by the Emergency Medical
Service is obligated to remit such monies to the Township in the event
the Township has not been paid for services rendered. Patients who do
not remit such monies may be held liable for costs of collection in
addition to the charges for emergency medical services rendered.
I. The Township of Pequannock shall be authorized to enter into contracts
with area hospitals that provide Advanced Life Support (ALS) services
to patients that are transported by the Pequannock Township Health
Department Emergency Medical Service. This will allow the hospitals to
bill for Emergency Medical Services and reimburse the Township for its
transportation costs within 45 days of receiving payment.
A. The Township of Pequannock is hereby authorized to enter into a
contract with a third party billing agency for the performance of EMS
§ 074.22 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 074.23
001:140
billing and collection services, provided however that the following
standards for such third party billing contracts are met.
1. Third party billing agency has in place a compliance program
conforming to standards set forth in the Office of Inspector
General's Compliance Program Guidance for Third Party Medical
Billing Companies, 63 Federal Register 70138, as amended.
2. Neither the billing agency nor any of its employees are subject to
exclusion from any state or federal health care program.
3. The billing agency is bonded and/or insured in amounts satisfactory
to the Township of Pequannock.
B. A detailed listing of patients who utilize Emergency Medical Services
provided by the Pequannock Emergency Medical Service will be
compiled by the Township of Pequannock. This information will be
transmitted to the third party billing agency. The information will be
subjected to the confidentiality requirements of applicable law. This
information will include, at a minimum, the following:
1. Name, address and telephone number of patients.
2. Name, address and claim number of insurance carrier, if
applicable.
3. Date, time and EMS chart number.
4. Point of origin and destination.
5. Odometer reading at point of pick up and destination.
6. Reason for transport/patient's complaint/current condition.
7. Itemization and description of services provided and charges.
8. Names, titles and signatures of ambulance personnel, when
possible.
C. The third party billing agency shall obtain the information from the
Emergency Medical Service and will bill the patient and or their
financial representative parties, insurers or carriers according to the
Fee Schedule established herein, provided however that the third party
billing agency shall not bill any Pequannock resident for any fee,
balance, deductible, or co-payment not satisfied by public or private
insurance including Medicare/Medicaid, nor will the Township bill a
Pequannock resident for Emergency Medical Services provided if the
resident is not covered by private or public insurance.
D. The fee for Emergency Medical Services shall be $900 plus $10 per
mile per trip. Non-transportations where aid is provided shall be billed
at a rate of $400.
§ 074.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 074.23
001:141
Chapter 075
FESTIVALS, CARNIVALS, EXHIBITIONS AND SHOWS
§ 075.01. License required.
No person or organization shall hold any fair or festival, any tent show,
outdoor trade show, or any circus, carnival or similar outdoor amusement
without first obtaining a license from the Township Council.
§ 075.02. License application. [Amended 2-23-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-01]
Application to the Township Council for a license under this chapter shall
be made on a form to be furnished by the Township containing such
information as the Township Council shall direct including but not limited
to: the date of the event, hours of operation, provisions for traffic control,
site protection, provision of parking space, sewage disposal, solid waste
disposal, food service, water, and dust and noise control. If the applicant
is not the owner of the property where the event is being scheduled, the
property owner's written consent shall accompany the application. The
application shall also include a copy of the notice which must be furnished
to all property owners within 200 feet of the site advising them of the event
along with a list of owners the notice was presented to. Notice to property
owners within 200 feet must be given, and application to the Township
Council shall be made at least 45 days in advance of the event to allow
sufficient review time. No more than one license per year shall be issued to
any individual, organization, or association.
§ 075.03. License fee; exemptions. [Amended 9-23-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-24]
A license fee of $100 shall be charged for each license issued pursuant
to this chapter, which fee shall be paid on the issuance of the license,
provided that the Township Council, in its discretion, may issue a license
without charge to any organization, corporation or association formed and
operated for charitable, benevolent, religious, civic, eleemosynary, library,
community, or hospital purposes.
E. The Township shall review the fees for services listed in section "D"
above annually and adjust said fees based on the recommendation of
the Township Manager, the Health Officer of the Health Department,
and the EMS Program Coordinator and in accordance with the federally
approved Medicare Fee Schedule.
F. The Township of Pequannock may at its discretion, bill additionally for
materials, vehicle and/or personnel costs in the case of major or unique
incidents.
§ 074.23 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 075.04
001:142
§ 075.04. Issuance and contents of license.
Upon the payment of the required license fee, the deposit of the
indemnification required by this chapter and approval of the application by
the Township Council, the Township shall issue a license to the applicant.
Such license shall state the purpose for which it is issued and the person
and organization to whom it is issued. This license does not relieve the
licensee from any and all applicable local, State, or Federal regulations.
§ 075.05. Term of license.
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall state the date of expiration
of such license, which shall not be more than seven days after the date of
issuance.
§ 075.07. Cash bond to insure cleanup.
Upon issuance of a license under this chapter, all licensees, including those
exempt from the license fee, shall deposit with the Township Clerk a cash
bond of $250, conditioned upon the prompt cleanup and removal of all
equipment, trash and debris from the premises where the special events
and exhibits operated pursuant to such license. If such cleanup and removal
is not satisfactorily accomplished within a reasonable time after the closing
of such event or exhibit, so much of such bond as may be necessary to
effect such cleanup and removal may be used by or at the discretion of
the Township Council, and the balance returned if any to the licensee. In
the event that cleanup is satisfactory to the Township, such bond shall be
returned to the licensee upon expiration of the license.
§ 075.08. Signs.
A license to hold an outdoor event grants no permission to post or install
signs announcing, advertising, or directing persons to the event except as
provided by and in accordance with Chapter 153 of the Township Code.
§ 075.09. Use of live animals as prizes or giveaways prohibited.
[Added 3-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-15]
No person or organization obtaining a license under this chapter shall
permit the use of any live animal or creature, fish, reptile, or bird as a
prize, inducement, or giveaway at any fair or festival, any tent show, outdoor
trade show, or any circus, carnival or similar outdoor amusement. This
shall not apply to any domestic animal given away or sold in connection
with legitimate adoption events by licensed animal shelters and/or licensed
animal rescue organizations.
Chapter 077
FAIR HOUSING COMMITTEE RULES AND REGULATIONS
AFFORDABILITY CONTROL
§ 075.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.01
001:143
§ 077.01. Preamble.
The Fair Housing Committee of the Township of Pequannock entitled
"Affordability Control" was established in part to provide residential zoning
that provides for low- and moderate-income housing. In implementing the
control procedure and mechanisms to provide affordable housing as set
forth in said Affordability Control Ordinance, the Township Council of the
Township of Pequannock pursuant to Section 1C, established the Fair
Housing Committee, hereinafter referred to as "FHC". Pursuant to Section
1C(E), the FHC was charged with promulgating rules and regulations to
implement and maintain in the Township of Pequannock the affordability
control standards and procedure as set forth in this Ordinance. The
following rules and regulations are hereby adopted by the FHC and
approved by the Pequannock Township Council.
§ 077.02. Fair Housing Committee.
The Fair Housing Committee (FHC) is appointed by the Township Council
and is charged with the responsibility, among others, of establishing
procedures and standards to be utilized in implementing the Township's
affordable housing program.
The FHC also enforces and otherwise administers the provisions of this
chapter. Its function is to oversee the developer's or owner's
implementation of the rules and regulations and affordability controls. The
developer is the entity which initially creates an affordable unit or units or
assigns his or her interest to a subsequent person or entity and establishes
procedures, application forms and other methodology for marketing and
sales or rentals of set aside units which are submitted to the FHC for its
review and approval as set forth in the FHC's Rules and Regulations, The
owner is any person in possession and residing in an affordable dwelling
unit who must, in transferring ownership, comply with the rules and
procedures established herein. The function of the FHC can be more
properly understood as an oversight committee and a committee which
administers, monitors, and reviews plans and procedures submitted by the
developer or an owner of an affordable dwelling unit.
The FHC, however, is not without substantive powers as it is the FHC's
responsibility to promulgate Rules and Regulations which will be utilized
by the developer and owner of an affordable unit and to insure that
affordability is maintained.
The responsibility of the FHC includes, but is not limited to, the following:
A. Assist the developer, owner or tenant association in establishing
procedures and standards in accordance with this Ordinance, for
implementing the Affordability control mechanism.
B. The FHC shall hold meetings with any developer, owner or tenants
association in insuring that there is compliance with the ordinances and
will provide to said developer, owner or tenants association any data, or
§ 077.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.02
001:144
§ 077.03. Definitions. [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
The following terms wherever used or referred to in this text of Rules and
Regulations and Affordability Controls shall have the following meanings
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AFFORDABLE —
information which the FHC may deem to be helpful in accomplishing
this purpose. The FHC may supply the developer, owner or tenants
association with prior forms or documentation filed with the FHC by
prior developers with the stipulation that any names will be deleted
from said information.
C. Monitor affordability control compliance by developers, owner or
tenant associations, fee owners, and other parties in interest, including
compliance with deed restrictions and disposition covenants.
D. In connection with the first and subsequent occupancy of all set-aside
sale and rental units, review and amend the approved price
stabilization plan, review implementation of affordability control
standards and procedures, and in its sole discretion, make
recommendations for changes in procedures or exercise the right to
disapprove occupancy for any and all set-aside sale or rental units in
instances where eligibility is in question.
E. Thereafter, review and approve annual set-aside occupancy reports
prepared and filed by the developer, association or any party in interest,
as may be required by its practices and procedures, or as contained in
its rules and regulations.
F. Promulgate rules and regulations subject to approval by the Township
Council and implementation in ordinance form.
G. File periodical reports with the Township Council concerning the
discharge of its responsibilities and immediately report non-compliance
with affordability control standards and procedures for such actions as
the Council may deem appropriate.
OWNERSHIP EXPENSES — Ownership expenses for principal, interest,
taxes and insurance and condominium fees, excluding that part of the
condominium fees, if any, relating to household interior maintenance
shall not exceed 25% of the upper income limit for low- or moderateincome
households, as the case may be. In determining ownership
expenses in terms of qualifying household size:
1
bedroom
= a maximum of 2 person household
2
bedrooms
= a maximum of 4 person household
A.
§ 077.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.03
001:145
AGENCY — The Fair Housing Committee (FHC) of the Township of
Pequannock, or any successor duly authorized to carry out the powers and
responsibilities of the FHC. If no specific successor is duly established, the
Agency for the purpose of implementing this plan shall be the Planning
Board of the Township of Pequannock or its designee.
ASSOCIATION — An organization for the private ownership and
maintenance of any open space, community buildings, amenities and
improvements, including utilities, for the benefit of owners or residents of
the development, whether or not such organization shall be controlled by
the developer or homeowners.
HOUSEHOLD MEMBER — With the exception of children who reside or
regularly visit a parent or parents, a resident of an affordable unit must
establish legal residence in the affordable unit and must be an occupant of
the unit for at least nine months of any year.
INCOME — The total gross annual income from all sources of all members
of the household or family except income received by a family member
(other than the family head, spouse, or foster children) who is under the
age of 18 years or a full-time student of any age. Income includes, but is
not limited to, compensation for employment services or wages, interest, or
dividends from such assets as savings, CDs, money market, mutual funds,
stocks, bonds, 401Ks, KEOGHs, pension benefits, and government benefits,
such as unemployment compensation, welfare payments, social security,
disability income, and AFDC, plus verified regular child support payments,
alimony, commissions, regularly scheduled overtime, income from business
or real estate and "Return on Assets Income" defined below.
INITIAL PRICE or SALES PRICE — The price of an affordable unit when
it is for sale by a developer. This price is approved by FHC at the time of
marketing plan approval and is subject to subsequent adjustments based
on changes in COAH income data, real estate taxes, insurance, or interest
rates with written approval of the FHC, said adjustments shall be made
six months from the date of marketing plan approval and every six months
thereafter.
3
bedrooms
= a maximum of 6 person household
Generally, households will be referred to available units using the
following standards for table occupancy: a maximum of two persons
per bedroom; children of same sex in same bedroom; unrelated adults
or persons of the opposite sex other than husband and wife in
separate bedrooms; and children not in the same bedroom with
parents.
RENTAL EXPENSES — Rental expenses for monthly contract rent,
including utility charges, if any, shall not exceed 25% of the upper
income limit for low- or moderate-income households, as the case may
be.
B.
§ 077.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.03
001:146
INTEREST RATE — The developer, owner or tenant association will obtain
mortgage rates and terms from three lenders licensed to do business in New
Jersey, and willing to lend on affordable housing units. The average thirtyyear
fixed rate of these three lenders will be used in calculating unit selling
prices. A mortgage cap of 10% will apply.
LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLDS — Are those whose income fall below 50%
of the County of Morris median household income, adjusted for household
size, as established periodically by the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH).
MANDATORY SET-ASIDE — Is an inclusionary zoning device providing
internally subsidized dwelling units for low- and moderate-income
households for rent or sale, as part of a development proposal.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLDS — Are those whose income fall
between 50% and 80% of the County of Morris median household income,
adjusted for household size, as established periodically by the New Jersey
Council on Affordable Housing (COAH)
NET FAMILY ASSETS — All monetary assets that do not currently earn
income plus currently owned real estate and major personal items. Any
real estate that does not produce income and that is currently owned or
owned in part by the applicant shall be considered an asset to be counted in
totaling net family assets. Personal items shall also be counted in this total.
Personal items include resalable goods with a current market value greater
than $5,000 such as automobiles/trucks, boats and recreational vehicles.
Applicants owning real estate and major personal property must produce
documentation of the current market value and/or outstanding mortgage/
loan debt. The difference between the market value of these items and
documented debt owed will be treated as the monetary value asset.
RESALE PRICE — The price at which an affordable unit is sold by an owner
subsequent to the initial sale. This price is an adjustment to the initial price
or the price paid by the owner. The maximum price shall provide for a
percentage increase based on the change in the CPI Index. The percentage
increase shall be 75% of the increase in the Consumer Price Index for
Clerical Workers and Wage Earners (NY, NJ, CT) from the date of purchase
to the date of resale.
sale price +
[sale price
(CPI1 -
CPI2).75]
100
= resale price
RETURN ON ASSETS — The imputed value of income from assets. Income
shall be imputed on net family assets which do not earn verifiable income.
This value shall be determined by multiplying the value of the household's
total Net Family Assets by 5%.
§ 077.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.04
001:147
§ 077.04. General regulations. [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-18]
A. Phasing schedule. The developer shall submit a phasing schedule for
the construction of an equal number of low- and moderate-income units
in each phase in accordance with the following:
Minimum Percent Maximum Percent
Phase
Low/Moderate
Income Total Units
Completed
Low/Moderate
Income Total Units
Completed
I 0 20
II 20 40
III 45 60
IV 70 80
V 100 90
Market rate units set forth in the schedule shall not be occupied nor
shall Certificates of Occupancy be issued for units other than units
affordable to low- and moderate-income households until all low- and
moderate-income units in the previous phase have been completed and
sold or reserved for eligible persons.
B. Low- and moderate-income housing ratio. At least 10% of the total
number of residential dwellings shall be made affordable and sold or
rented to low-income persons and 10% shall be made affordable and
sold or rented to moderate-income persons.
C. Bedroom distribution. At least 20% of the low- and moderate-income
units shall be three bedroom units, and no more than 50% shall be one
bedroom units or efficiency units and the balance shall be two
bedrooms.
D. Application fees. A developer shall require a $50 non-refundable
application fee for each and every application submitted which shall be
paid to the FHC be it for ownership or rental of a set-aside unit but
there shall be no other fee paid as a finders or any other type of fee with
regard to the initial rental or sale of a set-aside unit. A $250 refundable
deposit may be required by the developer at the time of initial
application for the purchase of a set-aside unit. Said deposit will be fully
refundable in the event that a particular purchaser does not qualify for
a unit or if no unit is available for a prospective purchaser, or if a
prospective purchaser withdraws his/her application for any reason
prior to entering a formal contract with the developer. In the event a
formal contract is entered into, the $250 deposit will be applied toward
the purchase price.
E. Forms. The FHC has developed an application form and a certification
form which shall be utilized by the developer or owner. Applications
§ 077.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.04
001:148
§ 077.05. Developer affirmative marketing plan. [Amended
5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
shall include, as a minimum, all information contained in Schedule
A attached to these regulations. The application form is attached as
Schedule B.
A. General. The developer shall formulate and submit a written affirmative
marketing plan to the FHC at least 60 days prior to initial sales effort.
The affirmative marketing plan shall be realistically designed to ensure
that low- and moderate-income persons of all races and ethnic groups
are informed of the housing opportunity in the development, feel
welcome to seek to buy or to rent such housing and have the
opportunity to buy or rent such housing.
B. Household Size. Unless the FHC finds reasons for matching unit size
and household size according to a particular need, a one bedroom unit
shall be sold or rented to a single person or a two person household, if
these persons are a couple. A two bedroom unit shall be sold or rented
to a two person household that is not a couple or a maximum four
person household. A three bedroom unit shall be sold or rented to a
three person household that has no couple or a maximum six person
household. If the developer fails to find a household of appropriate size
to match a particular size unit the FHC will consider matching the unit
with a household of a smaller size.
C. Marketing Strategy and Procedure. At least 60 days prior to scheduled
publication, the Developer [Owner] will submit for FHC approval all
proposed advertising copy and brochures with a schedule of dates and
publications as well as application forms, the pricing structure, the
affirmative marketing plan, an outline of procedures, and any other
related materials required by the FHC at the time of submission of the
marketing plan.
D. FHC Approval-Marketing Plan Advertising Copy. The FHC shall
approve/disapprove the marketing plan and materials within 30 days of
receipt thereof.
E. Advertising Guideline. Advertisements shall be placed in appropriate
newspapers designed to reach:
1. Lower income persons of all races and ethnic groups in
municipalities in northeastern New Jersey that have higher than
average proportions of blacks, Hispanics, or lower income
households, and
2. Lower income persons of all races and ethnic groups who work in
Morris County but do not live within the County.
F. Advertisement Content. Advertising at a minimum shall set forth:
1. The price of the units.
§ 077.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.05
001:149
§ 077.06. Income requirements. [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-18]
2. The essential economic data with regard to the price of the units.
3. The purchaser's income limits.
4. The estimated down payment required.
5. Proposed association fees, if any.
6. Estimated real estate taxes.
7. The number of units available.
8. When units will probably be available for occupancy.
9. Method of registration.
10. When registration will begin and close.
11. A telephone number of the developer so interested applicants can
obtain further information.
12. Any other pertinent economic data with regard to the purchase of a
unit.
G. Additional Information.
1. The Developer shall provide as part of the marketing plan and
literature information in plain language regarding eligibility,
criteria, income levels, documentation required for certification,
application procedure, deed restriction, resale cap, mortgage
availability and any other information that will facilitate the
potential applicant's understanding of the low-moderate housing
program.
2. The Developer shall also make available, for interested persons,
additional information or assistance as needed to facilitate a
potential purchase.
A. General. No person shall be permitted to purchase or rent an affordable
Housing Unit unless he/she qualifies as a Household of Low or
Moderate Income.
B. Qualifications. Prospective purchasers or renters of Affordable Units
must be certified as to having family income that is under the income
limits established by the Council on Affordable Housing prior to
purchase or rent as a Low or Moderate Income family. A low-income
family is a family with income less than 50% of the annual median
household income, with adjustments for family size, and a moderateincome
family is a family with income between 50% and 80% of median
income with adjustments for family size. These income limits, which are
§ 077.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.06
001:150
§ 077.07. Determination of sales price.
published and adjusted for household size by the Council on Affordable
Housing shall be used in determining the applicant's eligibility.
A. The Initial Base Price. The initial base price is established such that the
sum of the monthly payments for principal, interest, taxes, fire, theft,
and liability insurance, and homeowners' association fees shall not
exceed 25% of both the low- and moderate-income ceilings determined
by taking 50% and 80%, respectively, of the median income adopted by
COAH for Morris County. The calculation of the base price assumes a
10% down payment and a thirty-year mortgage term. The calculations
are made utilizing the formula established by N.J.A.C. Title 5, Chapter
93, The Substantive Rules of the Council on Affordable Housing.
B. Discounted Sales Price. The base price shall be reduced by 10% for a
portion of the units offered by each developer to increase the range of
affordability to persons at lower income levels:
1. A minimum of 25% of the low- and moderate-income level units
offered by a developer will be discounted. This percentage shall be
increased in relation to the proportion of applicants at lower
income levels in both the low- and moderate-income categories but
this increase shall not exceed 50%. The relationship between the
percentage of applicants at the lower income levels and the
percentage of units to be discounted is set forth below:
Percentage of Applicants'
Incomes Under 45% of
Median
Percentage of Low Income
Units to Be Discounted
0 to 25% 25%
25.1 to 40% 37.5%
40.1 to 100% 50%
Percentage of Applicants
with Income Between 50.1%
to 68.5% of Median
Percentage of Moderate
Income Units to Be
Discounted
0 to 25% 25%
25.1 to 40% 37.5%
40.1 to 100% 50%
§ 077.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.07
001:151
§ 077.08. Affordable rental rates.
The chart above, by requiring that a portion of both low- and
moderate-income categories be discounted, creates four income
levels and four price levels. These are level one and level two low
income applicants and units and level one and level two moderateincome
applicants and units. If, for example, 28% of the applicants
fall within the level one low income category (income under 45%
of median), the developer must provide 37.5% of the low-income
units at level one or discounted prices.
2. The proportion of applicants that fall into the lower end of both the
low- and moderate-income categories shall be determined at the
end of the application period on the basis of income representation
made by applicants on their application forms.
3. The discount or reduction in price shall be applied to a variety of
unit sizes (number of bedrooms) such that the kinds and numbers
of units discounted matches the kinds and numbers of units offered
by the developer.
4. Any discounted unit will be first made available to certified families
within the low end of the low- and moderate-income categories set
forth in the schedule above.
A. Rental expenses. The rental expenses for monthly contract rent,
including utilities (gas, electric, water, oil), if any, shall not exceed 25%
of the upper income limit for Low-Moderate Income Households,
determined in accordance with paragraph B below.
B. Determining Rental Rate. For the purpose of determining the rental
charges of any initially designated rental units or any unsold affordable
units, the following formula shall be used.
Low income monthly rent = [0.25 (0.50 monthly median income)] -
monthly utilities charges*
Moderate income monthly rent = [0.25 (0.80 monthly median
income)] - monthly utilities charges*
*In calculating rent, the developer shall assume an average and
reasonable utility cost for the unit size
C. Initially Designated Rental Units. If any Affordable Unit is designated
initially as a rental unit, such Unit shall remain a rental unit for at least
15 years. After 15 years, they may be sold at prices affordable to low- or
moderate-income households, subject to such resale price controls as
may be necessary to insure that the units continue to be affordable to
moderate-income households in perpetuity.
D. Lease Requirements. The developer, or landlord, shall obtain a lease
which is signed by both the [landlord] developer and the tenant with
regard to any rental. The lease shall contain at least the following
§ 077.07 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.08
001:152
§ 077.09. Application/occupancy denied by developer.
requirements which shall be expressly made as part of the rules and
regulations of the lease. The following requirements shall be made
conspicuous to the prospective tenant:
1. Tenants are to be offered a lease of at least one year with a
maximum of three years.
2. Tenants must be informed that they are to be initially certified as
income eligible and that certification will last for a period of three
years. At the end of three years, the tenant is to be re-certified as
income eligible.
3. Tenants are to be specifically advised that if, at the time of recertification,
their income as further defined in the regulations,
rises above the amount which would make them ineligible for lowor
moderate-income rentals, then the tenant, as a condition of the
lease term, agrees to vacate the unit within three months.
E. Vacate Premises/Eviction Notice. The Developer, if the tenant's income
exceeds the allowable amount for low- or moderate-income rentals,
after three years will not have the right to charge the fair market rent
nor shall the tenant remain in the unit. If the tenant does not voluntarily
vacate the unit, then eviction procedures shall be instituted by the
developer. Failure on the part of the developer to initiate timely eviction
action will result in penalties as set forth in this chapter against the
developer. These eviction procedures shall take place in accordance
with the procedure as set forth in New Jersey Landlord Tenant Statutes.
F. Rent increases. The Developer will be permitted to increase the rent
annually providing that the monthly rent at no time exceeds the amount
established per Subsection B above.
G. Reports.
a. The Developer shall submit all new leases and renewals to the Fair
Housing Committee for approval prior to entering into a leasehold
agreement.
b. Within 30 days of entering into any lease agreement, a signed copy
of the lease shall be forwarded to Fair Housing Committee for
record keeping purposes.
A. Denial Contested. If an applicant for a set-aside unit contests a decision
of the developer with regard to submission of documents or other
procedures with regard to the income qualification process, then that
person shall make that grievance known both to the developer and FHC
in writing within five days of the grievance. The developer shall
communicate with the grievant and FHC either orally or in writing in an
attempt to resolve the problem. However, if with the assistance of the
FHC the developer is not able to resolve the problem, satisfactory to the
§ 077.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.09
001:153
§ 077.10. Application procedures for initial sales or rental by
developers.
applicant, then the decision of the FHC shall be final and binding and
non-appealable.
B. Return of Deposit. All monies deposited by the applicant with the
developer shall be returned by the developer within 30 days.
A. Availability of Application. The Developer shall prepare and make
available for pickup at the business office of the Developer, copies of the
Application for Certification as a Qualified Purchaser or Renter.
B. Application Process Plan. The developer shall prepare a plan to be
submitted with the Market Plan for Fair Housing Committee approval,
for accepting applications, notifying applicants, certifying applicants,
and insuring that applicants are matched to appropriate units. This plan
shall make provisions for the following criteria and procedures.
1. The developer shall establish a "window" or time frame for the
application process. The FHC shall be advised of the date when
advertising begins and when materials will be made available as
well as the date after which no application will be accepted.
2. When the advertising period begins and at least four weeks prior to
the end of the period when applications are accepted, all persons
who have expressed an interest or are on the interested persons list
shall be notified in writing of the pending application deadline.
3. When the period for receipt of applications is over, the developer
will sort all applications into categories to facilitate a match
between income and price of units, family size and composition and
number of bedrooms. The application sorting process shall be
accomplished so that persons in the same income category and
requiring the same bedroom mix are grouped together and are
then prioritized according to the date the application was received.
4. Facilitating the match between applicant and appropriate unit.
a. In any case where the number of appropriate candidates for a
particular unit or category of units exceeds the number of units
available, the developer shall choose five households based on
the order in which the applications were received for each unit
in the particular category in question. These households will
then be certified. After certification, the household with the
earliest application date shall be the first to be offered a unit
and the household with the next earliest application date shall
be the second offered the unit, etc., until all certified applicants
have been given the opportunity to purchase. Should none of
this group accept the offer or qualify for a mortgage, the
developer shall repeat the process by certifying another group
of five for each unit available until all units are filled.
§ 077.09 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.10
001:154
b. In cases where the number of units exceeds the number of
appropriate candidates, a suitable candidate from another
category must be sought. A level two low- or moderate-income
applicant shall be a suitable candidate for a level one low- or
moderate-income unit. If no suitable applicant is available, the
developer shall reopen the application period and conduct a
similar marketing plan until such time as the unit is filled.
5. A certified applicant that has been offered an appropriate unit shall
have five days to respond to the offer and enter into a contract for
purchase. If no response is received within five days, or if the
applicant declines the offer, the developer will be free to offer the
unit to another appropriate applicant next in line as determined by
the date the application was received.
6. The Developer shall provide qualified applicants with information
regarding the procedures in obtaining a mortgage. This procedure
shall include providing information concerning the New Jersey
Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency (NJHMFA). The booklet
provided by NJHMFA, if made available to applicants by the
Developer, shall meet this obligation.
7. The Developer shall, when developing forms, procedures and
schedules, comply with guidelines as set forth in the Affordability
Control Ordinances of the Township of Pequannock and the
Affordability Control Regulations as developed by the Fair Housing
Committee.
8. The application form shall contain data set forth in Schedule A,
attached hereto.
9. The Developer may request any additional information from the
applicant which is not required by the Application Form but which
is deemed by the Developer to be necessary to determine whether
the applicant meets the eligibility criteria of a qualified purchaser
or renter. The Developer shall allow an applicant reasonable time of
not less than 14 days nor more than 21 days to comply with such a
request for additional information and, if necessary, shall delay the
offering period until all certifications necessary to comply with
procedures outlined above are complete.
C. Review of Application. The Developer shall initiate the Certification
process and grant or deny Certification as described above within a
reasonable period of time after the application process is closed. The
Developer may conduct on-site inspections to confirm statements and
information given by the applicant regarding housing conditions. If the
decision of the Developer is to deny Certification, the Developer shall
notify the applicant in writing of the denial and the reasons for the
decision. If the decision of the Developer is to grant a Certification, a
copy of such Certification shall be sent to the applicant.
§ 077.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.11
001:155
§ 077.11. Certification by developer. [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-18]
A. Contents of Certification. A certification as a qualified purchaser or
renter shall contain the following documentation:
1. A completed application.
2. The total amount of income.
3. Written documentation of all information provided on application.
4. A statement regarding whether the applicant qualifies as a level
one or level two low-income or level one or level two moderateincome
purchaser and the basis of such classification.
5. The size of unit, household size and composition.
6. A statement regarding the applicant's compliance with FHC rules
and regulations.
7. The notarized signature of the certifier.
B. Validity of Certification shall be made in affidavit form, subject to
penalty for perjury, and personally signed by the developer, or, in the
case of a corporation, the principal stockholder(s), or, in the case of a
partnership, the general or principal partner. Certification made by an
association shall be signed by the President or chairperson of the Board
of trustees.
C. Review of Certification by FHC. Each developer shall provide all
certification documentation to the FHC for all prospective purchasers
and renters not less than 10 days prior to a fully executed sales contract
or binder or lease application or agreement, and, not less than 35 days
prior to occupancy.
D. Notification of Certification. A notice of certification and a letter
describing follow-up procedures shall be sent to the prospective
purchaser or renter at the address specified on the application certified
mail. This letter shall contain an explanation of the five day response
period, how the response shall be made, the interested persons list that
is applicable, and any additional information about the availability of
sales people who will facilitate the response.
E. Duration of Certification. A certification shall be valid for one year and
may be utilized to demonstrate eligibility for any affordable housing
program within the Township of Pequannock. A certification may be
renewed if the original certifier finds that there is no change in income
or information or if there is a change in income or information that the
change does not impact eligibility and the certifier attests to this fact by
affidavit and subject to the same penalties as attached to the original
certification. In renewing a certification, a developer or association may
request any additional information from the applicant deemed
§ 077.11 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.11
001:156
§ 077.12. Developer reports.
necessary to determine whether the applicant continues to meet the
eligibility criteria of a qualified purchaser or renter.
F. Revocation of Certification. A certification may be revoked by the
Developer upon evidence of (1) false, misleading or incomplete
statements or information submitted in an Application for Certification
or an Application for Renewal of Certification; (2) a change in the
household income of applicant prior to the purchase or rental of
housing such that the income level of the applicant would no longer
meet the eligibility criteria of a qualified occupant; (3) criminality or
immorality on the part of the applicant. The Developer shall notify the
applicant in writing of such revocation of Certification.
A. Initial Report. Prior to the sale of the first unit in any phase or offering,
the developer shall file with the FHC an initial report which includes the
following information:
1. An affidavit attesting to compliance with the approved marketing
plans and application process plan.
2. A list of all applicants arranged according to unit size classification,
priority status, family size, and income.
3. A report indicating the percentage of applicants that fall into the
income categories established for the purpose of determining the
number of units to be offered at a discounted sales price.
B. Summary Report. Within 30 days of the close of the selling period, for
any phase of a development, the developer shall file with FHC a
summary report containing the following information and supporting
documentation.
1. A list of all certified applicants and the date of the certification.
2. A list of all applicants who were found not to qualify. This list should
be supported by application forms and certification materials.
3. A list of all unit purchasers.
4. A copy of a letter mailed to all potential purchasers notifying them
of the close of the selling period and their status with respect to any
future selling period or waiting list.
5. A list of applicants who, in the opinion of the developer, should be
advised of any resales or kept on an interested persons list to be
notified of any subsequent application period.
C. The FHC may require additional reports as needed to monitor the
developer's progress and fair marketing program.
§ 077.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.13
001:157
§ 077.13. Ownership controls. [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-18; 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-32; 6-11-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-11]
§ 077.14. Restrictions. [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
A. No owner of a fee title affordable housing unit shall lease his or her unit
for any period of time. The fee title affordable unit must be owner
occupied.
B. No tenant in a regulated rental unit shall sublease his or her unit for
any period of time. The affordable rental unit must be occupied by an
approved, qualified tenant.
C. Unit owners may not own or have an ownership interest in any other
real estate while owning an affordable unit. An exception to this rule
may be granted on application to the FHC for good cause under
extenuating circumstances.
D. The FHC will require a report annually from each owner of an
affordable unit verifying that the owners of record are all residents of
affordable units at the time the certification is requested. The owner
will be required to provide residency verification for all members of the
household over the age of 18 with a copy of their driver's license
verifying their address in the fair housing unit or alternate verification
by other documentation approved by the FHC. The failure to complete
the verification within 30 days from the date shown on the letter from
the FHC shall constitute a violation of the ordinance.
A. Deed restrictions. Deed restrictions or disposition covenants in
recordable form, satisfactory to the Township Attorney, shall restrict fee
or leasehold disposition of all set-aside units in perpetuity. A copy of this
restriction is attached as Schedule A.
B. Sale price restrictions. Restrictions or covenants shall provide that the
sale price may not exceed the original price as inflated by 75% of the
increase of the CPI for Clerical Workers and Wage Earners utilized as a
rate of increase plus amounts allowed by the FHC in accordance with
this chapter. The sale price may be lower than the original price inflated
as per above as agreed to between the parties.
C. Certification of the purchaser:
1. No person, family, or household shall purchase an affordable unit
unless it is certified that the household meets the income limits
established by the Council on Affordable Housing. Certification of a
household demonstrating that it is qualified to purchase shall be
completed by an individual who is approved by the FHC to act as a
certifier and shall contain the following documentation:
(a) A completed application.
§ 077.13 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.14
001:158
(b) The total amount of income.
(c) Written documentation of all information provided on the
application.
(d) A statement regarding whether the applicant qualifies as a lowincome
or moderate-income purchaser or renter.
(e) The size of unit, household size and composition.
(f) The completion of the certification form by the certifier.
2. Review of certification by FHC. Each owner shall provide all
certification documentation to the FHC for all prospective
purchasers not less than 35 days prior to the completion of the sale
transaction or closing.
3. Duration of certification. A certification shall be valid for 90 days.
At the time of closing on an affordable unit, an applicant must
certify as to the accuracy of the information contained in the
certification.
4. Revocation of certification. A certification may be revoked by the
FHC upon evidence of false, misleading, incomplete statements or
false information submitted in an Application for Certification.
D. Additional resale restrictions: The low-income units upon resale may be
sold only to low-income persons, and the moderate-income units may be
sold to low- or moderate-income purchasers.
(1) If no low-income purchaser is found for a low-income unit or if no
moderate-income purchaser is found for a moderate-income unit
within 10 months of being offered for sale, the owner shall notify
the FHC by certified mail of the inability to sell the unit to the
appropriate purchaser.
(2) Upon receipt of such notice, the option to buy the unit, at the sales
price as defined in these Rules and Regulations or at a lower price
agreed to between the parties shall be available for 120 days to the
Township of Pequannock. The FHC shall notify the Township of
Pequannock, the Department of Community Affairs, or qualified
nonprofit Agency that the unit is for sale. If the Township of
Pequannock exercises its option, it may enter into a contract of
sale. If the Township of Pequannock fails to exercise this option
within 120 days, the first of the other entities giving notice to the
seller of its intent to purchase during the one-hundred-twenty-day
period shall be entitled to purchase the unit. Any Option to buy a
housing unit of the Township, the Department of Community Affairs
or qualified nonprofit Agency shall be exercised by certified mail
and shall be deemed exercised upon mailing.
(3) If the Option to purchase the unit at the sales price or price agreed
to between the parties is not exercised by a written offer to
§ 077.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.14
001:159
purchase the housing unit within 120 days of receipt of notice of
the inability to sell the unit to the appropriate purchaser, the owner
may proceed to sell the housing unit.
(4) If the Township of Pequannock elects to purchase a low- or
moderate-income unit it may: (a) convey or rent the housing unit to
a low- or moderate-income purchaser or tenant at a price or rent
not to exceed the allowable sales price or rent, or, (b) convey the
unit at Fair Market Value subject to the following provisions:
(a) Notify the FHC of any proposed sale and sales price 90 days
before closing;
(b) Notify the FHC of the price differential as defined in N.J.A.C.
5:92-1.3, the Council on Affordable Housing's Procedural and
Substantive Rules;
(c) Deposit the price differential in a trust account devoted solely
to the creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of low- and
moderate-income housing; and,
(d) Notify the FHC by February 1 of each calendar year of the
balance within this trust account;
(e) Money deposited in trust accounts may not be expended until
the municipality submits and the FHC approves a repayment
housing plan and the Township of Pequannock and the FHC
may approve the repayment housing plan if it determines that
it provides realistic opportunity for the creation, rehabilitation
or maintenance of low- or moderate-income housing.
(5) When the Department of Community Affairs or agency elects to
purchase a low- or moderate-income unit, it may (a) convey or rent
the housing unit to a low- or moderate-income housing purchaser
or tenant at a price or rent not to exceed the allowable sale price or
rental or (b) convey the unit at Fair Market Value and utilize the
price differential to subsidize the construction, rehabilitation or
maintenance of low- and moderate-income housing within the
Township of Pequannock subject to the restrictions set forth in
Subsection D(4) above.
(6) Nonprofit agencies may apply to the FHC at any time for the right
to purchase low- or moderate-income units subsequent to the
period of controls and affordability in perpetuity. Nonprofit
agencies that have been designated by COAH shall be eligible to
purchase low- or moderate-income units for the sole purpose of
conveying or renting the housing units to a low- or moderateincome
purchaser at a price or rent not to exceed the allowable
sales price or rental. Low-income units shall be made available to
low-income purchasers or tenants and the housing units shall be
regulated by the restrictive covenant and lien adopted by the FHC.
§ 077.14 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.14
001:160
(7) At the termination of the Option Period an eligible seller of the lowor
moderate-income unit who has provided Notice of the Inability
to Sell the Unit to the appropriate purchaser may proceed with the
sale if no eligible entity as outlined above exercises its Option to
purchase within 120 days.
(8) Repayment Option - At the end of the Option Period the Seller may
elect to (a) sell to a qualified low- and moderate-income household
at the controlled unit sales price in accordance with existing FHC
rules providing the unit is regulated by the restrictive covenant and
lien adopted by the FHC in perpetuity up to 30 years; or, (b)
exercise the repayment option and sell to any purchaser at market
price providing that 100% of the price differential is paid to the
FHC, as the instrument of the municipality at the closing.
(a) If the sale will be to a qualified low- or moderate-income
household, the FHC shall certify the income qualifications of
the purchaser and shall insure the housing unit is regulated by
the restrictive covenant and lien required by the FHC.
(b) The FHC shall examine any contract of sale containing a
repayment option to determine if the proposed sale price bears
a reasonable relationship to the housing unit's Fair Market
Value. In making this determination, the authority may rely on
Comparable sales data or an appraisal. The FHC shall not
approve any contract of sale where there is a determination
that the price does not bear a reasonable relationship to Fair
Market Value. The FHC shall make a determination within 35
days of receipt of the contract of sale and shall determine
payment to the Seller. The FHC shall adopt an Appeal
procedure by which a Seller may submit written
documentation requesting the authority to re-compute the
repayment obligation if the Seller believes that a sales price
does not bear reasonable relationship to the Fair Market Value.
A repayment obligation determination made as a result of an
owner's appeal shall be a final administrative determination of
the authority of the FHC. The repayment shall occur at the date
of closing and transfer of title for the first non-exempt
transaction after the expiration of the controls on affordability.
Repayment proceeds shall be deposited in a trust account
devoted solely to the creation, rehabilitation and maintenance
of low- and moderate-income housing. Money deposited in
trust accounts may not be expended until the Township of
Pequannock submits and the FHC approves a repayment
housing plan. The FHC may approve the repayment housing
plan if it determines that it provides a realistic opportunity for
the creation, rehabilitation or maintenance of low- and
moderate-income housing.
(c) The Township of Pequannock shall have the right to determine
that the most desirable means of promoting an adequate
§ 077.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.14
001:161
§ 077.15. Resale procedural controls. [Amended 4-30-1999 by Ord.
No. 99-4; 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18; 12-22-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-31; 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-32; 6-11-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-11]
supply of low- and moderate-income housing is to prohibit the
exercise of the repayment option and maintain controls on
lower income housing units sold within the municipality. Such
determination shall be made by resolution of the municipal
governing body and shall be effective upon filing with the
FHC. The resolution shall specify the time period for which the
repayment option shall not be applicable. During such period,
no seller in the municipality may utilize the repayment option.
(9) If the Township of Pequannock exercises the option outlined in "c"
above, it shall (a) provide Public Notice in a newspaper in general
circulation and (b) notify the FHC of its governing body's action.
The FHC shall insure that the deed restriction on all restricted
housing units shall have the extended period of controls.
(10) The covenants, conditions and restrictions set forth in this section
shall be effectuated by means of the documents contained in the
Schedules.
A. The Fair Housing Committee shall be advised in writing of an owner's
desire to sell an affordable unit and be provided with a copy of the unit
owner's deed. The date that the letter is received by the Fair Housing
Committee shall constitute the "Notice of Intent to Sell the Unit."
B. Upon receipt of the "Notice of Intent to Sell Unit" accompanied by a fee
in the amount of $150 the Fair Housing Committee shall notify the
owner of the maximum resale price established by following the
mechanism developed by State regulation. The Committee will also
provide the owner with a list of three purchasers from the waiting list.
The owner may only contract to sell the unit with an individual whose
name appears on the list obtained from the Committee who becomes
certified as meeting the qualifications for purchasing an affordable unit.
In the event all individuals on the waiting list do not meet the
qualifications or decline to enter into a contract to purchase the
property, the owner may request a new list. In the event that the
Committee is unable to provide a list because there are no applicants
who have submitted an "Interested Person Questionnaire" in the
category requested, or in the event that the owner is unable to enter
into a contract after exhausting the available lists, the owner may apply
to the Committee to sell the unit to a qualified individual not on the
waiting list provided the individual submits all required documentation
and is approved by the Committee.
C. An individual who desires to be included on the list for an affordable
unit must complete an "Interested Person Questionnaire" and meet the
qualifications established by the Fair Housing Committee for inclusion
§ 077.14 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.15
001:162
on that list. An individual will be placed on the waiting list for resale
purchases upon approval by the Fair Housing Committee. A prospective
purchaser will be matched to the unit size according to the formula
established by State regulation. The Fair Housing Committee may
approve a sale outside of the State formula if necessary to find a
qualified purchaser or under exigent circumstances at the discretion of
the Committee.
D. The Fair Housing Committee will maintain a purchaser's waiting list
which will include the date in which a complete "Interested Person
Questionnaire" has been received. The list to be provided to unit
owners seeking to resell their unit will contain three names
chronologically listed by the earliest date of approval in the relevant
category.
E. The seller is responsible for obtaining a copy of the Fair Housing
Committee's Affordability Controls and complying with same. The seller
shall also advise the perspective purchaser of the restrictions placed on
an affordable unit and provide the purchaser with a copy of these same
Affordability Controls. The seller must also provide the Fair Housing
Committee with a copy of the Public Offering Statement which the
Committee will provide to the purchaser once approved. At the closing
of an affordable resale, the purchaser must certify as to the continued
accuracy of the information contained in the certification.
F. After the owner has entered into a contract with a prospective buyer,
the buyer will be provided with a Buyer's Packet ("Packet") from the
Fair Housing Committee and must submit the Packet for approval of the
sale. The buyer shall submit the $50 application fee with the completed
Packet. The Packet will not be reviewed without transmittal of the fee.
The prospective purchaser must forward the completed Packet at least
two weeks prior to the schedule Fair Housing Committee meeting in
which they wish the Packet to be reviewed. The Packet will only be
considered when the prospective purchaser attends the meeting and
provides the information necessary for the Committee to determine
compliance with purchase requirements.
G. The Fair Housing Committee may permit a unit owner to refinance a
mortgage on their property if the following conditions are met:
(1) The Owner must obtain, complete and file with the Fair Housing
Committee the refinancing procedure for unit owners.
(2) Upon filing of a complete application for refinance, the Fair
Housing Committee will provide the maximum allowable selling
price.
(3) The total amount financed may not exceed 80% of the recalculated
maximum selling price.
H. Fees received by buyers and sellers under this section shall be
nonrefundable.
§ 077.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.16
001:163
§ 077.16. Violation of plan. [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-18]
The interest of any Owner may, at the option of the FHC, be subject to
forfeiture in the event of substantial breach of any of the terms, restrictions
and provisions of this Plan which remains uncured for a period of 60 days
after service of written Notice of Violation upon the Owner by the FHC.
The Notice of Violation shall specify the particular infraction and shall
advise the Owner that his or her interest may be subject to forfeiture
if such infraction is not cured within 60 days of receipt of the Notice.
The provisions of this paragraph will be enforced by the Zoning Officer
of Pequannock Township and/or by court action seeking a judgment which
would result in the termination of the Owner's interest in the unit. Any
judgment shall be enforceable as if same were a judgment of default of
a First Purchase Money Mortgage and shall constitute an encumbrance
against the Affordable Unit. Such judgment shall be enforceable at the
option of the FHC, by means of an execution of sale by the Sheriff at
which the Affordable Unit shall be sold at a sales price as determined in
accordance and consistent with the resale provisions of this plan and which
is not less than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any First
Purchase Money Mortgage and prior liens and costs of the enforcement
proceedings including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have his/
her right to possession terminated as well as his title conveyed pursuant to
the Sheriff's sale. The proceeds of the Sheriff's Sale shall first be applied
to satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and any prior liens
upon the Affordable Unit. The excess, if any, shall be applied to reimburse
the FHC for any and all costs and expenses incurred in connection with
either the court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the Sheriff's
Sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's Sale are insufficient
to reimburse the FHC in full as aforesaid, the violating Owner shall be
personally responsible for and to the extent of such deficiency, in addition to
any and all costs, including but not limited to attorney fees, incurred by the
FHC in connection with collecting such deficiency. In the event of a surplus,
the balance, if any, shall be paid to the FHC. Title shall be conveyed to the
purchaser at the Sheriff's Sale subject to the restrictions and provisions
of this Plan. The Owner determined to be in violation of the provisions of
this Plan and from whom title has been divested by means of the Sheriff's
Sale shall not be entitled to any right of redemption. If there are no bidders
at the Sheriff's Sale, of if insufficient amounts are bid to satisfy the First
Purchase Money Mortgage and any prior liens, the FHC may acquire title
to the Affordable Unit pursuant to the Rules and Regulations. Failure of the
Affordable Unit to be either sold at the Sheriff's Sale or acquired by the FHC
shall obligate the Owner to either convey title of the Owner until such time
as the FHC can convey title to a Qualified Purchaser in accordance with
this Plan or accept an offer to purchase from any Qualified Purchaser, which
may be referred to the Owner by the FHC, with such offer to purchase being
equal to the maximum sales price of the Affordable Unit as permitted by the
terms and provisions of this Plan. The Owner shall remain fully obligated,
§ 077.16 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.16
001:164
responsible and liable for complying with the terms and restrictions of this
Plan until such time as title is ultimately conveyed to a Qualified Purchaser.
§ 077.17. Covenants running with land.
The provisions of this Plan shall constitute covenants running with the land
with respect to each Affordable Unit affected hereby, and shall bind all
purchasers of each such Unit, their heirs, assigns and all persons claiming
by, through or under their heirs, executors, administrators and assigns. The
terms, restrictions, and covenants of this Plan shall continue in perpetuity
except that this Plan shall expire; (1) in the event of a foreclosure as
set forth in these Rules and Regulations, or (2) if there is a substantial
destruction of an affordable unit or units and the property owner or
Association elects not to rebuild. In the case of substantial destruction,
instruments and documents evidencing said destruction and the intent not
to rebuild pursuant to the Master Deed must be duly recorded with the
Office of the Clerk in Morris County. The terms, restrictions and covenants
of this Plan shall, however, automatically expire and terminate at the
earliest of the following: (1) 30 years from the date of recording this Plan; or
(2) the date upon which the event set forth in these Rules and Regulations
hereinafter shall occur; or (3) the date upon which the Association dissolves
after an election not to rebuild pursuant to the Master Deed or ceases to
exist as a result of a total or substantial destruction of the buildings and
common elements caused by fire or other casualty for any period of time,
in which case an instrument executed by the Association evidencing same
must be duly recorded with the Office of the Clerk of Morris County.
§ 077.18. Foreclosure.
Notice of Foreclosure shall allow the municipality, the Department of
Community Affairs or Agency or a qualified nonprofit to purchase the
affordable housing unit at the allowed sales price and maintain it as an
affordable unit for the balance of the intended period of controls. Failure to
purchase the affordable housing unit shall result in the adding of the unit to
the municipal present and prospective fair share obligations. Failure of the
first mortgagee to provide notice of a foreclosure action to the FHC shall
not impair any of the first mortgagee's rights to recoup loan proceeds; shall
not negate the extinguishment of controls or the validity of the foreclosure;
and shall create no cause of action against the first mortgagee.
§ 077.19. Obligations of owners.
The Owner of an Affordable Unit shall not permit any lien, other than the
First Purchase Money Mortgage, to attach and remain on the property
for more than 60 days. The Owner of an Affordable Unit shall keep the
unit in good repair and shall not commit waste thereon. The Owner shall
pay all taxes and public Assessments and Assessments by the Association
levied upon or assessed against the unit, or any part thereof, as and when
the same become due and before penalties accrue. This Affordable Unit is
part of a larger complex together with appurtenances thereto. The Owner,
§ 077.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.19
001:165
in addition to paying any applicable Association assessments as may be
described in the Master Deed shall further fully comply with all of the terms,
covenants or conditions of said Master Deed, as well as fully comply with all
terms, conditions and restrictions of this Plan.
§ 077.20. Right to cure.
The Agency may, at its option, advance and pay all sums necessary to
protect, preserve and retain the unit as an Affordable Unit subject to the
terms of this Plan. All sums so advances and paid by the Agency shall
become a lien against such unit and shall have a higher priority than
any lien except the First Purchase Money Mortgage lien and liens by
duly authorized government agencies. Such sums may include, but are not
limited to, insurance premiums, taxes, assessments (public or private) and
liens which may be or become prior and senior to any First Purchase Money
Mortgage as a lien on the Unit, or any part thereof. In the event any First
Mortgagee or other creditor of an Owner of an Affordable Unit exercises
its contractual or legal remedies available in the event of default or nonpayment
by the Owner of an Affordable Unit, the Owner shall notify the
Agency in writing within 10 days of such exercise by the First Mortgagee
or creditor and not later than 10 days after service of any summons and
complaint and the Agency shall have the option to purchase, redeem, or
cure any default upon such terms and conditions as may be agreeable to all
parties in interest and/or to acquire the First Purchase Money Mortgage to
the Unit, thereby replacing the First Mortgagee as the First Mortgagee of
the Unit. The Agency shall have the same priority of lien as was held by the
First Mortgagee at the time the Agency acquires such First Purchase Money
Mortgage, and shall have the right of subrogation with respect to any other
claim or lien it satisfies or acquires.
§ 077.21. Provisions for first purchase money mortgages and
refinancing. [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
A. The terms and restrictions of the Plan shall be subordinate only to the
First Purchase Money Mortgage lien on any Affordable Unit and in no
way shall impair the First Mortgagee's ability to exercise the contract
remedies available to it in the event of default as such remedies are set
forth in the First Purchase Money Mortgage documents for the Unit. So
long as the First Purchase Money Mortgage is not sold to the Federal
National Mortgage Association or in the secondary mortgage market,
the First Mortgagee and/or mortgage servicer shall serve written notice
upon the Agency within 10 days after the First Purchase Money
Mortgage is three months in arrears, and again within 10 calendar days
of the filing of the complaint seeking foreclosure of the First Purchase
Money Mortgage held on an Affordable Unit.
B. The obligation of the First Mortgagee and servicer to notify the Agency
shall cease automatically and immediately upon the sale of the First
Purchase Money Mortgage to the Federal National Mortgage
Association or in the secondary mortgage market unless the rules and
§ 077.19 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.21
001:166
§ 077.22. Surplus funds.
In the event of a Foreclosure sale by the holder of the First Purchase Money
Mortgage, the Owner shall be personally obligated to pay to the Agency
any surplus funds. For purposes of this paragraph, surplus funds shall be
the total amount paid to the Sheriff in excess of the amount required to
pay and satisfy the First Purchase Money Mortgage, including the costs
of foreclosure, even if junior creditors actually receive payment from said
surplus funds to the exclusion of the Owner. The Agency is hereby given
a first priority lien, second only to the First Mortgagee of a Unit and
any taxes or public assessments by a duly authorized governmental body,
equal to the full amount of surplus funds. This obligation of the Owner
to pay this full amount to the Agency shall be deemed to be a personal
regulations or guidelines of the Federal National Mortgage Association
are amended so as to not prohibit or exclude placing such obligation
upon the holder of the mortgage or its service representative, in which
case an instrument duly evidencing same must be recorded with the
Office of the Clerk of Morris County, New Jersey, before any such
obligation shall exist. Provided that the First Mortgagee is obligated
to give the Agency the above mentioned notices, the First Mortgagee
shall also serve written notice of any proposed foreclosure sale upon
the Agency at least 30 days of the sale of the First Purchase Money
Mortgage to the Federal National Mortgage Association or in the
secondary mortgage market.
C. The Township of Pequannock and/or the Agency or any instrumentality
designated by the Township shall have the right to purchase any
mortgage which is in default at any time prior to the entry of a
foreclosure judgment, or within the redemption period thereafter.
Notification of a default and of the institution of a foreclosure action
and of a Sheriff's sale shall be served in writing upon the Township
Clerk as aforesaid. The Township of Pequannock shall at all times be
considered a party in interest and shall have the right to intervene in
any foreclosure action seeking foreclosure of a first mortgage and/or
shall have the right to redeem and acquire the owner's equity of
redemption or to acquire the unit from the Owner upon such terms and
conditions as may be determined by the Agency.
D. The FHC may permit a refinance if the following conditions are met:
(1) The Owner must obtain and complete and file with the FHC the
refinancing procedure for unit owners.
(2) Upon filing of a complete application for refinance, the FHC will
provide the maximum allowable selling price.
(3) The amount financed may not exceed the recalculated maximum
selling price.
(4) The refinanced mortgage must include Schedule A.
§ 077.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.22
001:167
obligation of the Owner of record at time of the Foreclosure Sale and the
Agency is hereby empowered to enforce the obligation of the Owner in
any appropriate court of law or equity as though same were a personal
contractual obligation of the Owner. Neither the First Mortgagee nor the
purchaser at the Foreclosure Sale shall be responsible or liable to the
Agency for any portion of this excess.
§ 077.23. Interested persons list. [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-18]
§ 077.24. Adjudication.
In the event the developer is unable to interpret or adhere to the rules
and regulations and by-laws of the Fair Housing Committee, he should be
permitted to file a written application for relief as to the specified section
under which he requests an interpretative ruling by the FHC.
A. The Affordability Control Ordinance requires that there is an interested
person list. The purpose of the interested person list is twofold; first, it
is to provide a list of names to help ensure that future sales of each
individual unit will proceed timely and smoothly; second, is to provide a
mechanism to prevent the loss of set-aside units in the Township. The
FHC, subject to the following shall supply the developer and/or owner
of an individual unit with this list of individuals who have at one time
been interested in the purchase or a rental of an affordable unit. The
FHC does not warrant or guarantee that the individuals are certified at
the time when the list is given to any owner.
B. In order to ensure that the list is as current as possible, each developer
shall provide to the FHC a full and complete list of all applicants who
applied for low- and moderate-income housing with regard to any
development. Each developer shall also keep the FHC appraised of any
individual who is found to be qualified as well as whether that individual
has contracted for purchase of a unit.
C. Each developer, before turning over the power and control to any
association or other party in interest, shall also apprise the FHC of any
new applicants or individuals who have expressed an interest in
obtaining a set-aside unit. The FHC shall also maintain a list of the
names and addresses of individuals who have expressed an interest to
the FHC or any other official within the Township with regard to future
occupancy of a set-aside unit. The list of individuals who have qualified
as income eligible by a previous developer, but have not purchased a
unit, shall be utilized by a developer after he has used all reasonable
means and has exhausted marketing approaches with regard to the sale
and/or rental of a unit.
§ 077.22 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.25
001:168
§ 077.25. Schedule A.1 [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
Schedule A is attached.
§ 077.26. Schedule B.2 [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-18]
Schedule B is attached.
§ 077.27. Seller's Notarized Form.3 [Amended 5-25-2004 by Ord.
No. 2004-18]
Seller's Notarized Form is attached.
§ 077.28. Buyer's Notarized Form.4 [Added 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-18]
Buyer's Notarized Form is attached.
§ 077.29. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-25-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-18]
A. The failure to comply with any provisions contained in this chapter or
the failure to comply with an order of the Fair Housing Committee
issued under the authority of this chapter shall be deemed in violation
of this chapter.
B. The FHC reserves the right to notify regarding a failure to comply with
provisions contained in this chapter and this will be deemed a violation.
Written notification of the violation with proof of corrected measures by
the owner must be returned within 60 days.
C. The penalty for a violation of this chapter or any supplement or addition
thereto for which no specific penalty is provided shall be a term of
imprisonment in the County jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a
fine not less than $100 nor exceeding $1,000, or by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
D. Any person who is convicted of violating this chapter within one year of
the date of a previous violation of this chapter and who was fined for the
previous violation, shall be sentenced by the Court to an additional fine
as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the Court upon a
person for repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or
exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of this chapter, but shall
be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the
ordinance.
1. Note: Said Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
2. Note: Said Schedule is on file in the Township offices.
3. Note: Said form is on file in the Township offices.
4. Note: Said form is on file in the Township offices.
§ 077.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.29
001:169
§ 077.30. Development fees for affordable housing. [Added
9-13-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-19; amended 3-28-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-05]
E. The Court before which any person is convicted of violation this chapter
shall have the power to impose any fine, term of imprisonment, or
period of community service no less than the minimum and not
exceeding the maximum.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COAH — The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
DEVELOPMENT FEES — Money paid by an individual, person,
partnership, association, company or corporation for the improvement
of property as permitted by COAH rules.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The value of a property determined
by the Municipal Tax Assessor through a process designed to ensure
that all property in the municipality is assessed at the same assessment
ratio or ratios required by law. Estimates at the time of issuance of
a building permit may be obtained utilizing estimates for construction
cost. Final equalized assessed value will be determined at project
completion by the Municipal Tax Assessor.
SUBSTANTIVE CERTIFICATION — A determination by COAH
approving a municipality's housing element and fair share plan in
accordance with the provisions of the Fair Housing Act, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq., and the regulations promulgated thereunder.
B. Purpose; establishment; exemptions; collections; deposit; expenditure;
monitoring; expiration.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish standards for
the collection, maintenance and expenditure of development fees in
accordance with COAH's regulations. Fees collected pursuant to
this section shall be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and
moderate-income housing. This section shall be interpreted within
the framework of COAH's regulations on development fees.
2. Residential development fees. All developers of residential housing,
except those provided in Subsection B(5), shall pay a development
fee of 1% of the equalized assessed value for each residential unit
to be constructed.
3. Nonresidential development fees. Developers of nonresidential
uses shall pay a fee of 2% of equalized assessed value of the
nonresidential development to be constructed.
4. Bonus development fees as a result of a "d" variance, N.J.A.C.
5:93-8.10 and 8.11.00.
§ 077.29 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.30
001:170
(a) Residential development fees. If a "d" variance is granted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5), then the additional
residential units realized (above what is permitted by right
under the existing zoning) will incur a bonus development fee
of 6% of the equalized assessed valuation rather than the
development fee of 1%. However, if the zoning on a site has
changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of the
"d" variance application, the density for the purposes of
calculating the bonus development fee shall be the highest
density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the "d" variance application.
(b) Nonresidential development fees. If a "d" variance is granted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(4), then the additional floor
area realized (above what is permitted by right under the
existing zoning) will incur a bonus development fee of 6% of
the equalized assess valuation rather than the development fee
of 2%. However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of the "d" variance
application, the density for the purposes of calculating the
bonus development fee shall be the highest density permitted
by right during the two-year period preceding the filing of the
"d" variance application.
5. Eligible exaction, ineligible exaction and exemptions.
(a) Affordable housing developments shall be exempt from
development fees. All other forms of new construction may be
subject to development fees.
(b) Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is expanded or undergoes a change to a
more intense use. The development fee that will be imposed
and collected shall be calculated on the increase in the
equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
(c) Developments that have received preliminary or final approval
prior to the imposition of a municipal development fee shall be
exempt from development fees unless the developer seeks a
substantial change in the approval.
(d) Churches, synagogues, parish houses and not-for-profit
education, cultural and other charitable organizations
incorporated under Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes or
holding nonprofit exemptions under Section 501(c) of the
Internal Revenue Code, parochial and private schools,
governmental buildings, libraries and schools and applications
of public agencies shall be exempt from paying a development
fee.
6. Collection of fees.
§ 077.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.30
001:171
(a) Developers shall pay 50% of the calculated development fee to
the Township at the issuance of building permits. For purposes
of this payment, the development fee shall be estimated by the
Tax Assessor prior to the issuance of building permits. This fee
is nonrefundable. This fee is credited against any future fees
which may be assessed for affordable housing.
(b) Developers shall pay the remaining fee to the Township at the
issuance of certificates of occupancy. At the issuance of
certificates of occupancy, the Tax Assessor shall calculate the
equalized assessed value and the appropriate development fee.
The developer shall be responsible for paying the difference
between the fee calculated at the issuance of the certificate of
occupancy and the amount paid at the issuance of the building
permit.
7. Contested fees. Imposed and collected development fees that are
challenged shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account by
the Township of Pequannock. If all or a portion of the contested fees
are returned to the developer, the accrued interest on the returned
amount shall also be returned.
8. Housing trust fund. All development fees, payments in lieu of
constructing affordable units on site and funds from the sale of
units with extinguished controls shall be deposited in a separate,
interest-bearing housing trust fund. In establishing the housing
trust fund, the municipality shall provide written authorization, in
the form of a three-party escrow agreement between the
municipality, the bank and the Council, to permit the Council to
direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in N.J.A.C.
5:94-6.16(b). This authorization shall be submitted to the Council
within seven days from the opening of the trust fund account. All
interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by the Council.
9. Spending plan summary.
(a) Subject to the approval of the Township Council, who shall
adopt a Resolution of Approval of Trust Fund Expenditure to be
forwarded to the Chief Financial Officer who shall, in turn,
issue the funds to be expended, the Township of Pequannock
shall use the revenue collected from development fees for any
activity approved by the Council on Affordable Housing
(COAH) which addresses the fair share housing obligation of
the Township of Pequannock, including, but not limited to the
following:
(i) Rehabilitation of units;
(ii) New construction of affordable units;
(iii) Regional contribution agreements;
§ 077.30 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 077.30
001:172
(iv) Purchase of land for low- and moderate-income housing;
(v) Improvement of land to be used for low- and moderateincome
housing;
(vi) Extension and/or improvements of roads and
infrastructure to low- and moderate-income housing sites;
(vii) Assistance designed to render housing units to be more
affordable; and
(viii) Administration to the implementation of the Housing Plan
Element and Fair Share Plan of the Township of
Pequannock.
(b) Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of
Pequannock for past housing activities.
(c) After subtracting development fees collected to finance an
RCA, a rehabilitation program or a new construction project
that are necessary to address the municipality's affordable
housing obligation, at least 30% of the balance remaining shall
be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in a
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability
assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used
to provide affordability assistance to those households earning
30% or less of median income by region.
[1] Affordability assistance programs may include down
payment assistance, security deposit assistance, low
interest loans, and rental assistance.
[2] Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less
of median income may include buying down the cost of
low-income units in a municipal Fair Share Plan to make
them affordable to households earning 30% or less than
median income. The use of development fees in this
manner shall entitle a municipality to bonus credits
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-4.22.
[3] Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site
and funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls
shall be exempt from the affordability assistance
requirement.
(d) Municipalities may contract with a private or public entity to
administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:94-7.
(e) No more than 20% of the revenues collected from development
fees each year, exclusive of the fees used to fund an RCA, shall
§ 077.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 077.30
001:173
Chapter 079
FEES
§ 079.01. Investigative Fees.
§ 079.01.010. Application required.
Any person requiring services of the Pequannock Township Police
Department in connection with the issuance of licenses, permits,
certifications, etc., which require police investigation, shall be required to
make application to the Pequannock Township Police Department.
be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant
fees necessary to develop or implement a new construction
program, a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, and/or an
affirmative marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation
program, no more than 20% of the revenues collected from
development fees shall be expended for such administrative
expenses. Administrative funds may be used for income
qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale
and rental units, and compliance with Council monitoring
requirements. Development fee administrative costs are
calculated and may be expended at the end of each year or
upon receipt of the fees.
10. Monitoring. The Township Council or its designee shall complete
and return to the Council (COAH), as applicable, all monitoring
forms related to the collection of development fees, the
expenditures of the revenues and the implementation of the
Spending Plan Summary. Additionally, the Township Council or its
designee shall file quarterly financial reports and annual program
implementation and auditing reports with the Council (COAH) or
with the Superior Court, as applicable, on forms designed by the
Council (COAH).
11. Expiration of section. This section shall expire if:
(a) COAH revokes substantive certification or its certification of
this section.
(b) Substantive certification of repose expires prior to the
Township filing an adopted housing element with COAH,
petitioning for substantive certification or receiving COAH's
approval of this section.
§ 077.30 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 079.01.020
001:174
§ 079.01.020. Enumeration of fees.
Each person requiring investigative services shall pay a fee of $15 for
the services in addition to any fee which may be required for the specific
application, license, permit, certification, etc.
§ 079.02. Fees for Birth, Marriages, Death, Burial and Personal
Health Programs.
§ 079.02.010. Fees established. [Amended 9-25-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-19; 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-26; 3-27-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-5; 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-33]
A. There are hereby established the following fees:
(1) Birth certificate: $25 first certificate; $5 each additional certificate.
(2) Death certificate: $25 first certificate; $5 each additional
certificate.
Note: Veterans entitled to one death certificate at no charge.
(3) Marriage certificate: $25 first certificate; $5 each additional
certificate.
(4) Civil union certificate: $25 first certificate; $5 each additional
certificate.
(5) Domestic partnership certificate: $25 first certificate; $5 each
additional certificate.
(6) Marriage license: $28.
(7) Domestic partnership: $28.
(8) Civil union license: $28.
(9) Burial Permit: as established by New Jersey State Statutes.
(10) Amendments to birth, death, civil union, and marriage records: $5.
(11) Personal health programs:
(a) Coronary risk profile to include SMAC blood test: $45/test.
(b) Influenza vaccinations: $15/vaccination.
(c) Female cancer screening: $65/test.
(d) Male cancer screening: $65/test.
(e) Adult tetanus vaccination: $25/vaccination.
(f) Child health conference fee per eligible visit: $10.
(g) Skin cancer screening: $10 per participant.
§ 079.01.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 079.02.010
001:175
§ 079.02.020. Collection.
The Health Officer is empowered to collect certain fees and remit the same
in accordance with standard Township policy.
§ 079.03. Development Fee Schedule.
§ 079.03.010. Establishment of schedule.
There is hereby established, in connection with various applications for
development and other matters which are the subject of this section, the
following schedule of fees.
§ 079.03.020. Subdivisions and site plans. [Amended 11-28-2002 by
Ord. No. 2000-26; 2-27-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-3; 3-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 2009-2; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-2]
(h) Bone density screening: $20 per participant.
(i) Peripheral vascular screening: $20 per participant.
(j) Stroke screening: $20 per participant.
A. Application for minor subdivision.
(1) The following application fees covering administration and
overhead shall be charged to the applicant for a minor subdivision
and shall be submitted at the time of an application to the Planning
Board. All checks are to be made payable to the Township of
Pequannock.
(a) Lot line adjustment not creating an additional lot: $200.
(b) Minor subdivision creating one or more new lots: $200 plus
$50 per lot.
(c) Amendment to minor subdivision approval: $200.
(2) The following deposits shall be submitted by the applicant at the
time of submission of an application to the Planning Board. Said
deposit shall cover the costs of engineering, legal, planning review,
documentation fees and disbursements.
(a) Lot line adjustment not creating an additional building lot:
$1,000.
(b) Minor subdivision creating one or more new lots: $2,000.
(c) Amendment to minor subdivision approval: $1,000.
(3) The Planning Department shall tabulate the costs of the Planning
Board including the engineer, attorney, planning review, their staffs
and any additional experts required for a proper review and
§ 079.02.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 079.03.020
001:176
documentation. These costs shall be deducted from the review
fee deposit. Where the review costs exceed or are anticipated to
exceed the review fee deposit, the applicant shall pay the additional
amount prior to the signing of any plat or deed. Failure to remit
the additional required deposit within 15 days of the request shall
render the application incomplete, and no further proceedings or
action shall be taken by the Planning Board until after compliance.
Where the review costs are less, the difference shall be refunded to
the applicant within 120 days of the filing of the deed.
B. Application for major subdivision.
(1) The following application fees covering administration and
overhead shall be charged to the applicant for a major subdivision
and shall be submitted at the time of submission of an application
to the Planning Board. All checks shall be made payable to the
Township of Pequannock.
(a) Concept or sketch plat for major subdivision: $250.
(b) Preliminary plat for major subdivision: $400, plus $100 per lot.
(c) Final plat for major subdivision: $300 plus $50 per lot.
(d) Amendment or extension of preliminary or final subdivision
approval: $250.
(2) The following deposits shall be submitted by the applicant at the
time of submission of an application to the Planning Board. Said
deposit shall cover the costs of engineering, legal and planner
review and documentation fees and disbursements.
(a) Conceptual or sketch plat for major subdivision: $500.
(b) Preliminary plats: $4,000.
(c) Final plats: $2,000.
(d) Amendments; $1,500 or extension of preliminary or final
subdivision: $500.
(3) The Planning Department shall tabulate the costs of the Planning
Board for engineer, attorney, planner, their staffs and any
additional experts required for a proper review and documentation.
These costs shall be deducted from the review deposit fee. Where
the review costs exceed the review deposit fee, the applicant shall
pay the additional amount prior to the signing of any plat. Failure to
remit the additional required deposit within 15 days of the request
shall render the application incomplete, and no further
proceedings or action shall be taken by the Planning Board until
after compliance. Where the review costs are less than the amount
of the review deposit fee, the difference shall be returned to the
applicant within 120 days of the signing of the plats.
§ 079.03.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 079.03.020
001:177
C. Application for Site Plan.
(1) The following application fees covering administration and
overhead shall be submitted by the applicant at the time of
submission of a site plan application to the Planning Board. All
checks shall be made payable to the Township of Pequannock.
(a) Minor site plan: $500.
(b) Preliminary major residential site plan: $500 plus $50 per unit.
(c) Preliminary major nonresidential site plan: $500 plus $75 per
1,000 square feet.
(d) Final residential/nonresidential site plan: 50% Preliminary.
(e) Amendment or extension of preliminary or final site plan
approval: $250.
(f) Floodplain development permit: $250.
(2) The following deposits shall be submitted by the applicant at the
time of submission of an application to the Planning Board. Said
deposit shall cover the cost of engineering, legal, planner review,
documentation fees and disbursements.
(a) Minor site plan: $1,500.
(b) Preliminary Major Residential Site Plan: $2,000 plus $100 per
unit.
(c) Preliminary major nonresidential site plan: $2,000 plus $150
per 1,000 square feet.
(d) Final major residential/nonresidential site plan: 50%
Preliminary.
(e) Amendment; $1,000 or extension: $500.
(f) Floodplain development permit: $1,000.
(3) The Planning Department shall tabulate the costs of the Planning
Board and the engineer, planner, attorney, their staffs and any
additional experts required for a proper review and documentation.
These costs shall be deducted from the review deposit fee. Where
the costs exceed or are anticipated to exceed the review deposit
fee, the applicant shall pay the additional required deposit amount
prior to the signing of any plat. Where the review deposit fee costs
are less than the deposit, the difference shall be refunded to the
applicant within 120 days of the signing of the plat.
D. Conditional uses, variances and appeals.
(1) The following application fees covering administration and
overhead shall be charges to the applicant for conditional uses,
§ 079.03.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 079.03.020
001:178
§ 079.03.030. Temporary uses.
Fees for temporary uses shall be as follows:
variances, and appeals and shall be submitted at the time of an
application to the Planning Department. All checks shall be made
payable to the Township of Pequannock.
(a) Conditional use: $250.
(b) Appeals: $500.
(c) Interpretation of Zoning Map or zoning regulations or for
decisions on other special questions: $300.
(d) Dimensional variance (lot area, front yard, side yard, rear yard,
lot coverage, lot width): $100 each variance.
(e) Use variance: $750.
(f) The fees listed in sections a-e above shall be in addition to any
applicable subdivision or site plan fees.
(g) Zone change: $500.
(2) The following deposits shall be submitted by the applicant at the
time of submission of an application to the Planning Department.
Said deposit shall cover the costs of engineering, legal, planner
review, documentation fees and disbursements.
(a) Conditional use: $1,000.
(b) Appeals from decision of a Construction or Zoning Officer:
$750.
(c) Dimensional variances: $800 for the first variance and $200 for
each subsequent variance requested.
(d) Use variance: $1,000.
(e) Interpretation: $750.
(f) Zone change: $750.
(3) The Planning Department shall tabulate the costs of the Planning
Board, the engineer, planner, attorney, their staffs, any additional
experts required for a proper review and documentation. These
costs shall be deducted from the review deposit fee. Where the
costs exceed or are anticipated to exceed the review deposit fee,
the applicant shall pay the additional required deposit amount
prior to the signing of any plat. Where the review deposit fee costs
are less than the deposit, the difference shall be refunded to the
applicant within 120 days of the signing of the plat.
§ 079.03.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 079.03.030
001:179
§ 079.03.040. Inspections.
A. Copy of decision of governing body to interested party in connection
with an appeal: $10.
B. Publication in newspaper of decision of governing body on an appeal of
publication: cost.
A. Inspection fees and costs shall include:
(1) The inspection by the Township Engineer of on-site, on-tract, offsite
and off-tract improvements constructed or installed by the
developer in accordance with the terms and conditions of
subdivision or site plan approval.
(2) The reasonable cost of testing materials or construction work
performed by the developer in the event that any such testing may
be required by the Township Engineer.
(3) Analyses or tests to determine compliance by the developer with
any monitoring standards established by the terms and conditions
of subdivision or site plan approval.
(4) The inspection of improvements constructed or installed by the
developer for purposes of determining compliance with the twoyear
maintenance obligation of the developer.
B. Account.
(1) At the time of the grant of final subdivision or site plan approval by
the Planning Board, the developer shall pay to the Township an
amount equal to 5% of the cost of all improvements as estimated by
the Township Engineer. Such amount shall be held by the Township
in an interest-bearing trust account separate from the general
funds of the Township.
(2) The Township shall pay from the aforesaid account the inspection
fees and costs which are the obligation of the developer as
hereinabove provided. All payments shall be calculated in
accordance with a schedule of inspection fees and costs set forth in
the developer's agreement.
(3) The developer may, at any time, examine Township records with
respect to vouchers and payments from the account.
(4) In the event that the payment to the Township is not sufficient to
cover all inspection fees and costs, upon request, the developer
shall pay to the Township for deposit to the aforementioned
account such additional amount as may be reasonably required to
cover anticipated inspection fees and costs.
C. Upon the issuance by the Township Engineer of a certification that all
improvements have been maintained during the required two-year
§ 079.03.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 079.03.040
001:180
§ 079.03.050. Additional fees. [Amended 11-28-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-26; 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-2]
§ 079.03.060. Method of payment. [Amended 3-24-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-2]
period following their acceptance by the Township, the Township shall
pay any outstanding vouchers for inspection fees and costs; pay to the
Township for administrative expenses an amount equal to 5% of the
total inspection fees and costs paid from the account; terminate the
account; and refund to the developer any moneys remaining in the
account at the time of its termination, including all interest earned
during the life of the account.
A. Situations may occur in which expenses necessary in processing
applications for development or in acting upon appeals are not
otherwise provided for and covered by the fees set forth in the
preceding subsections of this section. Such expenses may involve
extensive studies of applications and testimony by experts, consultants
or other individuals, including engineering, land use, planning and
environmental consultants, or expenses incurred in connection with
holding special meetings, including attorneys' fee. In the event that any
such situations occur, the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, before rendering a decision, whether
preliminary or final in nature, may require that the applicant or
appellant pay such additional fees as may be required for
reimbursement of such additional expenses not otherwise provided for
by this section.
B. In addition to all other fees specified in this section, an applicant or
appellant shall pay the actual cost incurred by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, for recording
verbatim, by use of a shorthand reporter or stenographer, all public
hearings, whether regular or special, in excess of three years upon any
application for development as well as the furnishing of copies of
transcripts of any such hearing required by the applicant, appellant,
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, in
consideration of the application or appeal.
C. In addition an applicant or appellant shall pay for any requested special
meeting in the sum of $1,000 to cover all expenses associated with the
requested special meeting. These expenses include but are not limited
to the cost of providing the meeting room; Board secretary, Board
attorney, Township planner, and Township Engineer as applicable.
A. All fees required by this section shall be paid by check drawn to the
order of the Township of Pequannock. Any check for fees in excess of
$250 shall be in the form of a certified or bank cashier's check, except
of the filing of any application or appeal, and shall be submitted with
the application or appeal.
§ 079.03.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 079.03.060
001:181
§ 079.03.070. Relief from other fees.
The payment of fees pursuant to the provisions of this section shall not
relieve an applicant from the payment of any other fees required by any
other ordinance or provision thereof.
§ 079.03.080. Zoning permit fees. [Amended 2-23-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-2]
§ 079.04. Photocopying and Printing Fees.
§ 079.04.010. Photocopying fees. [Amended 2-25-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-02; 8-22-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-18]
B. All permits, determinations, resolutions, decisions or certificates of
approval are subject to the payment of all fees provided for in this
section, and no approvals shall be given or decisions rendered by the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
until proof has been submitted that all requisite fees have been paid to
the Township.
A. Certificate of continued occupancy for nonresidential uses: $200.
B. Home occupation: $25.
C. Zoning compliance letter for commercial use: $25.
D. Residential additions: $50.
E. New home: $75.
F. Nonresidential uses and structures: $100.
A. The fees for the photocopying of any document shall be $0.25 per page
for the first 10 pages, $0.50 per page for the next 10 pages, and $0.75
per page thereafter.
B. The fees for Police Department photocopy reports are; accident reports
in person $0.50 per page, accident reports by mail shall be $5 for the
first three pages and $1 per page thereafter.
C. The fee for photocopying of reduced tax assessment maps shall be
$0.50 per 11 inches by 17 inches sheet, complete sets shall cost $25
each.
D. Special Services Charges (SSC), in certain circumstances where the
actual direct cost of providing the records exceeds the basic charge,
shall be collected as provided for in the Open Public Records Act
(OPRA.) The SSC must be reasonable and based on the actual direct
cost of providing the copies. The SSC includes labor cost but cannot
include overhead cost. The custodian of the record must notify the
requester in advance of the SSC.
§ 079.03.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 079.04.020
001:182
§ 079.04.020. Printing fees. [Amended 2-24-1998 by Ord. No.
98-03; 8-22-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-18; 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-24]
§ 079.05. Fees For Use of Township Designated Playing Fields and
Picnic Areas.
§ 079.05.010. Fees charged. [Amended 7-22-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-25; 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-32]
A rental fee for use of recreational facilities of $35 for in-town organizations
will be charged per event use. A rental fee of $60 will be charged for out-oftown
organizations per event use.
§ 079.05.020. Exemptions from fees. [Amended 7-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-25]
Exempted from the fee charges set forth in Section 79.05.010 are athletic
events sponsored by Parks and Recreation and Township sponsored
organizations, including but not limited to Little League.
§ 079.06. Fees For Returned Checks.
§ 079.06.010. Fees for returned checks.
A charge of $20 shall be made on any check made payable to the Township
of Pequannock, or any of its departments or officials, which is returned,
marked insufficient funds.
§ 079.07. Fee For Appointment of Public Defender.
§ 079.07.010. Public Defender fee. [Amended 5-23-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-07]
The fee for an application for appointment of a Public Defender shall be
up to $200 in accordance with rules and guidelines established by the
Municipal Court.
§ 079.08. Rates for Newsletter Advertising.
A. The fee for blue printing of tax assessment maps shall be $2 per 24
inches by 36 inches sheet, complete sets shall cost $100 each.
B. The fee for blue printing of utility maps, filed maps and miscellaneous
maps and plans on file in the office of the Township Engineer shall be $5
each.
C. The fee for providing a report of tax and utility transactions on
individual property shall be $2 for each report provided.
§ 079.04.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 079.08.010
001:183
§ 079.08.010. Advertising rates. [Added 2-25-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-02]
Chapter 080
FERTILIZER
§ 080.01. Definitions. [Added 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this Ordinance clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER — The land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any waterbody.
COMMERCIAL FARM — A farm management unit producing agricultural or
horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
FERTILIZER — A fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other substance
containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used for its
plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have value in
promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for sale, or intended for
sale.
A. Advertising rates for the Township newsletter are as follows:
1. For a single newsletter issue the rate shall be $325 for a standard
size advertisement measuring 1/16th of a page. Larger
advertisements will be calculated as multiples of a standard size
advertisement.
2. For a yearly rate of a standard size advertisement to include four
newsletters the rate shall be fixed at $1,200, payable as $300
quarterly. Larger advertisements will be calculated as multiples of
a standard size advertisement.
B. Advertising fees are due 30 days prior to the newsletter publication
date. Advertisements not paid by the due date will result in the
advertisement not appearing in the requested newsletter issue.
Advertisers who fail to submit timely payments for two advertisements
within any four consecutive publications will be debarred from
advertising for a two-year period upon notification of same.
C. Advertisers will be accepted on a first come, first serve basis until all
advertising space is used. Advertisers who are unable to be served due
to space limitations will be placed in a waiting list until the next
available space.
§ 079.08.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 080.01
001:184
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. This term shall
be used to include any highway, street, sidewalk, parking lot, driveway, or
other material that prevents infiltration of water into the soil.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Any fertilizer that contains phosphorus,
expressed as P2O5, with a guaranteed analysis of greater than zero; except
that it shall not be considered to include animal (including human) or
vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood ashes that have
not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOILS TEST — A technical analysis of soil conducted by an accredited
soil testing laboratory following the protocol for such a test established by
Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
WATERBODY — A surface water feature, such as a lake, river, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
§ 080.02. Prohibited conduct. [Added 7-22-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17]
No person may do any of the following:
§ 080.03. Phosphorus fertilizer application. [Added 7-22-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-17]
No person may do the following:
A. Apply fertilizer when a runoff producing rainfall is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for fertilizer
movement off-site exists.
B. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back into the
target surface or returned to either its original or another appropriate
container for reuse.
C. Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any waterbody.
D. Apply fertilizer more than 15 days prior to the start of or at any time
after the end of the recognized growing season (March 15 to October
31).
A. Apply phosphorus fertilizer in outdoor areas except as demonstrated to
be needed for the specific soils and target vegetation in accordance
with a soils test and the associated annual fertilizer recommendation
issued by Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
B. Exceptions:
§ 080.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 080.03
001:185
§ 080.04. Enforcement. [Added 7-22-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-17]
This ordinance may be enforced by Police or other Township Officials.
§ 080.05. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-22-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-17]
Any person(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this ordinance
shall be subject to violations and penalties as provided for in Chapter 178.
Chapter 081
FIREARMS
§ 081.01. Prohibitions.
§ 081.02. Permission to use firearms for specified period of time.
The Township Manager of the Township of Pequannock may, upon proper
application being made as hereinafter set forth, give specific permission
to a person, for limited periods of time in certain places of the Township
to discharge or use a gun, pistol, firearm or weapon in the Township of
Pequannock for sport, recreation or the protection of property. The granting
or denial of any permission under this section shall be in the complete and
sole discretion of the Township Manager of the Township of Pequannock, in
1. Application of phosphorus fertilizer needed for:
a. Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided the application is in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules, or
b. Re-established or repairing a turf area.
2. Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular
fertilizer under the soils surface, directly to the feeder roots.
3. Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container
plantings, flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
A. No person shall discharge any firearms upon or across any state, county
or municipal road or highway, and no person except the owner or lessee
of the property and persons specifically authorized by him in writing
shall have in his possession a loaded gun while within 400 feet of any
occupied dwelling in the Township of Pequannock or while within 450
feet of a school or school playground, except as hereinafter provided.
B. The discharge, firing or use of any gun, pistol, firearm or weapon, of any
description, whatsoever at any place whatsoever in the Township of
Pequannock is hereby specifically prohibited, except as hereinafter set
forth.
§ 080.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 081.02
001:186
accordance with standards as herein set forth and as to protect the health,
safety and welfare of Pequannock.
§ 081.03. Application for permission to use firearms; term of
permit; fee.
Chapter 083
FIRE PROTECTION
§ 083.01. Enforcement authority. [Amended 4-27-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-13]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the agent having jurisdiction in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:71-2.2 to enforce the provisions of this code as
set forth herein.
§ 083.02. Enforcing agency designated. [Amended 4-27-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-13]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Safety in the
Township of Pequannock.
A. Any person desiring to make application under 81.02 hereof for the
specific permission, shall file with the Police Department of the
Township of Pequannock a proper application for the same provided by
the Police Department at Police Headquarters. Said application will
then be investigated by the Police Department and its
recommendations will then be made available to the Township Manager
of the Township of Pequannock, the Township Manager shall take action
on said application. No permission will be given unless said applicant
specifically states in the application where the discharge, firing or use
of said gun, pistol, firearm or weapon is to take place and for what
period of time, and if on land other than the land owned by the
applicant, said applicant must then accompany his application with
specific written permission from the owner or owners of said land set
forth in said application, and each application shall be accompanied by
a photograph of the applicant.
B. All firearm permits shall be for a period of one year from April 1 to
March 31 and all permits issued on and after April 1 in any one year
shall expire on March 31 of the following year.
C. All applications shall be accompanied by a fee of $5 to cover the cost of
Township processing. Said fee shall be payable initially and for all
renewals.
§ 081.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 083.03
001:187
§ 083.03. Powers and duties of enforcing agency. [Amended
4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-13]
The Bureau of Fire Safety shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act, the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, and any amendments thereto in all
buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of the
Township of Pequannock, other than owner-occupied one- and two-family
dwellings, and shall faithfully comply with the requirements of said Act and
Code.
§ 083.04. Location of Fire Department connections.
§ 083.05. Red light display over connections.
A red light shall be illuminated 24 hours per day over any fire department
connection. In such suppression systems where Siamese connections supply
more than one zone of suppression, the red light shall flash intermittently
over the suppression connection of the activated zone. The rate of flash shall
not be less than 60 flashes per minute.
§ 083.06. Interference with fire systems prohibited; fines.
[Amended 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-13]
Blocking access, interference, tampering with or causing malicious damage
to any fire alarm, suppression system, fire communications system, fire
detection, first-aid, fire-fighting system, unit, device, unit part thereof shall
result in a mandatory fine of $5,000 per day per violation. If such violation
occurs during an actual alarm condition, there shall be a mandatory $5,000
fine per day of violation. (N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12)
§ 083.07. Designation of on-site fire zones.
A. No fire connections shall be installed without the approval of the Fire
Official or his designated representative.
B. Siamese connections shall be within 100 feet from an approved fire
hydrant. All fire connections shall be maintained, accessible and visible
at all times.
C. Installation of and location of approved fire hydrants to connections
shall apply to all new construction and any renewal of an existing
construction, when the renewal is in excess of 30% of the usable
building footage or when there is a change of occupancy or ownership.
A. Upon receipt of notification to designate an on-site fire zone, the owner
of the property shall mark the fire zone in a manner as set forth on the
notification.
B. The marking and maintenance of Fire Lanes and Fire Zones shall be the
responsibility of and at the expense of the property owner, and shall be
completed within 30 days from the date of the mailing of the letter to
the owner by regular mail at his last known address.
§ 083.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 083.07
001:188
§ 083.08. Rapid entry system. [Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-04; 3-28-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-09; 4-27-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-13]
C. The penalty for a violation of this section shall be such penalties as
authorized by the code of the Township of Pequannock.
A. Key box. All property within the Township of Pequannock, a Key Box of a
UL type shall be installed on the property and approved by the
Pequannock Township Fire Official. The location of said box shall be
approved by the Fire Official.
B. Ordering the equipment. The owner and/or occupant or their agent is
responsible for ordering and installing of a Knox Company Rapid Entry
System or combination cabinet style vault or its commercial
equivalents. The responsible person shall have this equipment installed
within 90 business days after receiving the application.
C. Type of equipment. The entry system and the cabinet style vaults shall
have a single lock and alarm tamper switch. If the building is protected
by a burglary alarm system(s), it shall be connected so that if the box is
open or removed from the building, an alarm will sound. If the building
is not protected by a burglar alarm system, the box may be connected to
the fire alarm system provided the connection is on the fire side
signaling an alarm. Connection to the fire alarm requires the box to be
zoned alternately from any fire detection and noted on the fire alarm
annunciator panel as rapid entry system.
D. Box contents.
(1) Keys to locked points of ingress whether on the interior or exterior
of such building.
(2) Keys to locked mechanical equipment rooms.
(3) Keys to locked electrical rooms.
(4) Keys to elevator rooms and emergency elevator keys.
(5) Keys to other areas as directed by the Fire Official.
E. General. All new commercial and/or manufacturing buildings
constructed after the effective date of this ordinance, including all
existing commercial and/or manufacturing buildings when there is a
change of tenancy or ownership, and when reconstruction is excess of
30% of the usable building footage shall provide a key box at a location
approved by the Fire Official. The key box shall be provided with all
keys as set forth in section D above. The box keys shall be provided
prior to occupancy and/or final inspection.
F. Exemptions from this section. Any structure or site that has a twentyfour-
hour, seven day a week, on site Guard Service shall be excluded
from the provisions of this section.
§ 083.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 083.08
001:189
§ 083.09. Hazardous chemicals, required control procedure.
[Amended 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-13]
§ 083.10. Rear door identification.
A sign indicating the name and street number of every commercial
establishment shall be installed on the rear door to alert emergency
management officials of the business location. The lettering and numerals
shall be florescent and a minimum of three inches high. These signs shall be
posted at a height of five feet measured from the door sill.
G. Fines and penalties. Any building owner violating the provisions of this
section, after receiving written warning notice by the Fire Official, shall
be subject to a fine of $200 or such other penalties as are allowed by the
Code of the Township of Pequannock.
A. General.
(1) All persons engaged in hazardous chemical operations shall carry
out such operations in a manner to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the public from such operations as required by the Toxic
Catastrophe Prevention Act Program, N.J.A.C. 7:31-1.1 et seq.
(2) All persons engaged in hazardous chemical operations shall comply
with the requirements and standards set forth in this Ordinance.
The Fire Official may accept equivalent protection where strict
compliance would create a hardship.
B. Special compliance. Every person engaged in hazardous chemical
operations shall comply with the Township's Building Code, Fire Code,
Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Sewer Code and any other standards
which have been or may be adopted by the Township of Pequannock.
C. Permits. In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7(a)6, permits for 55
gallons of hazardous chemicals shall be issued where the use of
hazardous chemicals is incident to the principal business of the
applicant.
D. Buildings/structures. All buildings and other structures in or upon
which a significant quantity of hazardous chemicals are used or stored
shall be clearly marked on or about the principal entrance in
accordance with the NFPA 704 standard placed on a fifteen-inch
placard with six-inch symbols. The Fire Official may determine that any
additional entrance must be marked in a similar fashion.
Determinations of the relative hazards shall be made by the Fire Official
in consultation with the Health Officer. It shall be the responsibility of
the permit holder to post, maintain and update the placards as needed
and to remove them upon vacating the premises or elimination of
chemical storage. Tampering with the placard shall be in violation of
this Ordinance.
§ 083.08 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 083.11
001:190
§ 083.11. Use and storage of propane cooking equipment.
§ 083.12. Inspection of life hazard uses.
The Office of Fire Safety shall carry out the periodic inspection of life hazard
uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf of the Commissioner of
Community Affairs.
§ 083.13. Organization of enforcing agency. [Amended 4-27-2004
by Ord. No. 2004-13]
The Bureau of Fire Safety shall be part of the Planning and Building
Department and shall be under the direct supervision of the Fire Official
who reports to the Township Manager.
§ 083.14. Fire official; inspectors and other employees.
§ 083.15. Board of Appeals. [Amended 4-27-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-13]
Pursuant to Section 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act,* any person
aggrieved by any order of the Bureau of Fire Safety shall have the right to
appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Morris County.
*Note: See N.J.S.A. 52:27D-206 and 27D-208 respectively.
A. The use of propane or charcoal cooking equipment or the storage of
such equipment shall be prohibited on any porch, balcony, deck or any
other portion of a building that is within five feet of any exterior
combustible wall, or within five feet vertically or horizontally of any
opening in any wall; said storage or use of the above equipment within
any room or space of a building.
B. The penalty for a violation of this section shall be such penalty(ies) as
authorized by the Municipal Code of the Township of Pequannock.
A. Appointment of Fire Official. The Office of Fire Safety shall be under the
supervision of the Fire Official, who shall be appointed by the Township
Manager.
B. Term of office. The Fire Official shall serve for a term of one year.
C. Inspectors and employees. Such inspectors and other employees as may
be necessary in the local enforcing agency may be appointed by the
Township Manager upon the recommendation of the Fire Official.
D. Removal from office. Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing
agency shall be subject to removal by the Township Manager for
inefficiency or misconduct. Each inspector or employee to be so
removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the appointing
authority or a designated hearing officer.
§ 083.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 083.16
001:191
§ 083.16. Nonlife hazard and fees. [Amended 12-12-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-19; 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-13]
In addition to the inspections and fees required pursuant to the Act and
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections and fees shall be required:
§ 083.17. Smoke detector/carbon monoxide test. [Amended
12-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-19; 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-13]
§ 083.18. (Reserved) [Amended 12-12-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-19;
4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-13]
§ 083.19. Permit fees. [Added 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-13;
amended 12-2-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-19]
A. Each commercial/industrial operation shall be inspected on an annual
basis.
B. A fee for each inspection is hereby established in accordance with the
following schedule:
Up to 999 square feet: $50.
1,000 to 4,999 square feet: $60.
5,000 to 9,999 square feet: $115.
10,000 to 14,000 square feet: $230.
15,000 unlimited square feet: $345.
C. When a business fails an initial inspection and after reasonable time is
provided for remedial action and a second or subsequent inspection is
made, a fee of $20 shall be charged for each such inspection.
A. Request for CSDCMAC received more than 10 business days prior to
the change of occupant: $45.
B. Request for CSDCMAC received four than 10 business days prior to the
change of occupant: $90.
C. Request for CSDCMAC received fewer than four business days prior to
change of occupant: $155.
D. If a re-inspection is required if any of the above mandates fail, it will
result in an additional $40 fee for each additional re-inspection. (Source
N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3 and N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9)
A. The permit fees are established by the State of New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code 5:70-2.9. (Revision October 02, 2017)
1. Type 1: $54.
2. Type 2: $214.
§ 083.16 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 083.19
001:192
Chapter 084
FIRE ALARM PROTECTION
§ 084.01. Purpose and applicability.
§ 084.02. Change in occupancy.
In any case where a change in occupancy of any building as set forth in
84-1 occurs, no transfer in occupancy of any building set forth in 84-1 above
shall occur until a certificate of Fire Code Status Compliance is issued by
an authorized member of the Office of Fire Safety or the Construction Code
Official certifying that the provisions of 84-1 have been fulfilled.
§ 084.03. Fees.
A fee of $25 shall be paid for each inspection required prior to the issuance
of a certificate of Fire Code Status.
§ 084.04. False alarms; defined. [Amended 1-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2001-23]
As used in this chapter "false alarm" shall mean the transmission either
directly or indirectly to the Police Department of Pequannock Township of
any automatic fire alarm, smoke alarm, fire sprinkler water flow alarm,
or carbon monoxide alarm that was not caused by fire or equipment
malfunction, a smoke condition or such other condition that is beyond the
control of the owner or resident.
The Police Department shall report all false alarms to the Fire Bureau,
which shall investigate and determine the cause of the false alarm. The Fire
3. Type 3: $427.
4. Type 4: $641.
A. Every structure used or intended to be used for residential purposes by
not more than two households shall have a smoke-sensitive device on
each level of the structure and outside each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and located on or near the
ceiling in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association
Standard No. 74-1984. The installation of battery operated smoke
sensitive alarm devices shall be accepted as meeting the requirements
of this section.
B. Every structure used or intended to be used for residential purposes
shall display the house number so that they are clearly visible for the
purpose of identification and fire safety. The number shall be at least
three inches in height and placed on the left or right side of the door
five feet above the door saddle.
§ 083.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 084.04
001:193
Bureau shall maintain a list of all alarms and the number of false alarms at
the location for the calendar year.
§ 084.05. Penalties for false alarms. [Amended 1-22-2002 by Ord.
No. 2001-23]
Penalties for false alarms transmitted shall be as follows:
Number of Alarms Within a
Calendar Year Penalty
First two Warning only
Third $200
Fourth $300
Fifth $500
Sixth or more $1,000
§ 084.06. Repairs or tampering. [Amended 1-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2001-23]
Any person, firm, company or corporation that causes to be transmitted a
false alarm as the result of installing, repairing, testing, tempering with or
performing any work to an automatic fire alarm, smoke alarm, fire sprinkler
water flow alarm, or carbon monoxide alarm shall be subject a penalty of
not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 for each transmission of a false
alarm.
§ 084.07. Disposition of penalties. [Amended 1-22-2002 by Ord. No.
2001-23]
All penalties assessed for violations of this chapter shall be deposited into
the Office of Fire Safety penalty account.
Chapter 085
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 085.01. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and
Objectives.
§ 085.01.010. Statutory authorization. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-11]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry.
§ 084.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 085.01.020
001:194
§ 085.01.020. Finding of fact. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-11]
§ 085.01.030. Statement of purpose. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-11]
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
§ 085.01.040. Methods of reducing flood losses. [Amended
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this ordinance includes methods and
provisions for:
[1] The flood hazard areas of the Township of Pequannock are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
[2] These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
Areas of Special Flood Hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately flood proofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
[1] To protect human life and health;
[2] To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
[3] To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
[4] To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
[5] To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in Areas of Special Flood Hazard;
[6] To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
Development of Areas of Special Flood Hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
[7] To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an Area of
Special Flood Hazard; and
[8] To ensure that those who occupy the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
§ 085.01.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 085.01.040
001:195
§ 085.02. Definitions.
§ 085.02.010. Defined. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Administrator's interpretation of
any provision of this ordinance or a request for an Exception.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map [FIRM] with a 1% or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
(one-hundred-year Floodplain)
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other Structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
[1] Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
[2] Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
[3] Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
[4] Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
[5] Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 085.01.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 085.02.010
001:196
storage of equipment or materials located within the Area of Special Flood
Hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — A non-basement building (i) built in the case of a
building in an Area of Special Flood Hazard to have the top of the elevated
floor or in the case of a building in a Coastal High Hazard Area to have
the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor
elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns (posts and
piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii) adequately
anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood up to the magnitude of the Base Flood. In an Area of Special Flood
Hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill
or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the
unimpeded movement of flood waters.
EXCEPTION — A grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited
by this ordinance.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The Official Map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the Areas of Special
Flood Hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Boundary/Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the
Base Flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any Structure that is:
[1] The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
[2]
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) of preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
[1]
§ 085.02.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 085.02.010
001:197
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area [including
Basement]. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
Basement is not considered a building's Lowest Floor provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable non-elevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "Manufactured Home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the Start of Construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A Manufactured Home Park or Manufactured Home
Subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum,
the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the
effective date of the Floodplain Management Regulations adopted by the
municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is [i] built on a single chassis;
[ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest horizontal
projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel,
or seasonal use.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
[2]
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in States
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
[3]
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in States without approved
programs.
(b)
[4]
§ 085.02.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 085.02.010
001:198
START OF CONSTRUCTION [for other than New Construction or
Substantial Improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L.
No. 97-348)] — Includes Substantial Improvements and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual Start of Construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles,
the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading
and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways,
nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a Substantial Improvement, the actual Start of Construction means
the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a
gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure before the "Start of Construction"
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
"Substantial Damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
term does not, however, include either:
§ 085.03. General Provisions.
§ 085.03.010. Lands to which this ordinance applies. [Amended
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
This ordinance shall apply to all Areas of Special Flood Hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Pequannock.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
[1]
Any alteration of a "Historic Structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "Historic
Structure".
[2]
§ 085.02.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 085.03.020
001:199
§ 085.03.020. Basis for establishing the areas of special flood
hazard. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
The Areas of Special Flood Hazard identified by the Federal Insurance
Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood
Insurance Study for the Township of Pequannock" dated July 3, 1986, as
amended, Community Number 345411, with accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps and any revision thereto
are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
The Flood Insurance Study is on file in the office of the Township Engineer.
§ 085.03.030. Violations. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-11]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered unless in full compliance with the terms of this
ordinance and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of
this ordinance by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Any person, firm,
corporation, partnership or association violating this ordinance or failing to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation. Each and every day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 085.03.040. Abrogation and greater restrictions. [Amended
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance
and any other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 085.03.050. Interpretation. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-11]
In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall
be:
[1] Considered as minimum requirements;
[2] Liberally construed in favor of the Township; and,
[3] Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
§ 085.03.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 085.03.060
001:200
§ 085.03.060. Warning and disclaimer of liability. [Amended
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood Heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This ordinance does not imply that land outside the Area of Special Flood
Hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Pequannock, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
§ 085.04. Administration.
§ 085.04.010. Establishment of development permit. [Amended
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
A Development permit shall be obtained before construction or
Development begins within any Area of Special Flood Hazard established in
Section 085.03.020. Application for a Development permit shall be made on
forms furnished by the Administrator and shall include, but not be limited
to the following:
A. Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location,
dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures; fill; storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing, including:
(1) The existing and proposed contours at a contour interval of two
feet.
(2) Architectural or building drawings be provided with elevations in
relation to mean sea level, for all floor levels, including Basements
and crawl spaces.
(3) The proposed elevations of the lands involved at the corners of the
foundation of any structure or structures.
(4) The layout of existing and proposed public streets and the nature,
extent and location of existing and proposed utilities servicing and
to service the premises is question.
(5) The elevation of any existing or proposed pumping facilities and
overflow elevations of vents or entranceways, if underground;
overflow elevations of sewage treatment plant units.
(6) The nature and extent of the construction, alterations or repairs.
§ 085.03.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 085.04.010
001:201
§ 085.04.020. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Amended
6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
The Township Engineer or his designee is hereby appointed to administer
and implement this chapter by granting or denying Development Permit
applications eligible for Administrative approval or, by reviewing for
completeness applications requiring Board approval.
§ 085.04.030. Duties and responsibilities of the Local
Administrator. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
Duties of the Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
(7) Proof of application for Stream Encroachment Permit from the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection; if applicable.
(8) The extent of filling of the land; if any.
(9) Surrounding structures within a two-hundred-foot radius.
B. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor of all
structures.
C. Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential
structure has been flood proofed.
D. Plans showing how any nonresidential flood proofed structure will meet
the flood proofing criteria of this ordinance.
E. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
F. Plans for any walls to be used to enclose space below the base flood
level.
G. Proof that the application has taken into account any floodplain
management programs, if any, already in effect.
H. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
flood proofing methods for nonresidential structure meet the flood
proofing criteria in Section 085.06.01.
(a) Permit Review.
1. Review all Development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all Development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all Development permits to determine if the proposed
Development is located in the Floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of Subsection 085.06.030(1) are met.
§ 085.04.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 085.04.030
001:202
§ 085.05. Approval, Appeal and Exception Procedure.
§ 085.05.010. Jurisdiction approval. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-11]
(b) Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and Floodway data has not been provided in accordance with
Subsection 085.03.020 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood
Hazard, the Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and Floodway data available from a Federal,
State or other source, in order to administer Subsections 085.06.020A,
Specific Standards, Residential Construction and 085.06.020 B,
Specific Standards, Nonresidential Construction.
(c) Information to be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including Basement) of all new or
substantially improved Structures, and whether or not the
Structure contains a Basement prior to the issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy.
2. A final as-built topographic location survey referencing all floor
elevations in relation to mean sea level including crawl spaces and
Basements shall be provided for all new or substantially improved
Structures prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
3. National Flood Insurance Program Elevation Certificate shall be
provided for all new or substantially improved Structures prior to
the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
4. For all new or substantially improved flood proofed Structures.
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level);
(b) Maintain the flood proofing certifications required in
Subsection 085.06.020 B[3].
(c) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
[1] The development permit required by this chapter shall be issued only
upon site plan approval by either the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment except when eligible for administrative approval in
accordance with Number [2] of this Subsection. Site plan review in
conjunction with a related Development approval shall be heard by the
Board having jurisdiction over the related approval. Any application not
requiring any other development approval shall be heard by the
Planning Board.
§ 085.04.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 085.05.010
001:203
§ 085.05.020. Appeals. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-11]
[2] Administrative approval. The Township Engineer or designee may
review and approve or disapprove applications for Development
permits when the Development does not require N.J.D.E.P. approval.
[1] The Planning Board shall hear and decide Appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Township Engineer or designee in the enforcement of
administration of this ordinance. In passing upon such applications, the
applicable Board or the Township Engineer shall consider all technical
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
this ordinance, and;
(i) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(ii) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(iii) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
(iv) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
(v) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(vi) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(vii) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
(viii) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and floodplain management program of that area;
(ix) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
(x) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood water and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
(xi) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and
streets and bridges.
[2] Upon consideration of the factors of this section and the purposes of
this ordinance, the Planning Board may attach such conditions to the
granting of exceptions as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
this ordinance.
§ 085.05.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 085.05.020
001:204
§ 085.05.030. Conditions for exceptions. [Amended 6-10-2014 by
Ord. No. 2014-11]
§ 085.06. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
[3] The Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any exceptions to the
Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
[1] Generally, exceptions may be issued by the applicable Board having
jurisdiction for new construction and Substantial Improvements to be
erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded
by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level,
providing items (i-xi) in Subsection 085.05.020 have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the exception increases.
[2] Exceptions may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as
a historic structure and the exception is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
[3] Exceptions shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
[4] Exceptions shall only be issued upon a determination that the exception
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
[5] Exceptions shall only be issued upon:
(i) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the exception would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
(iii) A determination that the granting of an exception will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public as identified in Section 85.05.020 or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
[6] Any applicant to whom an exception is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from
the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 085.05.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 085.06.010
001:205
§ 085.06.010. General standards. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-11]
In all Areas of Special Flood Hazards the following general standards are
required:
A. Anchoring.
[1] All new construction and substantial improvements, including
sheds and garages, shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement of the structure.
[2] All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
[1] All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
[2] All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
[3] All new construction and Substantial Improvements shall provide
compensatory storage at hydraulically equivalent site at a ratio
1.5:1 for each cubic foot of fill placed in the regulatory floodplain.
[4] All new construction and Substantial Improvements shall be
constructed on foundations that are designed and sealed by a
registered design professional in compliance with the currently
adopted construction codes and not be constructed on fill.
[5] All new construction and Substantial Improvements having fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage shall require a nonconversion
agreement in the form of a deed restriction to be filed
with the County Clerk prior to the request for a Certificate of
Occupancy.
C. Utilities.
[1] All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
[2] New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters;
§ 085.06.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 085.06.010
001:206
§ 085.06.020. Specific standards. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-11]
In all Areas of Special Flood Hazards where base flood elevation data
have been provided as set forth in Subsection 085.03.020 or in Subsection
085.04.030B the following standards are required:
[3] On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
[4] Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment ductwork and other service facilities shall be designed
and/or located three feet above base flood elevation so as to
prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision proposals and Site Plan Proposals.
[1] All subdivision proposals and site plan proposals shall be consistent
with the need to minimize flood damage;
[2] All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
[3] All subdivision proposals and site plan proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;
and,
[4] Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and site plan proposals and other proposed Development
which contains at least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
E. Enclosure openings. All New Construction and Substantial
Improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a Basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Residential Construction.
§ 085.06.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 085.06.020
001:207
§ 085.06.030. Floodways. [Amended 6-10-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-11]
Located within Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section
085.03.020 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
[1] New Construction and Substantial Improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including Basement, elevated
to or above three feet freeboard above base flood elevation.
B. Nonresidential construction. New Construction and Substantial
Improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential
structure shall either have the lowest floor, including Basement,
elevated to the level of two foot freeboard above the Base Flood
elevation; or
[1] Be dry flood proofed to two feet above the Base Flood level so that
the Structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to
the passage of water;
[2] Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
[3] Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the Township Engineer and be in the form of a FEMA Flood
Proofing certificate.
C. Manufactured homes.
[1] Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
Subsection 085.06.010.A.
[2] All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an Area of Special Flood Hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation and shall have the lowest floor, including
Basement elevated three feet above the Base Flood Elevation.
[1] Prohibit encroachments, including fill, New Construction, Substantial
Improvements, and other Development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
[2] If Subsection 085.06.030(1) is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 085.06
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction shall apply.
§ 085.06.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 085.06.030
001:208
Chapter 088
FOOD AND BEVERAGE
§ 088.01. Adoption of standards.
Chapter 88 shall be entitled "Retail Foods Establishment and Food and
Beverage Machines", and pursuant to the New Jersey Statutes Annotated
26:1A through 26:1A-7 et seq. there is adopted Chapter 8:24-1.1 through
8:24-11.15 of the New Jersey Administrative Code and the supplements and
additions thereto.
§ 088.02. License required.
No person shall operate a Retail Food Establishment or Food and Beverage
Machine unless a license to operate the same shall have been issued by the
Department of Health. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place
in such establishments.
§ 088.03. Fee established. [Amended 9-25-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-19; 5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-21; 4-27-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-08; 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-20]
There shall be a license fee established to operate pursuant to this chapter:
[3] In all Areas of Special Flood Hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated Development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the Base Flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
A. Retail Food Establishments for each fixed location.
B. Retail Food Establishments for each vehicle classified as a Mobile Food
and Drink.
C. Vending machines.
"Risk type 1 food establishment" means any retail food establishment
that:
1. Serves or sells only pre-packaged, nonpotentially hazardous foods;
2. Prepares only non-potentially hazardous foods; or
3. Heats only commercially processed, potentially hazardous foods for
hot holding and does not cool potentially hazardous foods. Such
retail establishments may include, but are not limited to,
convenience store operations, hot dog carts, and coffee shops.
Annual Fee: $100.
§ 085.06.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 088.03
001:209
"Risk type 2 food establishment" means any retail food establishment
that has a limited menu; and
1. Prepares, cooks, and serves most products immediately;
2. Exercises hot and cold holding of potentially hazardous foods after
preparation or cooking; or
3. Limits the complex preparation of potentially hazardous foods,
including the cooking, cooling, and reheating for hot holding, to
two or fewer items. Such retail establishments may include, but
are not limited to, retail food store operations, schools that do not
serve a highly susceptible population, and quick service operations,
depending on the menu and preparation procedures.
Annual Fee: $200.
"Risk type 3 food establishment" means any retail food establishment
that:
1. Has an extensive menu which requires the handling of raw
ingredients; and is involved in the complex preparation of menu
items that includes the cooking, cooling, and reheating of at least
three or more potentially hazardous foods; or
2. Prepares and serves potentially hazardous foods including the
extensive handling of raw ingredients; and whose primary service
population is a highly susceptible population. Such establishments
may include, but are not limited to, full service restaurants, diners,
commissaries, and catering operations; or hospitals, nursing homes,
and preschools preparing and serving potentially hazardous foods.
Annual Fee: $400.
"Risk type 4 food establishment" means a retail food establishment
that conducts specialized processes such as smoking, curing, canning,
bottling, acidification designed to control pathogen proliferation, or
any reduced oxygen packaging intended for extended shelf-life where
such activities may require the assistance of a trained food
technologist. Such establishments include those establishments
conducting specialized processing at retail.
Annual Fee: $400.
"Mobile Food and Drink" means any motor vehicle or any vehicle cart,
or bicycle of any kind including hand carried portable containers, in
which food or drink is transported, stored or prepared at temporary
locations.
Annual Fee: $100.
"Temporary Retail Food Establishment" means any food establishment
which operates at a fixed location for a temporary period of time not
to exceed 7 days in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public
exhibition or similar organizational meetings, mobile retail food
establishments as well as agricultural markets.
Annual Fee: $50.
§ 088.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 088.03
001:210
§ 088.04. License expiration and renewal.
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire annually on December
31st of each year, and the fee therefor shall not be prorated from the date of
issuance. Applications for renewal thereof shall be submitted, together with
the required fee, prior to December 15th of each year.
§ 088.05. Transferability of license.
Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable, nor shall
they be construed as authorizing the licensee or licensees to carry on the
business at any place other than that specified in the license itself.
§ 088.06. Evocation of license.
License issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the Township
Board of Health for any good or sufficient reason, provided that due notice
thereof shall be given to the licensee, and a hearing held before the Board of
Health, at which time an opportunity shall be afforded the licensee to show
cause why the license should not be revoked.
§ 088.07. Food Handler's Certificate.
§ 088.07.010. Certificate required. [Added 10-8-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-20]
Any person engaged or employed in the business or service of preparing,
processing or serving food or drink intended for human consumption at Risk
Type 2, 3, or 4 food establishments shall apply to the Pequannock Township
Health Department within seven days of the commencement of his said
employment for a Food Handlers' Certificate. Applicants will be required
to attend the next regularly-scheduled food handlers' training course given
"Vending Machine" means any self-service device which, upon
insertion of a coin, paper currency, token, card, key or by any other
means, dispenses unit servings of food, either in bulk or in packages
without the necessity of replenishing the device between each vending
operation.
Annual Fee:
Pre-packaged only: $20
Gum-ball $5
All others $40
"Nonprofit" means any food establishment which has been provided
with a Federal Internal Revenue Service Tax Exemption number and
prepares or handles food and drink and serves to the general public;
and, any school food establishment operated by employees of a Board
of Education.
Annual Fee: $0
§ 088.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 088.07.010
001:211
by the Township's Health Department or a comparable course approved by
the Township Health Department. Existing employees shall have six months
from enactment of this ordinance to attain a food handler's certificate.
§ 088.07.020. Course of instruction required. [Added 10-8-2013 by
Ord. No. 2013-20]
The food handler's certificate shall not be issued or granted to any person
unless the person seeking such food handler's certificate shall have first
completed a course of general instruction in health education, sanitation,
personal hygiene, food protection, dishwashing procedures and other
related health matters.
§ 088.07.030. Records of employees to be maintained by employer.
[Added 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-20]
All employers engaged in the business or service of preparing and
processing food intended for human consumption shall at all times keep
and maintain accurate records of the name and address of each employee,
date of employment and date of issuance and certificate number of said
food handler's certificate, which records shall be available at all times for
inspection by the Health Officer or his duly authorized representatives.
§ 088.07.040. Employment of persons without certificates
prohibited. [Added 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-20]
No employer shall continue to employ any person in connection with the
preparation, processing or service of food and drink intended for human
consumption at a retail level unless the person so employed shall have
applied for and obtained a food handler's certificate within the period as
specified in Section 088.07.
§ 088.07.050. Renewal of certificates. [Added 10-8-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-20]
All food handlers' certificates shall be renewed every two years after
completion of a food handler's course as identified in Section 088.07.
§ 088.07.060. Exemptions. [Added 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-20]
The requirement for a food handler's certificate shall not apply to: a
temporary retail food establishment; any employee who is a Certified Food
Protection Manager as recognized by the Conference for Food Protection;
or, persons engaging in food handler's activities on behalf of nonprofit
institutions, churches or other charitable organizations unless the said food
handling activities are conducted on a regular basis.
§ 088.07.070. Food handler training fees established. [Added
10-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-20]
A. Food Handler's Certificate Course, No Fee Until January 1, 2016.
§ 088.07.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 088.07.070
001:212
§ 088.08. Public posting of evaluation placard. [Added 4-14-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-03]
Every establishment must post the most recent Evaluation placard
according to the following requirements:
Chapter 089
GARAGE SALES
§ 089.01. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — Includes all sales entitled "garage sale," "lawn sale," "attic
sale," "rummage sale" or similar casual sale of tangible personal property
which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be
made aware of said sale.
GOODS — Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
PERSON — Includes individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations and
corporations.
§ 089.02. License required; fee. [Amended 8-23-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-25]
B. Certified Food Protection Manager's Course as recognized by the
Conference for Food Protection sponsored by the Pequannock Township
Health Department, $200.
A. The Evaluation Placard must be posted in one of the following
prominent locations clearly visible to the patron:
1. The main entrance door from 4 to 6 feet off the ground or floor;
2. A front window within 5 feet of the main entrance;
3. A display case mounted on the outside wall within 5 feet of the main
entrance.
4. If there is no direct entrance to the street, the Health Department
shall determine an appropriate posting location in prominent
public viewing.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale within the
Township of Pequannock without first filing with the Township Clerk the
information hereinafter specified and obtaining from such Clerk a
license to do so.
B. The fee for such license shall be and the same is hereby fixed at $5.
§ 088.07.070 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 089.03
001:213
§ 089.03. License limitations; display of license.
§ 089.04. Information to be filed.
The information to be filed with the Township Clerk pursuant to this chapter
shall be as follows:
§ 089.05. Permitted hours of sale.
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m.
§ 089.06. Signs. [Amended 8-23-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-25]
Signs directing or advertising a garage sale may be placed on the property
where the sale is to be conducted. Applicants are permitted to place one off
site sign, as described below, on the property of another, with that property
owner's consent. No signs for advertising or directing customers are to be
posted on any vehicle, trailer or utility pole. The signs shall not exceed two
by two by two feet in size and cannot be placed on the premises earlier than
one week prior to the sale and must be removed within 24 hours after the
sale has terminated.
A. Such license shall be issued to any one person for a garage sale twice
within a twelve-month period, and no such license shall be issued for
more than two consecutive calendar days; provided, however, that
where the sale is to be conducted on a Saturday and Sunday and the
sale shall be postponed because of inclement weather, the applicant will
be permitted to hold the sale on the same day of the following weekend.
Where the sale is being held during the week and the date is postponed
because of inclement weather, the applicant will be permitted to
continue the sale on the next clear day.
B. Any license issued under this chapter must be prominently displayed on
the premises upon which the sale is conducted throughout the entire
period of the licensed sale.
A. The name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting said sale.
B. The name of the owner of the property on which the sale is to be
conducted, together with consent in writing by the owner if the
applicant is other than the owner.
C. The location at which the sale is to be conducted.
D. The number of days of the sale and the hours of the sale.
E. Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendor's license
by any other local, state or federal agency.
F. An affirmation or sworn statement by the person signing that the
information given is true.
§ 089.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 089.07
001:214
§ 089.07. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to nor affect the following
persons or sales as outlined below:
Chapter 090
MANDATORY SOURCE SEPARATION AND RECYCLING
§ 090.01. Definitions. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-21;
12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-29]
COMMERCIAL — Any nonresidential building or establishment, including,
but not limited to, those used for retail, wholesale, dining, offices,
professional services, shipping and receiving areas and cafeterias.
COMMINGLED — A combining of non-putrescible source-separated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
CONTAINERIZED — The placement of yard waste in a trash can, bucket,
bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling or
blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials designated
within the Morris County District Solid Waste Management Plan to be
source separated for the purpose of recycling. These materials include:
A. Persons selling goods according to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their duties and powers as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed five in number.
D. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization shall not be required to pay
the licensing fee; however, the remaining provisions of this chapter
shall apply.
ALUMINUM CANS — Cans made from aluminum that was
manufactured to hold a serving of a beverage. Specifically omitted from
this definition are aluminum foil and aluminum pie plates.
A.
GLASS BOTTLES AND JARS — Bottles and jars made from glass
including clear, brown and green glass. A bottle is defined as a
receptacle having a narrow neck and a mouth that can be corked
or capped. A jar is defined as a wide mouthed container that can
be capped. Caps and lids not included. Specifically omitted from this
definition are drinking glasses, windows, mirrors, light bulbs, and
anything made of Pyrex® or ceramic.
B.
§ 089.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 090.01
001:215
PLASTIC BOTTLES (CODED 1 AND 2) — Plastic bottles coded to
indicate that they are comprised of the specific types of plastic
compounds (polymers) known as polyethylene terephthalate (PETE) or
high density polyethylene (HDPE). See symbols to the left. A bottle is
defined as a receptacle having a narrow neck and a mouth that can
be corked or capped. Caps and lids not included. Any item made of
plastic that is not a bottle, and any plastic bottle without one of the
symbols shown to the left is specifically omitted from this definition.
Empty bottles which contained hazardous materials, such as motor oil,
antifreeze, etc. should not be recycled.
C.
STEEL (TIN) CANS — An air-tight container for the distribution or
storage of goods, composed of thin, usually ferrous, metal. Examples
are soup cans and tuna fish cans.
D.
NEWSPAPER — A publication containing news, information and
advertising, usually printed on low-cost paper called newsprint.
Newspaper may include glossy inserts which come with the paper,
dependent upon the market conditions at the time.
E.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Shipping containers made with kraft
paper linerboard and corrugated medium.
F.
MIXED PAPER — Various categories of recyclable paper including, but
not limited to white and colored paper used in printers, photocopier and
fax machines, white and colored ledger paper, carbonless copy paper,
construction paper, undeliverable mail, mailed promotional letters/
advertisements/circulars, magazines, catalogues, envelopes, soft cover
books.
G.
LEAVES — Vegetative material, typically generated in the autumn when
they fall from trees and then are raked from residents' and/or
commercial lawns.
H.
GRASS CLIPPINGS — Vegetative material generated when grass
(lawns) is cut.
I.
BRUSH — Branches, woody plants and other similar vegetative
material. Leaves and grass do not constitute brush.
J.
NATURAL WOOD WASTE — Logs, stumps, branches and other wood
tree parts. Dimensional lumber is omitted from inclusion in this
definition.
K.
OIL-CONTAMINATED SOIL — Non-hazardous soil that contains
petroleum hydrocarbons (gasoline, diesel, kerosene, jet fuel, #4 and #6
heating oils and certain other refinery products including coal tar). This
type of soil shall be determined to be non-hazardous in accordance with
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:26.
L.
USED MOTOR OIL — Motor oil from motor vehicles, lawn mowers,
boats, etc., which has served its intended useful purpose.
M.
§ 090.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 090.01
001:216
ELECTRONIC WASTE — A computer central processing unit and associated
hardware including keyboards, modems, printers, scanners and fax
machines; a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube device, a flat panel display
or similar video display device with a screen that is greater than four inches
measured diagonally and that contains one or more circuit boards, including
a television, and cell phones.
INSTITUTION — An established organization or foundation dedicated to
public service or culture including, but not limited to, religious, educational,
health care, and governmental establishments.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any building or structure, or complex of
buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owner-occupied or
rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential purposes
(see N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a) and shall include hotels, motels, or other guest
LEAD-ACID BATTERIES — Storage batteries in which the electrodes
are grids of lead containing lead oxides that change in composition
during charging and discharging, and the electrolyte is dilute sulfuric
acid. These include starting batteries such as car batteries that deliver
a short burst of high power to start the engine. In addition, they may
include deep cell batteries found on boats or campers used to power
accessories like trolling motors, winches or lights.
N.
HAZARDOUS DRY CELL BATTERIES — Rechargeable batteries, such
as nickel-cadmium, nickel-iron, nickel metal hydride, lithium ion, small
sealed lead acid, etc. These are often used as substitutes for nonrechargeable
batteries in standard sizes such as AAA, AA, C, D and 9V.
Rechargeable batteries are commonly found in cordless tools, cellular
and cordless phones, laptop computers, cameras, remote controls, toys,
etc. Also included in this definition are non-rechargeable batteries that
are hazardous as defined by the Resource Conservation Recovery Act
("RCRA"), regardless of the RCRA exclusion of household waste from
the definition of hazardous waste pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 261.4(b). Nonrechargeable,
hazardous batteries include older alkaline and carbon
zinc batteries as well as silver oxide, mercury and magnesium buttontype
batteries, etc. It should be noted that domestically manufactured
alkaline and carbon zinc non-rechargeable batteries made after circa
1994 eliminated mercury content to the point that they should not
be considered RCRA hazardous and therefore are not included in this
material category.
O.
METAL APPLIANCES — Appliances composed predominantly of metal,
and may include stoves, washing machines and dryers, for example,
if the appliance is predominantly metal. Also included are air
conditioners, refrigerators and dehumidifiers if they are predominantly
metal. If these appliances on the latter list contain refrigerants that
are prohibited by the Clean Air Act from being knowingly vented, the
refrigerant must be recovered accordingly.
P.
WHOLE TIRES — Tires that are whole, not chipped into small pieces.
Tires are allowed to be recycled and/or incinerated for energy recovery.
Q.
§ 090.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 090.01
001:217
houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are defined
under Subsection (j) of Section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Law,"
P.L. 1967, c. 76 (N.J.S.A. 55:13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The person or persons
appointed by the municipal governing body to fulfill the requirements of
the Morris County Solid Waste Management Plan and the New Jersey
Statewide Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling Act and those rules
and regulations promulgated therefor.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING ENFORCEMENT COORDINATOR — The person
or persons named by the municipality who shall fulfill the responsibilities
with respect to recycling enforcement coordination detailed in the March
2007 Morris County Solid Waste Management Plan Amendment Section 8.6.
This person may be the same person designated as the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — All solid waste generated
at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments within the
boundaries of the Township of Pequannock which is not bulky waste or
construction and demolition debris.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials which would otherwise
become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or processed
and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
RESIDENT — Any person who owns, leases and/or occupies dwellings
within the Township of Pequannock, including those in multifamily
dwellings and/or single family developments.
SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge or any other waste material
with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing, excluding those materials
as defined as recyclable materials by this chapter.
SOURCE SEPARATION — The process by which recyclable materials are
separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof from solid
waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Recyclable materials
which are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive,
or other way, which is existing State, county, or municipal roadway, and
includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or
unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall be vegetative wastes to include fallen leaves, brush
(chippable, up to three inches in diameter) and grass clippings.
§ 090.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 090.02
001:218
§ 090.02. Recycling Coordinator.
On or before the effective date of this ordinance the Township Manager of
the Township of Pequannock will appoint one individual who shall serve as
recycling coordinator for the Township whose duties shall include, but not
be limited to, the development and administration of a recycling program
to conform to the New Jersey Statewide Mandatory Source Separation
and Recycling Act. The Recycling Coordinator shall serve at a salary as
established by the salary ordinance of the Township of Pequannock.
§ 090.03. Source separation required; exemption from source
separation requirements. [Amended 12-18-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-29]
A. Mandatory source separation: It shall be mandatory for all persons who
are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the Township of Pequannock, to separate
designated recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated
recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other
solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants of such
premises. Designated recyclable materials shall be placed separately at
the curb in a manner and on such days and times as may be hereinafter
established by regulations promulgated by the Township of
Pequannock.
B. Exemptions: Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the governing body of
a municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or
institutional premises within its municipal boundaries from the source
separation requirements of the ordinance which requires persons
generating municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to
source separate from the municipal solid waste stream, the specified
recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this section, a commercial or institutional
generator of solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the
municipal recycling coordinator on forms to be provided for this
purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the following
information: the name of the commercial or institutional entity; the
street address location and lot and block designation; the name, official
title and phone number of the person making application on behalf of
the commercial or institutional entity; the name, address, official
contact person and telephone number of the facility which provides the
service of recycling those designated recyclable materials, and a
certification that the designated recyclable materials will be recycled,
and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling service provider or
commercial/institutional generator shall provide written documentation
to the municipal recycling coordinator of the total number of tons
collected and recycled for each designated material.
§ 090.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 090.04
001:219
§ 090.04. Collection of designated recyclable materials. [Amended
9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-21; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-29]
The collection of recyclable material shall be in the manner prescribed as
follows:
A. Residents of single family units shall separate designated recyclables
from all other solid waste. Recyclable materials from residential units
shall be prepared in a manner as prescribed by the Township of
Pequannock.
Residential Developments (multi and single family) shall be responsible
for establishing recycling programs within their complex.
Notwithstanding the ability of the Township to collect or market certain
recycling materials, the residential development shall be responsible
for establishing recycling programs for the collection, transportation
and marketing of designated recyclable materials. Institutions and
Commercial Establishments shall source separate designated materials
for recycling. Notwithstanding the ability of the Township to collect or
market certain recycling materials, the institution shall be responsible
for establishing recycling programs for the collection, transportation
and marketing of designated recyclable materials. Documentation of
tonnage of materials recycled is to be submitted in accordance with
90.05 of this chapter.
B. All containers and brown paper bags containing recyclable materials
shall be placed, prior to collection, between the curb and the sidewalk,
or in the absence of curb and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to
constitute a danger, where such receptacles shall be readily accessible
to the collector without providing obstruction to pedestrians. The
owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all receptacles clean and
in safe handling condition. Receptacles or other items to be disposed of
shall be placed as noted above any time after 6:00 p.m. of the day
immediately preceding the day of collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m.
of the day of collection. After collection, any containers shall be
removed from the curbside by no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of
collection.
C. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be maintained in accordance with
the Health Code of the Township of Pequannock.
D. Yard Waste Collection. Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing
yard waste that is not containerized at the curb or along the street is
only allowed during the seven days prior to a scheduled and announced
collection, and shall not be placed closer than 10 feet from any storm
drain inlet. Placement of such yard waste at the curb or along the street
at any other time or in any other manner is a violation of this chapter. If
such placement of yard waste occurs, the party responsible for
placement of the yard waste must remove the yard waste from the
street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
§ 090.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 090.05
001:220
§ 090.05. Compliance requirements. [Added 12-18-2007 by Ord.
No. 2007-29]
§ 090.06. New developments. [Added 12-18-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-29]
New Developments of Multifamily Residential Units or Commercial,
Institutional, or Industrial Properties (Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and
13:1E-99.16c):
A. Residential Dwelling Compliance Requirements: The owner of any
property shall be responsible for compliance with this Ordinance. For
multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible for setting
up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection of
recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty
notices will be directed to the owner or management, in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and
every six months during their occupancy.
B. Nonresidential Establishment Compliance Requirements.
(1) All nonresidential generators, including commercial, industrial and
institutional establishments, of solid waste shall be required to
comply with the provisions of this Ordinance.
(2) The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables
hereunder shall be the responsibility of the commercial,
institutional or industrial property owner or their designee, unless
the municipality provides for the collection of designated
recyclable materials. All commercial, institutional or industrial
properties which provide outdoors litter receptacles and disposal
service for their contents shall also provide receptacles for
designated recyclable materials, for those materials commonly
deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall provide
for separate recycling service for their contents.
(3) All nonresidential facilities shall report on an annual basis to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be
prescribed, on recycling activities at their premises, including the
amount of recycled material, by material type, collected and
recycled and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
(4) All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code,
shall, in addition to compliance with all other recycling
requirements, be required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil
created in the processing of food or food products, and maintain
such records as may be prescribed, for inspection by any Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 090.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 090.06
001:221
§ 090.07. Documentation.
All commercial, institutional, multi - or single family developments which
are not serviced by municipal recycling collection systems must submit
documentation to the recycling coordinator. Documentation must include
the type of material recycled, date recycled, market receiving the recycled
material and total tonnage recycled of each material. Reports are due
according to the following schedule:
Reporting Period Due Date
January 1 - March 31 April 8
April 1 - June 30 July 8
July 1 - September 30 October 8
October 1 - December 31 January 8
The municipal recycling coordinator will compile all recycling
documentation and report annually to the Morris County Recycling
Coordinator.
A. Any application to the Planning Board of the Township of Pequannock,
for subdivision or site plan approval for the construction of multifamily
dwellings of three or more units, single family developments of 50 or
more units or any commercial, institutional, or industrial development
for the utilization of 1,000 square feet or more of land, must include a
recycling plan. This plan must contain, at a minimum, the following:
1) A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
2) Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the municipal recycling coordinator.
B. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Township of
Pequannock, the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial,
institutional, or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of collection
and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials, in those
instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
C. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Health Officer.
§ 090.06 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 090.08
001:222
§ 090.08. Collection prohibition; anti-scavenger clause. [Amended
12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-29]
Prohibition of the Collection of Solid Waste Mixed with Recyclable Materials
§ 090.09. Acceptance of the municipal solid waste goal. [Added
12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-29]
As set forth in N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13b(4)(c), the Township of Pequannock
accepts the goal of 50% recycling of municipal solid waste by 2015 and shall
monitor its level of recycling and solid waste disposal and shall strive to
achieve the recycling of 50% of the municipal solid waste generated within
its borders.
§ 090.10. Violation of rules. [Amended 12-18-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-29]
It shall be a violation of this ordinance to combine designated, unsoiled
recyclables with other solid waste. Failure to source separate materials for
recycling by residential, commercial or institutional units is a violation of
this chapter.
It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
contains visible signs of designated recyclable materials. It is also unlawful
for solid waste collectors to remove for disposal those bags or containers
of solid waste/recyclables which visibly display a warning notice, sticker
or some other device indicating that the load of solid waste contains
designated recyclable materials and therefore should not be removed for
disposal.
A. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of, designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unaspirated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary code.
C. Once placed in the location identified by this Ordinance, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this Ordinance, no person, other
than those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect,
remove, or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
D. Recycling material prepared and placed for collection by Township
residents is the property of the Township of Pequannock or its
authorized agent. It is a violation of this chapter for any person or firm
unauthorized by the Township of Pequannock to collect or pick up or
cause to be collected or picked up designated recyclable materials.
§ 090.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 090.10
001:223
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine not less than $25, nor more than $1,000.
Each day for which a violation of this Ordinance occurs shall be considered
a separate offence.
§ 090.11. Enforcement. [Amended 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-29]
The Health Department, Police Department, or Recycling Coordinator of
the Township of Pequannock is authorized to enforce the provisions of
this chapter to include the inspection of garbage set out for disposal in
order to determine whether recyclable materials are present in violation of
this chapter. An inspection may consist of sorting through containers and
opening of solid waste bags to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any
recyclable material.
§ 090.12. Interfering with persons performing duties under this
chapter.
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
Chapter 092
GRAFFITI
§ 092.01. Definitions. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-26]
For the purposes of this section, "graffiti" means any drawing, painting or
making of any mark or inscription on public or private real or personal
property without the prior written permission of the owner of the property.
§ 092.02. Graffiti prohibited. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-26]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, destroy or otherwise damage
private or public property without the owner's consent, by or through the
application of "graffiti."
§ 092.03. Property owner to remove graffiti. [Added 10-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-26]
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner of record of any property, whether
privately or publicly owned, to permit the application of or fail to
remove any graffiti from the property upon receipt of notice from the
Township to remove such graffiti.
B. The owner of record of the property shall be given written notice to
remove graffiti. The notice shall be delivered to the owner by certified
§ 090.10 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 092.03
001:224
§ 092.04. Violations. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-26]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000
or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days,
or by both such fine and imprisonment, and each violation of any of the
and regular mail. The order shall afford the owner the opportunity to
remove the graffiti within 90 days from the date that the notice is
sent, however, the New Jersey Department of Transportation shall be
afforded 120 days from the date a notice is sent to remove graffiti from
property owned by the department.
C. The notice to remove graffiti shall include a form to be utilized by the
property owner to inform the Township that the graffiti has been
removed. The form shall contain a provision stating that by affixing a
signature to the form, indicating that graffiti has been removed, the
owner is certifying that the facts set forth therein are true and that the
certification shall be considered as if made under oath and subject to
the same penalties as provided by law for perjury.
D. An owner who has been ordered to remove graffiti shall respond to the
Township by personal delivery or by certified mail:
1. Of any objection to the order, within 30 days of the date of the
order, or
2. Of notice that the graffiti has been removed, within 90 days of the
date of the order, or in the case of the Department of
Transportation, within 120 days of the date of the order.
E. An owner who objects to an order to remove graffiti must institute an
action challenging the order before a court of competent jurisdiction
within 60 days of the date of the order.
F. If a property owner does not undertake the removal of graffiti within 90
days of the date of the order, or in the case of the Department of
Transportation, within 120 days of the date of the order, unless an
action challenging the order to remove graffiti has been filed and is
pending, the owner is in violation of this section and the Township, at its
discretion, may remove the graffiti from that property and present the
property owner with a detailed itemization of the costs incurred by the
Township, by certified and regular mail, for reimbursement from the
property owner.
G. Whenever the Township undertakes the removal of graffiti from any
building, structure or other exposed surface, the governing body, in
addition to assessing the cost of removal as a municipal lien against the
premises, may enforce the payment of such assessment, together with
interest, as a debt of the owner of the property and may authorize the
institution of an action at law for the collection thereof. The Superior
Court shall have jurisdiction of any such action.
§ 092.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 092.04
001:225
provisions of this chapter and each day the same is violated shall be deemed
and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 100
LIBRARY
§ 100.01. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and designated as the "Library Property
Ordinance of the Township of Pequannock."
§ 100.02. Late return of property prohibited.
No person, corporation, agency or other association shall retain or fail
to return any book, periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, recording,
audio visual material or any other article borrowed from the Pequannock
Township Public Library after 30 days have elapsed from the date of posting
of a notice demanding return thereof. Such notice shall be addressed to
that individual borrowing such article at the last address furnished by
such individual to the Pequannock Township Public Library and shall be
forwarded by certified mail return receipt requested.
§ 100.03. Damage to library property prohibited.
No person, corporation, agency or other association shall cut, tear, deface,
disfigure, destroy or damage in any way any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, recording, audio visual material or any other article
which has been borrowed from, is owned by or is in the rightful custody of
the Pequannock Township Public Library.
§ 100.04. False information; illegal use of library card.
No person, corporation, agency or other association shall register or furnish
to the Pequannock Township Public Library a false or fictitious name or
address for the purpose of borrowing any book, periodical, pamphlet,
artistic reproduction, recording, audio visual material or any other article.
No person, corporation, agency or other association shall use without the
permission of the rightful owner any library card issued by the Pequannock
Township Public Library for the purpose of borrowing any book, periodical,
pamphlet, artistic reproduction, recording, audio visual material or other
article.
§ 100.05. Removal of materials restricted.
No person, corporation, agency or other association shall remove any book,
periodical, pamphlet, artistic reproduction, recording, audio visual material
or any other item from the Pequannock Township Public Library unless such
person, corporation, agency or association shall have first charged such
§ 092.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 100.05
001:226
item to the proper library card in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 100.06. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the main office of
the Pequannock Township Public Library as well as to all other branches
established within the Township of Pequannock.
§ 100.07. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable by the Director of the
Pequannock Township Public Library or by such other individual as may be
designated by the Board of Trustees of the Pequannock Township Library.
§ 100.08. Violations and penalties.
Any person, corporation, agency or other association violating any provision
of this chapter shall be subject, upon conviction thereof, to a fine not
to exceed $1,000 for each separate offense. Should any such person,
corporation, agency or other association be found to have violated 100.02
or 100.03 of this chapter, such person, corporation, agency or other
association shall be, upon conviction thereof, subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000 for each article detained or damaged. Continued failure to return
any such article detained or to pay to the Pequannock Township Public
Library its replacement cost or the replacement cost of any article damaged
for a period of 30 days subsequent to conviction shall constitute a separate
offense under this chapter.
Chapter 105
LITTER
§ 105.01. Definitions.
LITTER — Any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof
including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar, or can, or any top, cap, or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar, or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspaper,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic, or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — A container suitable for the depositing of litter
which is so designed to contain litter in the receptacle from the effects of
the weather and which is of sufficient size to contain all litter deposited
therein between normal periodic servicing.
§ 100.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105.01
001:227
PUBLIC PLACE AND PUBLIC BUILDING — Every public place or building
within the Township which is within the jurisdiction and control of the
Township and is or may be in general use by all citizens, and in which all
have an equal right of passage at will.
STREET — Includes highways, roads, avenues, boulevards, courts, public
lanes, alleys, sidewalks, foot paths and all other public highways for
vehicular or pedestrian travel.
§ 105.02. Littering prohibited.
No person shall throw, drop, discard, or otherwise put or place, or cause
to be thrown, put or placed, into, upon or within any street, public place,
parking lot or public building, litter of any nature or any substance, matter
or thing whatsoever whereby the safe, free or unobstructed use of the
same by the public may be in any way impeded or interfered with, or
whereby the same may be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of
the public. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the deposit of any such
material in any public or private receptacles approved by the Township
for such purpose. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed
to prohibit construction, repair or maintenance equipment, materials or
machinery from being utilized on such street, public place, parking lot or
public building.
§ 105.03. Litter receptacles; use; location.
Litter receptacles and their servicing are required at the following public
places which exist in the Township of Pequannock, including: sidewalks
used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned areas, such that at
a minimum there shall be no single linear quarter-mile without a receptacle;
buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, governmental
buildings, and railroad and bus stations; parks, drive-in restaurants; all
street vendor locations; self-service refreshment areas; construction sites;
gasoline service stations islands; shopping centers; parking lots;
campgrounds and trailer parks; marinas, boat moorage and fueling stations;
boat launching areas; public and private piers operated for public use;
beaches and bathing areas; and at special events to which the public is
invited, including sporting events, carnivals, circuses, and festivals. The
proprietors of these places or the sponsors of these events shall be
responsible for providing and serving the receptacles such that adequate
containerization is available.
§ 105.04. Illegal dumping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk vehicle or parts thereof, rubber tires, appliances,
furniture, or private property, except by written consent of the owner of said
property, in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid
waste storage or disposal.
§ 105.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 105.05
001:228
§ 105.05. Storage of household solid waste.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
storage of any household waste, including household appliances, furniture,
and mattresses, in areas zoned residential, except; in a fully enclosed
structure, during days designated for the collection of bulky items, or away
from public view such that the storage of such items is in such a manner so
as not to constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 105.06. Storage of tires.
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to open store or
permit the open storage of tires in areas zoned residential, unless such tire
or tires are stored in such a manner that there does not exist the potential
for the breeding of mosquitoes.
§ 105.07. Uncovered vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
within the Township, on any highway, street, alley or other public place,
unless such vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent any of its contents
from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom; nor shall
any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the Township, the
wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit on any street, alley or other
public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any
kind. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects have
fallen or escaped which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle, or
otherwise endanger travelers or public property shall immediately cause
the public property to be cleaned of all glass or objects and shall pay the
costs thereof.
§ 105.08. Construction sites.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during, or after completion of any construction or demolition project. It
shall be the duty of the owner, agent, or contractor in charge of a
construction site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or
non-flyable debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas, and
to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a
frequency as to prevent spillage of refuse.
§ 105.09. Open or overflowing waste disposal bins.
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit or maintain open or overflowing solid waste containers on his or her
property.
§ 105.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105.10
001:229
§ 105.10. Commercial establishments and residences.
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept sidewalks, alleyways,
backyards, courts and alleys free from litter and other offensive material.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin
or other public place any accumulation of litter from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. All sweepings shall be collected and properly
containerized for disposal.
§ 105.11. Vehicles; inoperable; abandoned or unlicensed.
§ 105.12. Interference with public official.
No person shall prevent or interfere with any employee of the Department
of Public Works or any municipally authorized person in the sweeping
or cleaning of any street or in the removal of sweeping ashes, garbage,
rubbish, snow, ice or other refuse material.
§ 105.13. Unsolicited materials.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping on
streets, vacant lots, residential lawns or on any premises located within
the Township except within a fully enclosed structure, any motor
vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer:
(1) Which is wholly unfit without rebuilding or reconditioning for use
for highway transportation; or,
(2) Which has been discarded for use as a motor vehicle, trailer or
semi-trailer; or
(3) Which does not display a current valid state license; or
(4) Which is wrecked, disassembled or partially disassembled.
B. This section shall not apply if it is proven by the owner that the vehicle
in question is being actively reconditioned, provided that:
(1) Only one vehicle may be reconditioned outside of an enclosed
structure at any given time on property, and;
(2) Vehicle body parts and equipment necessary for the reconditioning
of said vehicle are stored in an enclosed structure, and;
(3) The reconditioning is performed in such a manner so as not to
create an eyesore or public nuisance, and;
(4) The vehicle is covered at all times when it is not being
reconditioned.
A. It shall be unlawful for any firm or corporation to cause the delivery or
deposit of any unsolicited newspapers, shoppers, circulars, leaflets,
§ 105.10 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 105.13
001:230
Chapter 107
(RESERVED)
Chapter 109
MOTELS
§ 109.01. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of conducting a motel without first
having applied for and obtained a license from the Township.
§ 109.03. License application.
Each applicant for a license under this chapter shall make written
application to the Director of Administration, setting forth:
flyers and other like printed matter including any personal property to
or upon private premises within the Township of Pequannock except
in accordance with the terms hereof. For the purposes of this section
"unsolicited" shall mean the printed matter or other personal property
referred to that has not been ordered, subscribed or requested by the
recipient.
B. The delivery of any personal property, other than pursuant to the
regulations set forth for printed material, on private property is
prohibited.
C. There shall be no intentional delivery whatsoever of any such
unsolicited printed matter to premises after the owner or tenant of said
premises has notified the publisher or the delivery person to cease
further delivery of the same, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
at the address so indicated, that such delivery shall cease or be
suspended for a stated period of time.
A. The full name, residence and post office address of the applicant.
B. The exact location of the proposed licensed premises, giving the street
address, block and lot number, as shown on the Tax Assessment Map of
the Township, and the exact dimensions of the lands upon which the
business is to be conducted.
C. A description of the buildings, structures and accommodations upon
such lands, including a statement of the number of housing or lodging
units, the maximum number of persons who can be accommodated at
any given time, a description of the character of such buildings or
structures as to size, type of construction and whether or not the same
are fireproof and a description of automobile parking space and
facilities.
§ 105.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109.03
001:231
§ 109.04. Compliance with other standards required.
It shall be a prerequisite to the issuance of a license under this chapter that
the applicant shall have complied with all pertinent provisions of this Code
and other Township regulations and ordinances, including, but not limited
to the Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance and building provisions.
Approval of the application shall also be subject to inspection and approval
by the Health Officer and the Police Department.
§ 109.05. Issuance of licenses to certain persons restricted.
No license required by this chapter shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, nor shall any such
license be issued to any corporation in which any stockholder holding 10%
or more of any of the stock thereof or any director or officer thereof shall
have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
§ 109.06. License fees; minimum number of units.
The annual fee for a license under this chapter shall be $1,500 for the first
48 housing units, plus $25 for each additional unit in excess of 48 housing
units.
§ 109.07. Term of license; proration of fees.
A license issued under this chapter shall be for a maximum term of one
calendar year, commencing January 1 or the date of issuance and expiring
December 31, and where issued after January 1 of any year, shall be
prorated accordingly. In the case of new construction, a license shall be
apportioned from the date of the occupancy permit, and in no case later
than six months after the date the building permit.
D. The name and address of the owner of such lands and buildings.
E. A detailed description of the register or system used for the registration
of persons to whom accommodations are extended.
F. Whether any person constituting the individual or partnership applicant
or whether the corporate applicant or any stockholder holding 10% or
more of the stock thereof or any director or officer thereof, has ever
been convicted of any crime, and if so the details thereof, including,
with respect to each conviction, the name of the person convicted, the
date thereof, the nature of the crime, the court in which the conviction
was entered and the punishment imposed.
G. In the case of corporate applicants, the names and residences of all
stockholders holding 10% or more of any stock of the corporation, the
names and residences of all members of the Board of directors of the
corporation and the names and residences of all officers of the
corporation and the office held by each.
§ 109.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 109.08
001:232
§ 109.08. Transfers.
Application for transfer of license shall be made in writing to the Director
of Administration. Applicants shall be charged a transfer fee of 10% of the
annual license fee applicable to the particular premises. Such 10% fee shall
be retained by the Township Council, whether the transfer is granted or not.
§ 109.09. Suspension or revocation of license.
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of this chapter, or for any conviction of any licensee or of any
stockholder holding 10% or more of the stock of any corporate licensee, or
director or officer thereof, of a crime involving moral turpitude, after due
notice of the charges and a hearing by the Township Council, at which the
licensee shall be afforded full opportunity to be heard.
§ 109.10. Official register.
Each licensee under this chapter shall at all times cause to be maintained
on the licensed premises a register. Each register shall be preserved for a
period of one calendar year after last entry.
§ 109.11. Limitation on occupancy of units.
No housing unit shall be rented more than once in any twelve-hour period.
§ 109.12. Right of entry for inspection.
The Health Officer shall be admitted by the licensee at any time for the
purpose of inspecting the licensed premises.
Chapter 115
MUNICIPAL EQUIPMENT AND PROPERTY
§ 115.01. Prohibitions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, disturb, damage or
destroy in any manner, any fire alarm or fire apparatus, police apparatus
or equipment, flood control devices, public works apparatus and devices,
recreational equipment or any municipal buildings, public property,
equipment, apparatus or devices used by the Township in connection with
municipal regulation, police enforcement, public welfare, public health or
control.
Chapter 116
NEWSRACKS
§ 109.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116.01
001:233
§ 116.01. Definitions. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-23]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MODULAR NEWSRACK BOX ASSEMBLY (MNBA) — A unit that has
assembled together two or more newsrack boxes in a housing that is
supported by one or more pedestals. The modular newsrack box assembly is
then permanently attached to a sidewalk or concrete pad by bolts or other
such fasteners. Newspapers are distributed by placing such newspapers in
the various newsrack boxes by various newspaper vendors. Two or more
newspaper vendors may distribute newspapers from a modular newsrack
box assembly. of a similar
NEWSPAPER VENDOR — Any person or other legal entity distributing
publications by the use of a newsrack box in the Township of Pequannock.
NEWSRACK BOX or NEWSRACK — A rectangular cube-type box that has
a windowed door on its front for the purposes of viewing inside the cubeshaped
box and also to gain access to the box. Newspapers or other news
periodicals are placed in the newsrack box for the purposes of distribution.
One gains access to the interior of the newsrack box by opening the front
widowed door. The newsrack box may be, but need not be, accessed by
inserting coined money to unlock the access door.
§ 116.02. Intent and purpose. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-23]
A. Findings.
(1) The uncontrolled placement of newsracks in public rights-of-way
and semipublic rights-of-way presents an inconvenience and
danger to the safety and welfare of persons using such rights-ofway,
including pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles
and buildings, and persons performing essential utility, traffic
control and emergency services.
(2) Newsracks so located as to cause an inconvenience or danger to
persons using public rights-of-way and semipublic rights-of-way,
and unsightly newsracks located therein, constitute public
nuisances.
(3) These factors constitute an unreasonable interference with and
obstruction of the use of public rights-of-way and semipublic rightsof-
way, are injurious to health, offensive to the senses, and
constitute such an obstruction of the free use of property as to
interfere in the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by the
entire community.
(4) The Township Council recognizes, however, that the use of such
rights-of-way is so historically associated with the sale and
distribution of newspapers and publications that access to the
areas for such purposes should not be absolutely denied. The
§ 116.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 116.02
001:234
§ 116.03. General prohibition. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-23]
No person shall install, use or maintain any newsrack within the Township
of Pequannock except as specifically provided in this chapter.
§ 116.04. Only modular newsrack box assemblies (MNBA)
permitted. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-23; 7-26-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-24]
Township Council further finds that these strong and competing
interests require a reasonable accommodation which can only be
satisfactorily achieved through the means of this chapter which is
designed to accommodate such interests regulating the time, place
and manner of using such newsracks.
B. Purpose. The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter continued and
enacted are in pursuance of securing and promoting the general
welfare of persons in the Township in their use of public rights-of-way
and semipublic rights-of-way through the regulation of placement,
appearance, number, size, and servicing of newsracks on such rights-ofway
so as to:
(1) Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience;
(2) Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic including ingress to, or egress from, any place of
business or from the street to the sidewalk;
(3) Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of
sidewalks, poles, traffic signs and signals, hydrants, mailboxes, and
similar appurtenances, and access to locations used for public
transportation purposes;
(4) Reduce visual blight on the public rights-of-way and semipublic
rights-of-way, protect the aesthetics and value of surrounding
properties, and protect the quiet of residential areas; and
(5) Reduce exposure of the Township to personal injury or property
damage claims and litigation.
A. In the event that more than one newspaper desires to place a vending
machine newsrack within the Township of Pequannock (hereinafter
"Pequannock"), only MNBA units shall be permitted to be installed on
the public sidewalks, public property, and on the exterior of any
building on private property in Pequannock within the areas identified
in Section 116.08B. No other newsrack boxes, MNBA units, or other
such newspaper vending units shall be permitted to be placed
anywhere in Pequannock, except as is provided in this chapter. If only
one newspaper desires to place a vending machine on public property it
may place a single newsrack box within the areas identified in Section
116.08B.
§ 116.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116.04
001:235
B. The newspaper vendor shall be obligated to purchase at its expense its
own newsrack boxes and also to share in the cost of the purchase of the
MNBA unit with other newspaper vendors sharing the MNBA unit in
question. In the event Pequannock purchases either the newsrack box
and/or the MNBA unit for and on behalf of a newspaper vendor or
vendors, such newspaper vendor or vendors shall reimburse
Pequannock its out-of-pocket expense for such purchases, wherein each
vendor shall pay its proportionate share of such out-of-pocket expenses.
Pequannock shall not receive any additional money above and beyond
that which it expended for the newsrack boxes and/or the MNBA unit.
Pequannock prefers that the newspaper vendors purchase the
newsrack boxes and the MNBA units.
C. Maintenance, repair, and service of each newsrack box and MNBA unit
shall be the obligation of the newspaper vendors respectively. In the
event the Township of Pequannock expends any moneys for such, the
Township of Pequannock shall be reimbursed its expenditures by the
newspaper vendors who were obligated to make such expenditures.
Prior to Pequannock performing any maintenance, repairs or service to
the newsrack boxes and/or MNBA units, Pequannock will take
reasonable steps and efforts to cause the responsible newspaper
vendors to perform such maintenance, repair and/or service.
D. The style, color, size, material, and design of the newsrack box and the
MNBA unit, as well as its location, shall be determined by Pequannock.
E. The installation locations of the MBNA units on the public property or
public sidewalks within Pequannock shall be selected by Pequannock as
described in more detail herein. The newspaper vendors shall be
obligated to arrange for the installation work for each MNBA unit
installed on the public sidewalks or public property, at the newspaper
vendor's own expense.
F. The MNBA units can accommodate from two to six single newsrack
boxes. There is no limit on the reasonable number of MNBA units that
can be located in the Township of Pequannock in compliance with this
chapter.
G. There is no limit to the reasonable number of newsrack boxes that a
particular newspaper vendor can utilize, except that a newspaper
vendor is permitted to have only one newsrack box per MNBA unit
whenever other newspaper vendors wish to utilize a newsrack box in
such MNBA unit. For the purposes of this chapter, a double newsrack
box is considered as one newsrack box.
H. There are no time restrictions as to when the public may access the
newsracks to obtain newspapers; that is, such access may occur 24
hours per day, seven days per week, since the MNBA's are not located
in the residential districts.
I. Any other type of individual freestanding newspaper vending machines,
boxes, newsracks, etc., whether coin-operated or otherwise, are
§ 116.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 116.04
001:236
§ 116.05. Location of newsracks. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-23]
prohibited in the Township of Pequannock. Any such prohibited units
existing after the adoption of this chapter shall be removed by the
particular owner of such unit no later than 90 days after the effective
date of this chapter or at an earlier date when such newspaper vendor
has been afforded the opportunity of replacement distribution by
utilization of a newsrack box in an MNBA unit or units from which to
distribute newspapers in accordance with this chapter. The failure of an
owner to remove a prohibited unit after the expiration of the ninety-day
period will result in the Township removing the unit. The Township will
store the unit and give the owner of the unit notice that the unit has
been removed and brought to storage. The owner shall have a period
of 10 days for to retrieve the unit and reimburse the Township for any
expenses in connection with the removal and storage of the unit. In the
event the owner does not retrieve the unit and reimburse the Township,
the unit will be disposed of by the Township.
J. After the adoption of this chapter, newspaper vendors shall take timely
action to comply with the terms of this chapter. A newspaper vendor
may seek, in writing, an extension of the ninety-day removal time limit,
for just cause, stating the newspaper vendor's reasons why such
extension should be granted; provided that such newspaper vendor had
taken timely action to comply with this chapter and its reasons for
noncompliance are due to reasons other than the actions or inactions of
the newspaper vendor requesting the extension Pequannock will not
unreasonably deny such requests for an extension.
A. A newspaper vendor desiring a general location for a newsrack box
within a MNBA unit shall submit such request in writing to Pequannock
as required in this chapter. Pequannock shall make available a location
or locations to each newspaper vendor who requests a location or
locations. Pequannock will seek to identify a location as close as
practicable to that which had been requested by the newspaper vendor,
taking into account the criteria of this chapter. In the event the
Township of Pequannock is unable to grant the vendor's request for a
specific location, the Township of Pequannock will identify its reasons
for such a decision based on the criteria of this chapter and in such
event the Township of Pequannock will identify an alternative location
or locations that is available to the applying newspaper vendor. In no
event shall the newspaper vendor be denied the right to distribute its
papers. The newspaper vendor's right to distribute shall not be
abridged by Pequannock in that the Township of Pequannock shall
make available a location or locations to each newspaper vendor who
requests a location or locations.
B. Pequannock, in its discretion, shall determine the specific location of
each MNBA unit. The determination of the place and manner of
installation of such MNBA unit shall be made by the Township of
§ 116.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116.05
001:237
§ 116.06. Location and installation criteria. [Added 10-24-2006 by
Ord. No. 2006-23]
The MNBA units located on public sidewalks, public property, and on the
exterior of any building on private property shall be installed in accordance
with the following criteria:
§ 116.07. Request for locations. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-23]
Pequannock in its discretion wherein its discretion shall not be
exercised unreasonably, capriciously or arbitrarily, and shall be made in
accordance with the criteria of this chapter, as governed by federal and
state law.
A. No MNBA unit shall be installed wherein it impedes the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
B. No MNBA unit shall be installed wherein it endangers the public safety
of persons or property.
C. No MNBA unit shall be installed where it interferes with the ingress
and egress from any residence or place of business.
D. No MNBA unit shall be located wherein its location interferes with the
use of traffic signs, traffic signals, fire hydrants, utility poles, mailboxes,
and other such police, fire, and/or traffic control devices.
E. The content of the newspaper publication shall not be considered in
determining the manner of and place of location of the MNBA unit.
F. The newspaper vendor does not need a license, permit or other such
approval to distribute its newspaper in Pequannock.
G. The MNBA unit shall be placed in a location in keeping with the
character and zoning in Pequannock so as to minimize the visual
appearance and clutter of newsracks, but not at the expense of the
newspaper vendor's First Amendment right to distribute its newspaper.
H. No MNBA unit shall be installed above or within a proximity to interfere
with the use, maintenance, and/or repair of any gas line, water line,
sewer line or other such utility line.
I. No MNBA unit shall be located so as to impede the lawful use of any
buildings or access thereto.
J. No MNBA unit shall be located so as to interfere with the growth of any
municipally owned shade trees, plants, and shrubs existing in the rightof-
way sidewalk area.
K. No MNBA unit shall be located to interfere with the use of municipally
installed public benches and seating.
§ 116.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 116.07
001:238
A. A newspaper vendor seeking to distribute its newspapers in
Pequannock, in accordance with this chapter, shall make a request in
writing to the Township of Pequannock for a location or locations within
Pequannock.
B. The newspaper vendor is to identify the location by designating a
corner of a particular intersection and/or by reciting dimensions from
some fixed identifiable structure or object, and/or by some other
method of identifying the location so as to clearly inform Pequannock of
the location requested.
C. Pequannock shall review the request and shall make the final
determination as to the location of the MNBA unit. Pequannock must
take into account the requests of other newspaper vendors, in an effort
to coordinate the location of the MNBA units with the requests of all
newspaper vendors, in an effort to establish the necessary number of
two or more newsrack boxes in MNBA units. In the event several
newspaper vendors select a particular intersection and/or location and
identify different corners and/or locations, Pequannock will consolidate
those requests into the MNBA unit and identify the specific location
where the MNBA should be placed in accordance with the criteria in
this chapter.
D. Pequannock shall inform the newspaper vendor no later than 20
business days of receipt of its request as to the location of the MNBA
unit wherein such vendor may place its papers for distribution from a
newsrack box. In the event Pequannock selects an alternative location
or locations to the one requested by the vendor, Pequannock will recite
its reasons as to why the alternate location or locations in question had
been selected.
E. A newspaper vendor is permitted to make as many requests as is
reasonably necessary for the distribution of its newspapers in the
Township of Pequannock. There is no limitation on the reasonable
number of requests or on the reasonable number of locations that a
particular newspaper vendor may utilize in accordance with this
chapter.
F. At the adoption of this chapter, freestanding newsracks exist at various
locations in the Township of Pequannock. In the event one or more of
such locations are requested by newspaper vendors who presently have
a freestanding newsrack at such locations, such newspaper vendor's
request shall receive preference as to a newsrack box in an MNBA unit
at such location or the alternative to such location.
G. The earliest received location request shall have a preference over
subsequent requests for the same location or alternate to that location.
H. In the event the newspaper vendor disagrees with Pequannock's
decision concerning its request for a location or any other decision
related to this chapter, such newspaper vendor may request to
Pequannock, in writing, a reconsideration of Pequannock's decision,
§ 116.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116.07
001:239
§ 116.08. Selected locations. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-23]
§ 116.09. Violations and penalties. [Added 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-23]
Chapter 117
NOISE
§ 117.01. Definitions. [Added 7-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14]
The following words and terms, when used in this ordinance, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this ordinance have the same meaning as those defined in
N.J.A.C. 7:29.
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, including demolition of buildings or structures.
stating its position concerning its request for reconsideration.
Pequannock shall respond to such requests for reconsideration within
30 days of its receipt by Pequannock.
A. Pequannock has selected the general locations recited herein below as
locations for the MNBA units to be installed in accordance with this
chapter. The below listed locations are not exhaustive or exclusive.
Others may be added by the Township of Pequannock on its own and/or
at the request of newspaper vendors by resolution without the need to
amend this chapter.
B. The following locations as shown on the plan entitled "Newsrack
Vending Machine Program Map" are permissible general locations for
the installation of MNBA units, wherein the specific location shall be
determined by Pequannock in accordance with this chapter:
(1) Newark Pompton Turnpike near the intersection with Poplar
Avenue;
(2) Newark Pompton Turnpike near the Post Office; and
(3) Newark Pompton Turnpike between DeMott and New Read Streets.
A. Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter, shall be
notified in writing of such violation and shall have 15 days from the date
of the notice to correct the violation.
B. Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter and
continues such violation for more than 15 days after having received
the above notice shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more
than $250; each day may be considered a separate offense.
§ 116.07 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 117.01
001:240
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, destruction or removal of buildings,
structures, or roadways.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work or action necessary to deliver essential
public services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electricity,
telephone, sewer facilities, or public transportation facilities, removing
fallen trees on public rights-of-way, dredging navigational waterways, or
abating life-threatening conditions.
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Either a single pressure peak or a single burst
(multiple pressure peaks) that has a duration of less than one second.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled other than by human or
animal power on land.
MUFFLER — A properly functioning sound dissipative device or system for
abating the sound of escaping gasses on equipment where such a device is
part of the normal configuration of the equipment.
MULTI-DWELLING UNIT BUILDING — Any building comprising two or
more dwelling units, including, but not limited to, apartments,
condominiums, co-ops, multiple-family houses, townhouses, and attached
residences.
MULTI-USE PROPERTY — Any distinct parcel of land that is used for more
than one category of activity. Examples include, but are not limited to:
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER — An employee of: (1) a local, county or
regional health agency which is certified pursuant to the County
Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform noise
enforcement activities; or (2) a municipality with a Department approved
noise control ordinance and the employee has received noise enforcement
training and is currently certified in noise enforcement. The employee must
be acting within his or her designated jurisdiction and must be authorized
to issue a summons in order to be considered a noise control officer.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound that can be detected by a person using
his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source
under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification
or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the
music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The noise control officer
A commercial, residential, industrial or public service property having
boilers, incinerators, elevators, automatic garage doors, air
conditioners, laundry rooms, utility provisions, or health and
recreational facilities, or other similar devices or areas, either in the
interior or on the exterior of the building, which may be a source of
elevated sound levels at another category on the same distinct parcel
of land; or
A.
A building which is both commercial (usually on the ground floor) and
residential property located above, behind, below or adjacent.
B.
§ 117.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117.01
001:241
need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the
song.
PRIVATE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a nongovernmental
entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway,
sidewalk, alley or easement that is owned, leased, or controlled by a nongovernmental
entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon that are owned,
leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY LINE — Either (a) the imaginary line including its vertical
extension that separates one parcel of real property from another; (b) the
vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit that is part of a multidwelling
unit building; or (c) on a multi-use property, the interface between
the two portions of the property on which different categories of activity
are being performed (e.g., if the multi-use property is a building which is
residential upstairs and commercial downstairs, then the real property line
would be the interface between the residential area and the commercial
area).
WEEKDAY — Any day that is not a federal holiday, and beginning on Monday
at 7:00 a.m. and ending the following Friday at 6:00 p.m.
WEEKENDS — Beginning on Friday at 6:00 p.m. and ending on the
following Monday at 7:00 a.m.
§ 117.02. Applicability. [Added 7-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14]
A. This ordinance applies to sound from the following property categories:
1. Industrial facilities;
2. Commercial facilities;
3. Public service facilities;
4. Community service facilities;
5. Residential properties;
6. Multi-use properties;
7. Public and private rights-of-way;
8. Public spaces; and
9. Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
B. This ordinance applies to sound received at the following property
categories:
1. Commercial facilities;
§ 117.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 117.02
001:242
§ 117.03. Noise control officers. [Added 7-28-1998 by Ord. No.
98-14]
2. Public service facilities;
3. Community service facilities;
4. Residential properties;
5. Multi-use properties; and
6. Multi-dwelling unit buildings.
C. Sound from stationary emergency signaling devices shall be regulated
in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.3, except that the testing of the
electromechanical functioning of a stationary emergency signaling
device shall not meet or exceed 10 seconds.
A. The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by noise control
officers. A person shall be qualified to be a noise control officer if the
person meets the criteria set forth in the definition above and
completes, at a frequency specified by the Department in N.J.A.C.
7:29-2.11, a noise certification and recertification course which are
offered by the Department of Environmental Sciences of Cook College,
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey and any other noise
certification or recertification course which is offered by an accredited
university and approved by the Department.
B. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:29-2, except that interior sound
level measurements shall also conform with the procedures set forth in
Section 117.04B and C of this ordinance and with the definition of "real
property line" as contained herein.
C. Noise control officers shall have the power to:
1. Coordinate the noise control activities of all departments in the
Township of Pequannock and cooperate with all other public bodies
and agencies to the extent practicable;
2. Review the actions of the Township of Pequannock and advise of
the effect, if any, of such actions on noise control;
3. Review public and private projects, subject to mandatory review or
approval by other departments or boards, for compliance with this
ordinance; and
4. Investigate and pursue possible violations of this ordinance for
sound levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth in
Tables I and II, when measured at a receiving property located
within the designated jurisdiction of the noise control officer, in
accordance with Section 117.06 below.
§ 117.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117.03
001:243
§ 117.04. Maximum permissible sound levels. [Added 7-28-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-14]
5. Cooperate with noise control officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances.
A. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on an source property listed in Section 117.02A above
in such a manner as to create a sound level that equals or exceeds the
sound level limits set forth in Tables I and II when measured at or within
the real property line of any of the receiving properties listed in Tables I
and II, except as specified in Subsection B below.
B. When measuring total sound or residual sound within a multi-use
property, or within a residential unit when the property line between it
and the source property is a common wall, all exterior doors and
windows shall be closed and the measurements shall be taken in the
center of the room most affected by the noise. Residual sound shall be
measured in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.9(b)2. When measuring
total sound or residual sound, all sound sources within the dwelling unit
must be shut off (e.g., television, stereo). Measurements shall not be
taken in areas which receive only casual use such as hallways, closets
and bathrooms.
C. Indoor measurements shall only be taken if the sound source is on or
within the same property as the receiving property, as in the case of a
multi-use property (e.g., sound generated within a commercial unit of a
multi-use property building and received within a residential unit of the
same building) or multi-dwelling unit building. In addition, indoor
measurements shall be taken if the property line between the receiving
property and the source property is a common wall, such as in a multidwelling
unit building. The allowable sound level standards for indoors
are as shown in Tables I and II.
D. Impulsive sound. Impulsive sound shall not equal or exceed 80 decibels
at all times.
(1) Table I. Maximum Permissible A-Weighted Sound Levels.
(a) No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of
any source of sound on any source property listed in Section
117.02A above in such a manner as to create a sound level that
equals or exceeds the sound levels listed below.
[1] Outdoors.
§ 117.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 117.04
001:244
Receiving Property
Category
Residential property, or residential
portion of a multi-use property
Commercial
facility, public
service facility,
nonresidential
portion of a multiuse
property, or
community service
facility
Time
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. 24 hours
Maximum A-Weighted
sound level standard, dB
65 50 65
[2] Indoors.
Receiving Property
Category
Residential property, or residential
portion of a multi-use property
Commercial
facility,* or
nonresidential
portion of a multiuse
property
Time
7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. 24 hours
Maximum A-weighted
sound level standard,
dB
55 40 55
* In those instances when a commercial facility shares a common wall/ceiling/floor with
another commercial facility that is producing the sound.
(2) Table II. Maximum Permissible Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels
in Decibels.
(a) No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of
any source of sound on any source property listed in Section
117.02A above in such a manner as to create a sound pressure
level that equals or exceeds the sound levels listed below in
one or more octave bands.
(b) When octave measurements are made, the sound from the
source must be constant in level and character. If octave band
sound pressure level variations exceed plus or minus 2 dB in
the bands containing the principal source frequencies,
discontinue the measurement.
§ 117.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117.04
001:245
§ 117.05. Restricted uses and activities. [Added 7-28-1998 by Ord.
No. 98-14; 12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-35; 7-22-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-21]
Receiving
Property
Residential property, or
residential portion of a
multi-use property
OUTDOORS
Residential property, or
residential portion of a
multi-use property
INDOORS
Commercial
facility,
public
service
facility,
nonresidential
portion of a
multi-use
property, or
community
service
facility
OUTDOORS
Commercial
facility*, or
nonresidential
portion of a
multi-use
property
INDOORS
Octave
Band
Center
Frequency,
Hz
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level, dB
Octave Band Sound
Pressure Level, dB
Octave
Band Sound
Pressure
Level, dB
Octave Band
Sound
Pressure
Level, dB
Time
7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m.
to 7:00 a.m.
7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
10:00 p.m.
to 7:00 a.m. 24 hours 24 hours
31.5 96 86 86 76 96 86
63 82 71 72 61 82 72
125 74 61 64 51 74 64
250 67 53 57 43 67 57
500 63 48 53 38 63 53
1,000 60 45 50 35 60 50
2,000 57 42 47 32 57 47
4,000 55 40 45 30 55 45
8,000 53 38 43 28 53 43
* In those instances when a commercial facility shares a common wall/ceiling/floor with another
commercial facility that is producing the sound.
A. Applicability; exemptions.
1. Except as provided in Subsection B below, the provisions of this
ordinance shall not apply to the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C.
7:29-1.4.
§ 117.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 117.05
001:246
2. Construction and demolition activities are exempt from the sound
level limits set forth in Tables I and II, except as provided for in
Subsection B below.
3. Construction activities on projects performed under the direction
of Federal, State, or Local public entities are exempt from the
sound level limits set forth in Tables I and II provided that the
specifications for such projects set an applicable sound level
limitation.
B. Notwithstanding the provisions of Tables I and II, the following
standards shall apply to the activities or sources of sound set forth
below:
1. Commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment, excluding emergency work, shall not be
operated on a residential property or within 250 feet of a
residential property line when operated on commercial or
industrial property, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on
weekends or federal holidays, unless such activities can meet the
limits set forth in Tables I and II. In addition, commercial or
industrial power tools and landscaping and yard maintenance
equipment, excluding emergency work, utilized on commercial or
industrial property shall meet the limits set forth in Tables I and II
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. All motorized
equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler.
At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply
to commercial or industrial power tools and landscaping and yard
maintenance equipment;
2. Construction and demolition activity, excluding emergency work,
shall not be performed between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
on weekends and federal holidays, unless such activities can meet
the limits set forth in Tables I and II. All motorized equipment used
in construction and demolition activity shall be operated with a
muffler. At all other times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do
not apply to construction and demolition activities;
3. Motorized snow blowers, snow throwers, and lawn equipment with
attached snow plows shall be operated at all times with a muffler.
At all times, the limits set forth in Tables I and II do not apply;
4. An exterior burglar alarm of a building or motor vehicle must be
activated in such a manner that the burglar alarm terminates its
operation within five minutes for continuous airborne sound and 15
minutes for impulsive sound after it has been activated. At all
times, the limits set forth at Tables I and II do not apply;
5. Personal or commercial vehicular music amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated in such a manner
§ 117.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117.05
001:247
§ 117.06. Enforcement. [Added 7-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-14;
12-26-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-35]
Chapter 123
PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE
that it is plainly audible at a residential property line between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.;
6. Personal vehicular music amplification equipment shall not be
operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet in any direction from the operator between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.;
7. Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a public space or
public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet in any direction from the operator between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m., sound from such equipment shall not be plainly
audible by any person other than the operator.
8. Self-contained, portable, hand-held music or sound amplification or
reproduction equipment shall not be operated on a residential
property in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of
50 feet in any direction from the property line between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. sound from such equipment shall not be plainly audible
beyond the residential property line.
A. Violation of any provision of this ordinance shall be cause for an
enforcement document to be issued to the violator by the noise control
officer according to procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.6. or, in the
case of prohibited acts specified in Section 117.05, by any sworn police
officer. The recipient of an enforcement document shall be entitled to a
hearing in municipal court having jurisdiction to contest such action.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be subject
to a civil penalty for each offense of not more than $3,000. If the
violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall
constitute an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
C. No provision of this ordinance shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any
person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this ordinance
or from other law.
§ 117.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 123.01
001:248
§ 123.01. Adoption of standards.
There is hereby adopted that certain code defining and prohibiting certain
matters, things, conditions, or acts as a nuisance, prohibiting certain noises
or sounds, requiring the proper heating of apartments, prohibiting lease or
rental of certain buildings, prohibiting spitting in or upon public buildings,
conveyances or sidewalks, authorizing the inspection of premises by an
enforcing official, providing for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred in removing or abating such
nuisances and prescribing penalties for violations, described and commonly
known as the "Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1960)." Three
copies of such code have been placed in the office of the Secretary of the
Board of Health for the use and examination of the public.
Chapter 124
SOLID WASTE UTILITY AND MANDATORY
§ 124.01. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BUILDING MATERIALS/CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS — Waste resulting from
the destruction or demolition of structures or buildings or portions of
structures or buildings including but not limited to materials such as
concrete blocks, pipe, wallboard, broken concrete, roofing, timbers, lumber,
fencing, wire and wood lath, other wood materials and other similar nonputrescible
materials.
BULK OR BULKY WASTE — Large items of solid waste including but not
limited to house appliances, air conditioners, heating units, carpeting, home
furnishings, and other oversized items whose size precludes or complicates
handling by the normal collection process. Included by this definition are
wastes generated by households identified by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection as ID 13. Specifically excluded by this definition
are any building materials and automotive parts.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Any solid waste or by-product which is so
classified by the Federal or State Governments.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Solid waste resulting from industrial processes
and/or manufacturing operations.
MEDICAL WASTE — Any waste generated during the treatment of a patient
other than from an individual household source. Sources of medical waste
shall include but not be limited to offices of physicians, dentists and
veterinarians, medical laboratories, hospitals, clinics, nursing homes and
animal hospitals.
QUALIFYING SENIOR CITIZEN — Any resident, subject to the provisions
of this chapter, who is 65 years of age, or more and who qualifies for the
Senior Citizens Property Tax Deduction under N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.40 et seq.
§ 123.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124.01
001:249
RECYCLABLES — Those materials as identified by the Township of
Pequannock representing post-consumer materials which are generated
within the Township of Pequannock.*
REFUSE/GARBAGE — The conventional domestic waste generated by a
household and identified by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection as solid waste class ID 10. Specifically excluded from this
definition are bulk or bulky wastes, recyclable materials, medical waste,
industrial waste, vegetative waste, hazardous materials and construction
material and debris.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Properties in the Township consisting of single
family units in a single structure consisting of no more than four family units
in one lot. This definition specifically excludes multifamily garden or other
apartments and attached units in condominium ownership.
SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge or any other waste material
with insufficient liquid content to be free-flowing, excluding those materials
defined as recyclable materials.
SOLID WASTE UTILITY — A self-liquidating agency with a dedicated
budget, created to transact solid waste collection and disposal services as
outlined below within the Township of Pequannock; said utility operations
are separate and distinct but not autonomous from other municipal
operations as provided for under N.J.S.A. 40A:4-34 through 36.
SUITABLE RECEPTACLE (GARBAGE CAN) — A watertight container, can
or barrel made of metal or other durable material with a tight-fitting cover,
constructed so as to prevent spillage of its contents; it shall be waterproof
and shall not exceed 35 gallons in volume or 50 pounds in weight when
filled.
VEGETATIVE WASTE — This shall include leaves, grass, yard cuttings,
brush (no larger than four inches in diameter), and Christmas trees
generated by residential units. Included are wastes generated by
households identified by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection as ID 23.
*Note: See Chapter 90, Mandatory Source Separation and Recycling.
§ 124.02. Solid waste utility.
§ 124.03. Mandatory collection services.
A. A solid waste utility is hereby created to transact the collection of solid
waste and disposal as provided by law.
B. Said waste utility shall be self-liquidating with a dedicated budget as
provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-34 through 36.
A. Residential property. Effective October 1, 1990, every residential
property as defined above shall receive garbage collection and disposal
services through the Township of Pequannock. The owner of the
§ 124.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 124.03
001:250
§ 124.04. Temporary cessation of garbage collection service and
billing.
residential property shall be charged a fee for each dwelling unit as
established herein.
B. Properties other than residential. The owners of all properties other
than residential as described in the chapter shall be required to make
provision for the adequate provision for the collection and disposal of
solid waste generated by their premises. Upon request by the Health
Officer, the owner shall submit proofs to the Health Department to
establish that this provision has been met. When approved by the
Health Officer, the owner may provide for these services through the
Township of Pequannock by written application and payment of
collection and disposal fees as defined herein. The Department of
Health shall determine whether these services may be provided by the
Township based upon whether the premises are able to be property
serviced either by curbside collection or container under the contracts
in force with private collector(s) at the time service is requested. In
making this determination, the Health Department shall evaluate the
entire premises, including any separate tenancies on the premises.
A. Temporary cessation of service. Residential property owners may
temporarily stop garbage collection service to their home in the event it
will be unoccupied for an extended period of time. There will be no
charge for the period that the service is stopped. Temporary cessation
of service must be for a minimum of three months and be in full month
increments. To be eligible for a temporary service stoppage, a
homeowner must:
1) Be Current with all Fees and Charges owed to the Township at the
time of the request.
2) Request the stoppage in writing to the Utility Collector, specifying
the stop and start dates.
3) Have their water service stopped for a minimum of the same period
of time in accordance with Chapter 182 of the Township Code.
Property owners who receive garbage collection service and are
not connected to municipal water service shall certify, under oath,
in writing that the home will be vacant and no water used during
the time period stipulated.
B. No refuse placed during temporary cessation. A homeowner who has
received a temporary cessation of garbage collection service shall not
deposit any refuse to be collected at the property where service has
been stopped during the time period that has been stipulated.
C. Failure to comply. Any residence where refuse is placed to be collected
during a temporary cessation in service will be billed for service for the
entire period of stoppage and interest from the date that billing would
§ 124.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124.04
001:251
§ 124.05. Placement and number of suitable receptacles (garbage
cans).
§ 124.06. Fee for refuse collection and disposal. [Amended
2-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-05; 3-27-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-04;
2-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-03; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-01;
10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-29; 3-10-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01;
10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-15]
have occurred had service not been stopped in addition to any other
penalties that may be imposed as provided by this section.
A. Containers and location. The owners of any premises receiving
collection services from the Township of Pequannock may dispose of up
to two, 30 gallon or three, 20 gallon containers per collection, which
containers shall be placed within five feet of the street or traveled way
in front of the premises or at such location as directed by the
Department of Health. The owners shall comply with rules and
regulations promulgated by the Health Department regulating and
scheduling solid waste collection.
B. Time of placement. All owners and tenants shall not place any
containers at the designated location prior to 6:00 p.m. the evening
prior to scheduled collection and shall remove all empty containers
after collection no later than 6:00 p.m. on the day of collection.
A. Fee. The fee for residential refuse collection per unit shall be as follows:
1. For each single-family dwelling the rate shall be set according to
the following schedule:
2015 $400
2016 $400
2017 $400
2018 $420
2019 $420
2020 $420
2. Nonresidential properties approved for service shall pay a fee
equal to the basic residential fee for equal service or on a Cubic
Foot basis, based upon the service required and the size of the
container utilized.
B. Senior citizens. Senior Citizens who are subject to the fees set forth in
this chapter and who qualify for and receive property tax deductions
under N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.40 et seq. shall be eligible for a reduced fee for
refuse collection. A qualifying Senior Citizen shall file a request with
the Solid Waste Utility Collector for the reduced fee. The Tax Collector
shall certify that the applicant does qualify for and receive the property
§ 124.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 124.06
001:252
§ 124.07. Anti-scavenger clause.
Marketable recyclables as defined herein placed at the curb are the
property of the Township of Pequannock. It is a violation of this chapter for
any person or firm unauthorized by the Township of Pequannock to collect
or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such materials.
tax deduction as permitted by statute. The sum deducted pursuant to
this section is set at $40 per annum.
C. Bills to be rendered quarterly. Bills for refuse collection shall be
rendered quarterly, except for the initial billing period which shall be
prorated. For the purpose of billing, the calendar year shall be
subdivided and designated as follows: the year period shall begin on
January 1 and end on December 31; the quarterly periods shall begin on
the first day of January, April, July and October, respectively, and shall
extend to the beginning of the succeeding quarterly period.
D. Responsibility for payment. Unpaid balances are liens against property.
The owner of each property provided refuse collection and disposal
shall be entirely responsible for payment of bills of said refuse
collection and disposal as rendered by the Township of Pequannock. All
refuse collection and disposal charges shall be a lien against the
property until paid; said liens shall be subject to sale by the Township in
the manner prescribed by law, on or after July 1 of the year following
rendering of the delinquent bill.
E. Bills due upon rendering; interest; collection. The amount charged for
refuse collection and disposal shall be due on the date of rendering of
the bill. If bills are not paid within 30 days from date of rendering,
interest will accrue at the rate of 8% per annum. Liens originating from
non-payment of refuse removal and disposal charges shall be processed
for collection in the manner so provided by law, including sale of the
lien.
F. Discontinuance of service for properties other than residential. In
additions to the provisions for collection of unpaid balances outlined in
the preceding sections of this chapter, discontinuance of services for
properties other than residential as defined in this chapter shall be
initiated in the following manner. If bills are not paid within 30 days
from date of rendering, the Township, in addition to the provisions of
section D. above, shall terminate said refuse collection and disposal
service by sending written notice upon the property owner that unless
that outstanding bill and interest is paid within 15 days from the date of
the mailing of the notice, the service will be discontinued.
Discontinuance of service does not relieve the owner of the property
from complying with the provisions of Section 124.03B of this chapter.
§ 124.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124.08
001:253
§ 124.08. Responsibilities and enforcement.
It shall be the responsibility of the Pequannock Township Department of
Health to administer and enforce all provisions of this chapter, with the
exception that billing and collection of charges and fees provided herein
shall be the responsibility of the Pequannock Township Department of
Finance based upon parameters established by this Code and provided by
the Department of Health.
Chapter 129
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 129.01. Recreation Areas Open to Public.
§ 129.01.010. Definitions.
PUBLIC RECREATION AREAS — Any swimming pool, bathing beach, picnic
area or fishing boat rental business, which is conducted on premises
situated in the Township, and for the use of which the members of the public
are required to pay an admission price, parking fee or fee representing dues
in a so-called club plan.
§ 129.01.020. Facility reservation form required.
No person shall have exclusive use or reserve a portion of space at a
Township recreation area without first procuring from the Parks and
Recreation Office a facility reservation form as provided in this section.
§ 129.01.030. Facility reservation forms.
A. Applications for reservation forms under this section shall be made to
the Parks and Recreation office in writing and shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name of the person applying for the reservation form.
(2) The facility needed.
(3) A narrative description of the business to be conducted on the
licensed premises.
(4) Proposed hours of operation.
(5) Special equipment needed.
B. The Director of Parks and Recreation may also require any other
information not specifically enumerated above which may be designed
to provide the Township with a clearer understanding of the proposed
use.
§ 124.08 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 129.01.040
001:254
§ 129.01.040. Fees; renewals. [Amended 2-24-1998 by Ord. No.
98-03]
A rental fee of $100 plus an additional custodial deposit of $50 will be
charged for all activities and organizations for the use of Senior House.
Should the building be left in a clean and orderly manner the custodial
deposit of $50 will be eligible for refund. Senior citizen activities, Township
sponsored programs, Township service and other nonprofit organizations
will not be charged.
§ 129.01.050. Reservation forms.
Reservation forms issued under this section may be revoked by the Director
of Parks and Recreation for violation of any of the provision of this section.
§ 129.01.060. Hours of operation; responsibility for conduct of
patrons.
§ 129.01.070. Amplifying systems.
The use of amplifying systems in municipal recreation areas is prohibited
except for Township sponsored activities.
§ 129.02. Township Parks and Public Lands.
§ 129.02.010. Short title.
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Pequannock Township
Ordinance Regulating Conduct in Township Parks."
§ 129.02.020. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 8-24-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-23; 2-28-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-02]
A. No person shall be allowed in any public recreation area between
sunset and sunrise, except when events or programs authorized by the
Director of Parks and Recreation are scheduled during those hours.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the Group Leader to see to it that
persons using the premises conduct themselves in an orderly, peaceful
manner.
A. For the purposes of this section, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
BOARD OF EDUCATION PROPERTIES — The following real properties
owned by the Pequannock Township Board of Education: Pequannock
Township High School, Pequannock Valley Middle School, Stephen J.
Gerace Elementary School, Hillview Elementary School, and North
Boulevard Elementary School.
DIRECTOR — A person immediately in charge of any park area and its
activities, and to whom all park attendants of such area are responsible.
§ 129.01.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129.02.020
001:255
FIREARM —
GOVERNMENTAL VEHICLES — All motor vehicles either registered in
the name of or authorized to be operated by any representative of any
governmental agency of the State of New Jersey, or of any county or
municipality of the State of New Jersey.
MOTOR VEHICLES — Motorcycles, motor bicycles, automobiles,
trucks, tractors or other vehicles designed to be propelled otherwise
than by muscular power.
OPERATOR — Anyone in actual physical control of a motor vehicle.
OWNER — Anyone holding the legal title to a motor vehicle or, if
the latter is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or
lease thereof with the right of purchase upon the performance of the
conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of
possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee, or if a mortgagor
of a vehicle is entitled to possession, then the conditional vendee,
lessee, or mortgagor shall be deemed the "owner."
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or
any other area in the Township, owned or used by the Township, and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTIES AND PUBLIC PARKS — All real property owned or
maintained by the Township of Pequannock, its agents, servants and
employees, including all things growing upon said realty as well as all
structures and other inanimate objects located thereon, whether said
realty is open or closed to public use. Properties and Public Parks shall
include Board of Education Properties.
PUBLIC UTILITY VEHICLES — All motor vehicles either registered in
the name of or authorized to be operated by any representative of any
public utility of the State of New Jersey or of any county or municipality
of the State of New Jersey.
Any handgun, rifle, shotgun, machine gun, automatic or
semiautomatic rifle, or any gun, or;
(1)
(2) Any paintball gun, pellet gun, or "BB" gun; or
Any device or instrument in the nature of a weapon from which may
be fired or ejected any solid projectable ball, slug, pellet (including
a paint ball pellet,) missile or bullet, or any gas, vapor, paint or
other noxious thing, by means of a cartridge or shell or by the
action of an explosive or the igniting of flammable or explosive
substances.
(3)
The definitions listed in subsection (1) through (3) above shall be
liberally construed to permit any law enforcement officer or agent
to protect the people and property of Pequannock Township.
(4)
§ 129.02.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 129.02.020
001:256
§ 129.02.030. General restrictions. [Amended 8-24-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-23; 11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-29; 6-26-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-20; 2-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-04; 2-28-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-02]
No person shall, in any of the Township Parks or Board of Education
Properties, as herein before defined:
ROADWAY — Any portion of properties or public parks as defined
above, which has been improved, designed or is ordinarily used for the
traffic of motor vehicles.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Pequannock.
VEHICLE — Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animaldrawn,
or self-propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of
any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages and
vehicles in the service of the Township parks.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number.
A. Buildings and other property.
(1) Disfiguration and removal: willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure,
tamper with or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables,
benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines
or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs,
notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments,
stakes, posts or other boundary markers or other structures or
equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
(2) Rest rooms and washrooms: fail to cooperate in maintaining rest
room and washrooms of neat and sanitary condition. No person
over the age of five years shall use the rest room and washrooms
designated for the opposite sex.
(3) Removal of natural resources: dig or remove any beach sand,
whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs
or plants, down timber or other wood or materials, or make any
excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(4) Erection of structures: construct or erect any building or structure
of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or
run or string any public service utility into, upon, or across such
lands, except on special written permit.
B. Trees; shrubbery; lawns.
(1) Injury and removal: damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any
tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any
§ 129.02.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129.02.030
001:257
§ 129.02.050. Traffic.
No person shall, in any of the properties or public parks of the Township of
Pequannock, as hereinbefore defined:
tree or plant; nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other
contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or
otherwise disturb grass area, or in any other way injure or impair
the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(2) Climbing trees, etc.: climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon
monuments, vases, fountains, railing, fences or gun-carriages or
upon any other property not designated or customarily used for
such purposes.
(3) Hitching of animals: tie or hitch a horse or other animal to any tree
or plant.
C. Wild animals, birds, etc.
(1) Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw
missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor remove or have in
possession the young of any wild or the eggs or nest or young of
any reptile or bird; nor collect' remove, have in possession, give
away, sell or offer to sell or buy or offer to buy or accept as a gift
any specimen alive or dead of any of the group of tree snails.
(2) Give or offer, or attempt to give or offer to any wild animal or bird
any food, water, tobacco, alcohol or any known noxious substance.
D. Firearms. Firearms possession and/or use shall not be permitted. This
Ordinance shall not be applicable to the authorized use of the Township
of Pequannock police pistol range.
A. State motor vehicle laws apply: fail to comply with all applicable
provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment
and operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as are
contained in this section and other ordinances.
B. Enforcement of traffic regulations: fail to obey all traffic officers and
park employees, such persons being hereby authorized and instructed
to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the parks and on the
highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance
with the provisions of these regulations and such supplementary
regulations as may be issued subsequently by the Director.
C. Obey traffic signs: fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating
speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all others posted for
proper control and to safeguard life and property.
D. Speed of vehicles: ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding
five miles per hour, except upon such roads as the Director may
designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel.
§ 129.02.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 129.02.050
001:258
§ 129.02.060. Recreational activity. [Amended 10-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-17]
No person in a park shall:
E. Operation confined to roads: operate any motor vehicle other than on
those roadways upon which motor vehicles are presently and
customarily properly allowed, or other than on such additional areas as
may, on occasion, be specifically designated as parking areas by the
director.
F. Parking.
(1) Designated areas: park a vehicle in other than an established or
designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with
the posted directions there at and with the instructions of any
attendant who may be present.
(2) Full parking: full-park on the road or driveway at any time. In order
to enjoy some special natural scenic feature, vehicles may be
parked with the two left wheels near the right edge of the paving
for not more than five minutes. No stopping or parking is permitted
even briefly on the left-hand side of any road or driveway.
G. Night driving: No vehicles shall be permitted in the park after sundown
without permission of the Township Police or Director.
H. Emergency procedure: fail to immediately notify an attendant of an
emergency in the nature of a breakdown requiring the assistance of a
tow truck, mechanic or other person.
I. Double-parking: double park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless
directed by a park official.
J. Muffler required: fail to use a muffler adequate to deaden the sound of
the engine in a motor vehicle.
K. Prohibited operation: operate or park or permit any motor vehicle
which he may own to be operated or parked in any manner whatsoever
contrary to the provisions of this Section.
A. Bathing and swimming.
(1) Designated areas: swim, bath, or wade in any waters or waterways
in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places
as are provided therefore, and in compliance with such regulations
as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted; nor shall any
person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for
the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat when
such activity is prohibited by the Director upon a finding that such
use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
§ 129.02.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129.02.060
001:259
(2) Certain hours: frequent any waters or places, designated for the
purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except
between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the
Director for such purposes for each individual area. Nor shall any
person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for
the purpose of swimming or bathing or congregate thereat when
such activity is prohibited by the Director upon a finding that such
use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
(3) Structure on beach: erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any
beach or bathing area any tent, shelter or structure of any kind
unless there shall be an unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or
structure from at least two sides; nor shall any guy wire, rope or
extension or exterior brace or support be connected or fastened
from any such structure to any other structure, stake, rock or other
object outside thereof.
(4) Disrobe on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other place, except
in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that
purpose.
B. Boating.
(1) Designated areas: bring into or operate any boat, raft or other
water craft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters,
except at places designated for boating by the Director. Such
activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are
now or may hereafter be adopted. Rowboats and sailing boats not
exceeding 14 feet and canoes not exceeding 16 feet shall be
allowed in Woodland Lake. Sail boats shall only be launched from
areas designated by the Director and must be removed from the
park before sundown or as otherwise designated by the Director.
(2) Public docks: use the public docks for dockage or other purpose
without first making arrangements for such accommodation with
the Director, who shall assign space and collect reasonable rental
charges in conformity with established regulations and rates.
(3) Operation of boats: navigate, direct, or handle any boat in such
manner as to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or
endanger the occupants of any other boat.
(4) Prohibition during closing hours: launch, dock or operate any boat
of any kind on any waters between the closing hour of the park at
night and opening hour the following morning, nor shall any person
be on, or remain on or in, any boat during said closed hours of the
park.
(5) No person under the age of 14 years of age shall be permitted to
boat at Woodland Lake without the supervision of an adult 18 years
of age or older.
§ 129.02.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 129.02.060
001:260
C. Fishing. Fishing shall be allowed in Woodland Lake or such areas as
may be designated by the Director and under such regulations as may
be prescribed by the Director. Fishing shall only be permitted to
residents of Pequannock Township.
D. Picnic areas and use.
(1) Regulated: picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated
for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate
the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion
and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of
all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this
end.
(2) Availability: violate the regulation that use of the individual
fireplaces, together with tables and benches, follows generally the
rule of "first come, first served."
(3) Non-exclusive: use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the
buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to
the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area
and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(4) Duty of picnicker: leave a picnic area before the fire is completely
extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers,
cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal
receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are
available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park
area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
E. Games: Take part in or abet the playing of any game involving thrown or
otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or
model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation.
The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as
football, baseball and quoits is prohibited except on the fields and
courts or areas provided therefor. Roller skating shall be confined to
those areas specifically designated for such pastime.
F. Horseback riding: ride a horse except on designated bridle trails.
Where permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken, properly
restrained and ridden with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze
or go unattended, nor shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
G. Lifeguard in charge or area: obedience to lifeguard. The lifeguard on
duty shall be in charge of the beach and swimming areas at all times.
Failure by any person to obey rules and regulations set forth by the
lifeguard and the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall result in
the forfeiture of the person's park badge and swimming privileges. All
swimming is prohibited when the lifeguards are off duty.
§ 129.02.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129.02.070
001:261
§ 129.02.070. Miscellaneous restrictions. [Amended 2-24-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-04; 8-9-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-11]
No person in a park shall:
A. Intoxicating beverages.
(1) Prohibition: have brought alcoholic beverages, nor shall any person
drink alcoholic beverages, at any time in the park, or have in their
possession an opened or unopened container.
(2) Drunkenness: have entered or be under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.
B. Fireworks and explosives: have brought, or have in his possession, or
set off or otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any
firecrackers, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks or explosives of
inflammable material, or discharge them or throw them into any such
area from land or highway adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes
any substance, compound, mixture, or article that in conjunction with
any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of the
foregoing standpoints.
C. Domestic animals. Dogs, cats and other domestic animals are
prohibited on all park properties except as otherwise provided herein.
Service dogs, on a leash, are permitted on all park property. Dogs, only
when completely secured on a leash or similar restraint not more than
six feet in length and under the control of a person, are permitted in all
Township owned parks with the following exceptions:
(i) The portion of PV Park enclosed by fencing.
(ii) Any indoor location.
(iii) Playgrounds.
(iv) Sports fields, or within 50 feet from the boundary of a sports field,
except for walkways and other areas designated for pedestrian use.
(v) Special public events, as determined by the Parks and Recreation
Department, being held in a park.
(vi) Dogs are permitted, off leash, in the Bark Park.
D. The penalty for a violation of this subsection shall be $100 for the first
offense, $250 for the second offense, and $500 for the third offense and
any subsequent offense.
E. Reservation of facilities: occupy any seat or bench, or enter into or
loiter or remain in any pavilion or other park structure or section
thereof which may be reserved and designated by the Director for the
use of the opposite sex. Exception is made for children under five years
of age.
§ 129.02.070 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 129.02.070
001:262
§ 129.02.080. Merchandising, advertising and signs.
No person in a park shall:
§ 129.02.090. Pequannock valley park and woodland lake operating
policy; fees. [Amended 3-27-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-10; 12-28-2004
F. Alms: solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or
private.
G. Fires: build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under
such regulations as may be designated by the Director. No person shall
drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or
cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material, within any park
area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
H. Closed areas: enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall
any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
I. Games of chance: Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance.
J. Going onto ice: go onto the ice on any of the waters except such areas
as are designated as skating fields, and provided a safety signal is
displayed.
K. Loitering and boisterousness: sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats
or benches or other areas; or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening,
abusive, insulting or indecent language; or engage in any disorderly
conduct or behavior tending to a breach of the public peace.
L. Exhibit permits: fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the
Director he claims to have upon request of any authorized person who
shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance
with any ordinance or rule.
M. Interference with permittees: disturb or interfere unreasonably with
any person or party occupying any area, or participating in any activity,
under the authority of a permit.
A. Vending and peddling: expose or offer for sale any article, or station or
place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of
any such article. Exception is here made to any regularly licensed
concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the
Director.
B. Advertising: announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way
to any article or service for sale or hire, or in any way publicly solicit or
demonstrate for votes.
C. Signs. Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement, or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or
cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways
or roads adjacent to a park.
§ 129.02.070 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129.02.090
001:263
by Ord. No. 2004-39; 5-27-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-09; 4-27-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-6; 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-10; 5-8-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-07; 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02; 12-10-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-24; 5-27-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-07; 2-23-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-03; 10-24-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-15]
A. The Pequannock Valley Park ("PV Park") swimming and beach area and
the Woodland Park boating and fishing area shall be restricted to those
who have obtained membership badges, daily badges, or are approved
group users. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to use
the swimming facility or boating/fishing areas without a proper badge.
All badges are nontransferable and it is a violation of this section for
any person who has been issued a badge to allow it to be used by
another, or a person who has not been issued a badge to use or attempt
to use a badge to gain entry into the facility.
B. Pequannock residents and nonresidents shall be eligible to purchase
badges for PV Park and Woodland Lake.
C. Fees for badges and use of PV Park and Woodland Lake are established
as follows:
(1) P.V. Park Swimming Facility and Woodland Lake Boating and
Fishing Annual Membership:
Resident Nonresident
(2 to 17) (18 to 64)
Senior**
Resident (2 to 17) (18 to 64)
Senior**
Nonresident
All inclusive $40 $100 $50 $50 $150 $60
PV Park
ONLY
$30 $80 $40 $40 $125 $50
Woodland
Lake ONLY
$10 $20 $15 $20 $30 $25
* There shall be no fee at Woodland Lake for residents 70 years of age or older.
** Senior Age will increase up to the age of 65 as follows: Year 2018 - 61 years of age; Year
2019 - 62 years of age; Year 2020 - 63 years of age; Year 2021 - 64 years of age; Year
2022 - 65 years of age.
(2) Daily guest badges for the use of the PV Park swimming facility
and/or the Woodland Lake boating and fishing facility shall as
follows:
Weekday Weekend/Holiday
Resident NonresidentResident Nonresident
Under 2 years No charge No charge No charge No charge
2 to 17 years $8 $10 $9 $11
18 to 64 $10 $11 $11 $13
§ 129.02.090 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 129.02.090
001:264
Weekday Weekend/Holiday
Resident NonresidentResident Nonresident
65+ $7 $9 $9 $9
Book of 10
daily guest
passes:
Residents $80 Nonresidents $100
(3) Groups:
All groups of more than 25 must have prior approval of the Director
or the Park Manager and the following fees shall apply:
a. Camps or daycare groups providing supervision and insurance:
Group user rate (annual): $500 facility use fee plus.
$3 per child per full day.
$2 per child per half day (four hours maximum).
Nonprofit groups (annual): $250 facility use fee plus.
$2 per child per full day.
$1 per child per half day (four hours maximum).
b. Party Package (Daily).
Up to 25 people: $150 facility use fee plus $5 per person.
26 to 50 people: $200 facility use fee plus $5 per person.
51+ people: $300 facility use fee plus $5 per person.
Includes use of picnic table and grills.
All group users will submit a daily log to the Park Manager. Logs
are subject to verification by park staff. The amount due will be
determined at the end of each week and must be paid in full prior to
entering the park the following week.
(4) The fee for lost badges at either facility shall be $20 per badge.
(5) Memberships and badges may be revoked by the Director for
violations of the rules and regulations governing the facilities.
There will be no refund of fees for membership or badges revoked
by the Recreation Director for violations of the rules and
regulations.
(6) New boat registration fee: All boats must be registered at the Parks
and Recreation office and pay an annual fee of $20.
(7) Kayak and pedal boat rental:
§ 129.02.090 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129.02.090
001:265
§ 129.02.100. Enforcement.
Kayak: $3 per half hour, $2 for each additional 15 minutes.
Pedal boat: $5 per half hour, $2 for each additional 15 minutes.
Non-Woodland Lake or PV Park member: additional $4 per person.
D. There shall be no boating or fishing in the PV Park swimming facility
and no swimming in the Woodland Lake boating and fishing facility.
E. No person using the park facilities shall leave his motor vehicle parked
on adjacent or nearby streets.
F. Closed areas. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to
the public by the Director at any time for an interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and
either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Director shall find
reasonably necessary.
G. Facility hours will be established by the Director on an annual basis and
shall be posted at the facilities.
H. Senior citizens: Senior Citizens who are subject to the fees set forth in
this section who qualify for and receive property tax deductions under
N.J.S.A. 54:4-8.40 et seq. shall be eligible for a reduced fee for
Pequannock Valley Park and Woodland Lake. A qualifying Senior Citizen
shall file a request to Parks and Recreation for the reduced fee. The Tax
Collector shall certify that the applicant does qualify for and receive the
property tax deductions as permitted by statute. The sum deduction
pursuant to this section is set at 50% of the fee schedule as established
in the chapter.
A. Officials. The Director and park attendants and Park Rangers shall, in
connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the
provisions of this section.
B. Ejectment. The Director and any park attendant or Park Ranger shall
have the authority to eject from the park any person acting in violation
of this section.
C. Seizure of property; A police officer, the Director or any park attendant
or Park Ranger shall have the authority to seize and confiscate any
property, in the public properties and parks of the Township, used in
violation of this section, except as hereinafter provided in this
subsection. Should any motor vehicle, as defined in this section, be
operated in any manner whatsoever contrary to the provisions of this
section, any police officer of the Township of Pequannock shall be
hereby authorized to have such motor vehicle removed from the public
properties and parks of the Township. All expenses incurred for such
removal, including but not limited to towing and storage charges, shall
be paid by the owner of the vehicle to that individual or organization
§ 129.02.090 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 129.02.100
001:266
§ 129.03. Greenview Park Tennis Courts.
§ 129.03.010. General.
The area commonly known as "Greenview Park," in the Township of
Pequannock, Morris County, New Jersey, has heretofore been dedicated and
used for recreational and park purposes under the general supervision of
the Director of Parks and Recreation. Tennis courts have been constructed
thereon and dedicated for public use.
§ 129.03.020. Fees and charges.
Fees and admission charges are hereby established by the Township Council
for the use of said tennis courts, as follows:
§ 129.03.030. Identification.
Seasonal membership holders will be issued identification badges which
must be worn. Lost badges may be replaced at the cost of $5. Badges are
not transferable.
§ 129.03.040. Rules, regulations, revocations.
which effectuated the removal of the vehicle, upon the owner's
reacquisition of same.
D. Forfeiture of park badges. The Director and any park attendant *or Park
Ranger* shall have the authority to confiscate and cause the forfeiture
of a park badge or badges for any violation of this section. In the event
that a park badge is forfeited, any person wishing to avail themselves of
the park privileges must reapply for a park badge and pay the
customary fees.
E. All government and public utility vehicles as previously defined in this
section shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.
A. Season membership (residents only):
(1) Adults 16 years and over: $20.
(2) Children (under 16)]: $14.
(3) Senior citizens [60 and over): $10.
B. Nonmember fees: $4 per hour.
C. Nonresident season membership:
(1) $40 Adult.
(2) $28 for children under 16 by June 1, 1994.
(3) $20 for senior citizens 60 years and over.
§ 129.02.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129.03.040
001:267
§ 129.04. Recreation Utility.
§ 129.04.010. Definitions and word usage. [Added 11-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-24]
For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PEQUANNOCK VALLEY (PV) PARK — Pequannock Valley Park is a
municipal park which has been developed as the Township's Public
Swimming Facility. Admission to PV Park is charged in accordance with a
fee schedule described in Section 129.02.090 of this chapter. It is intended
that the cost of operating PV Park be covered through those fees charged
for admittance. All financial activity for PV Park shall be conducted through
the Recreation Utility.
RECREATION UTILITY — A self-liquidating agency with a dedicated budget,
created to transact self-supporting recreational activities as outlined within
this chapter within the Township of Pequannock; said utility operations are
separate and distinct but not autonomous from other municipal operations
as provided for under N.J.S.A. 40A:4-34 through 36.
RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES — Programs and activities which are
administered and supported by the Pequannock Township Recreation
Department. Those programs for which a fee is charged shall be transacted
through the Recreation Utility.
§ 129.04.020. Recreation utility. [Added 11-23-1999 by Ord. No.
99-24]
§ 129.04.030. Fees. [Added 11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-24]
A. The Director of Parks and Recreation court attendant or Park Ranger is
hereby authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations for
the use of the tennis courts. Said rules as so promulgated shall be
posted by the Director in an appropriate location on the tennis court
premises.
B. The Director of Parks and Recreation is hereby authorized to revoke
membership and playing privileges of any person violating said rules as
promulgated.
A. A Recreation utility is hereby created to transact Recreational Activities
and the Pequannock Valley Park swimming facility as provided by law.
B. Said Recreation utility shall be self-liquidating with a dedicated budget
as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-34 through 36.
A. Fees for PV Park are established within this chapter, Section
129.02.090.
B. Fees for all other Recreational Activities shall be determined by the
Recreation Department and set at a level whereby the cost of running
§ 129.03.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 129.04.030
001:268
§ 129.05. Group Use Policy/Township Parks.
§ 129.05.010. Group use of Township Parks. [Added 3-25-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-04]
Township Parks shall be available for group usage subject to the policies
and procedures set forth in this Ordinance.
§ 129.05.020. Policies and procedures applicable to all Township
Parks. [Added 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-04]
The following policies and procedures shall govern group use of all
Township Parks:
§ 129.05.030. Policies and procedures applicable to group use of
Washington Park. [Added 3-25-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-04; 3-24-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-05; 9-14-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-23]
The following additional policies and procedures apply to the use of
Washington Park by groups:
the activity can be reasonably expected to be recovered. Fees for each
activity shall be reviewed from time to time to determine adequacy and
shall be determined prior to registration for the program.
A. Groups using any Township park shall be responsible for cleaning all
debris from the parks prior to leaving the park. Any group using a
Township park shall designate an individual responsible for the cleanup
of any field being used. In the event the fields are not cleaned of
debris in an acceptable fashion, the Township may deem it necessary to
send a Township crew to clean debris. In the event the Township sends
a crew to clean debris, the responsible group shall be billed an amount
of $40 per field per hour for the time spent on field clean-up.
B. Groups using the Park shall designate an individual responsible for
doing a safety inspection of the fields both prior to and after games
have been completed.
A. Groups desiring to schedule games at Washington Park shall schedule
those games only on Tuesdays through Sundays. Monday games may be
scheduled only with the specific prior approval from the Parks and
Recreation Director.
B. Parking. Groups utilizing Washington Park shall encourage participants
to park in field provided parking rather than on streets surrounding
Washington Park.
C. The public address system will only be utilized with the prior approval
of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
D. Lighting at Washington Park.
§ 129.04.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129.05.030
001:269
§ 129.05.040. Insurance requirements. [Added 3-25-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-04]
Any group seeking to utilize the fields at any Township Park shall provide
proof of insurance and a certificate of insurance naming the Township as an
additional insured in an amount and in such form as may be required by the
Township.
§ 129.05.050. Field use scheduling and fees. [Added 3-25-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-04; 7-22-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-20; 11-28-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-17]
1. All field lighting, excepting lighting necessary for public safety,
shall be turned off by 10:00 p.m. between April 1 and August 15
and by 7:30 p.m. between August 16 and November 30 except that
on Tuesdays through Saturdays the lights must be turned off by
9:00 p.m. during this period. Notwithstanding these restrictions,
the light on one light pole may remain lit for a reasonable period to
permit safe egress from the fields following completion of the
games.
2. There shall be no illumination of any field not currently in use.
3. There shall be no field illumination on Sundays or Mondays.
4. Lighting restrictions may be waived for all-star games, state
tournament games, and on special occasions with the prior
approval of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
5. Penalties. In the event the group using the fields does not turn off
the lighting in compliance with this policy, the Recreation Director
shall have the right to suspend the privileges of the group violating
the policy from using lighting for a period she deems appropriate.
E. The Parks and Recreation Director shall have the authority to close
fields if she deems field closures necessary for reasons of field
protection or public safety.
A. Field use scheduling policy. Field use scheduling for outside groups
shall be at the discretion of the Director of Parks and Recreation who
shall have the authority to establish such policies as the Director deems
necessary to administer field usage. Each organization seeking to use a
Township field shall designate one individual as the responsible party
for field scheduling and reservations. That individual shall submit a list
of coaches within the organization. A certificate of insurance shall be
required prior to reserving a field. The Director shall have the authority
to suspend an organization which fails to comply with field usage policy.
B. Field usage fees:
1. The fee for resident organizations based in Pequannock Township
shall be $10 per hour for practices and $20 per hour for games,
§ 129.05.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 129.05.050
001:270
§ 129.05.060. Greenview pavilion - scheduling, fees. [Added
4-27-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-6; 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-4]
The following policies shall govern group use of the Greenview Park
Pavilion.
§ 129.06. Dog Park Regulations.
§ 129.06.010. Pequannock Township Dog Park. [Added 9-25-2007 by
Ord. No. 2007-26; 2-26-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
35% of which shall be a non-refundable deposit for field
reservations excluding fields determined unusable due to
inclement weather or repair. The organization must submit a
current certificate of insurance with a Pequannock Township
address as proof of its resident status along with additional
information as may be required by the Director.
2. The fee for all nonresident organizations shall be $50 per hour for
practices and games, 35% of which shall be a non-refundable
deposit for field reservations excluding fields determined unusable
due to inclement weather or repair. The organization must submit a
current certificate of insurance along with additional information
as may be required by the Director.
3. There shall be no fee for Recreation and Township sponsored
organizations, including, but not limited to, Little League.
A. Groups shall have the ability to reserve the Greenview Park Pavilion. All
reservation requests shall be made on forms established by the Director
of Parks and Recreation. The pavilion may not be reserved at times
when fields are in use for league play.
(1) Reservation Fees are as follows:
Residents: $35 per day.
Nonresidents: $85 per day.
B. The Director shall establish procedures and guidelines necessary for
the implementation of pavilion reservations.
A. Pass required. The Pequannock Township Dog Park may only be used
for dogs which have been registered with the Recreation Department
and have obtained a Dog Park Pass. Residents shall not be charged a fee
for Dog Park tags. The fee for a nonresident Dog Park tag shall be $25.
The owner and any individual responsible for bringing a dog which does
not have a pass to the Dog Park shall be deemed in violation of this
section.
B. Rules and Regulations. The following rules and regulations shall govern
the use of the Pequannock Township Dog Park:
§ 129.05.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 129.06.010
001:271
(1) Dog owners are responsible and liable for the actions and behavior
of their dogs at all times and may use the Park only at their own
risk. Pequannock Township will not provide supervision during Dog
Park operating hours.
(2) Dog owners must confirm that their homeowner's/renter's
insurance has liability coverage before using the Dog Park.
(3) All dogs must have current Rabies and Distemper vaccinations. It is
recommended that all dogs be on a flea or heartworm preventative
medication.
(4) No dog that is ill may be brought to the Park.
(5) All dogs must wear a valid license and a Pequannock Township Dog
Park Pass when in the Park.
(6) A limit of two dogs per adult may be brought to the Park at one
time.
(7) Dogs must be accompanied by an adult 18 years or older at all
times.
(8) Dogs must be kept on a leash until inside the gated area.
(9) No puppies younger than six months old are permitted in the Park.
(10)No children under age eight shall be allowed inside the fence; all
children between the ages of eight and 18 are permitted inside the
fenced area only if accompanied by an adult.
(11) Owners are required to clean up after their dog.
(12) The owner must remove a dog from the park at the first sign of
aggression. Continued display of aggression by any dog may result
in loss of membership.
(13) Female dogs must be spayed and male dogs neutered.
(14) All dog bites shall be immediately reported to the Pequannock
Township Health Department.
(15)No food shall be allowed within the Park (except water in plastic
bottles.) Play items must be removed when leaving.
(16) The Park may be closed for maintenance without prior notice.
(17) No smoking allowed.
(18) Hours: Open during daylight hours only.
(19) Dog owners who fail to comply with the above rules and regulations
shall be deemed in violation of this section and subject to the
penalties provided for in Section 129.06.020.
§ 129.06.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 129.06.010
001:272
§ 129.06.020. Penalties. [Added 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-26]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof before the Municipal Judge or other authorized judicial
officer, be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment in the
County jail for a period not exceeding 90 days, or both, or by a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, in the discretion of the Judge. In
default of the payment of any fine imposed hereunder, any person convicted
of a violation of any of the provisions of this section may, in the discretion
of the Judge, be imprisoned in the County jail for a period not exceeding 90
days.
Chapter 130
PUBLIC UTILITY POLES
§ 130.01. Definitions. [Added 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-10]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HOT PATCH — The installation of a mixture of asphalt to restore property
within the right-of-way to its previous condition subsequent to the
construction or excavation of a site required for the placement or
replacement of a pole or an underground facility pursuant to this chapter.
POLE — In addition to its commonly accepted meaning, any wires or cable
connected thereto, and any replacements which are similar in construction
and use.
UNDERGROUND FACILITY — One or more underground pipes, cables,
wires, lines or other structures used for the supplying and distribution of
electricity for light, heat or power or for the providing of water service, or
for the furnishing of telephone or other telecommunications service.
§ 130.02. Notification required. [Added 7-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-10]
A public utility which places, replaces or removes a pole or an underground
facility located in the Township, which pole or underground facility is used
for the supplying and distribution of electricity for light, heat or power,
or for the furnishing of water service or telephone or other
telecommunications service on or below a public right-of-way shall, in
addition to any other requirements of law, notify the appropriately licensed
Township code official at least 24 hours before undertaking any
construction or excavation related to the placement, replacement or
removal of such pole or underground facility.
(20) Dog Park passes are not transferable.
§ 129.06.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130.03
001:273
§ 130.03. Emergency exception to notification requirement. [Added
7-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-10]
Under emergency conditions which significantly impact the placement of
a pole or underground facility resulting from natural forces or human
activities beyond the control of the public utility, or which pose an imminent
or existing threat of loss of electrical, water, power, telephone, or other
telecommunication service, or which pose an imminent or existing threat
to the safety and security of persons or property, or both, or which require
immediate action by a public utility to prevent bodily harm or substantial
property damage from occurring, the provisions Subsection 130.02 shall
not apply when a public utility undertakes any construction or excavation
related to the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or an
underground facility in response to such an emergency, provided that the
public utility undertaking such construction or excavation notifies the
appropriately licensed municipal code official of the Township at the earliest
reasonable opportunity and that all reasonable efforts are taken by the
public utility to comply with the removal and restoration requirements of
Section 130.04 after responding to the emergency.
§ 130.04. Restoration requirements. [Added 7-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-10]
A. After completing the placement, replacement or removal of a pole or an
underground facility, the public utility shall remove from such right-ofway
any pole or underground facility no longer in use as well as any
other debris created from such placement, replacement or removal and
restore the property including, but not limited to, the installation of a
hot patch as needed to restore the property within the right-of-way to
its previous condition as much as possible.
B. If the public utility is unable to complete the installation of a hot patch
due to the unavailability of asphalt material during the period of time
from November through April, the public utility shall not be required to
complete the hot patch installation until 60 days immediately following
the end of the November through April period.
C. In the case of removal or replacement of a pole or an underground
facility utilized by two or more public utilities, the public utility last
removing its pipes, cables, wires, lines or other structures shall be
liable for the removal and restoration required under this section,
unless a written agreement between the public utilities provides
otherwise.
D. In the event a public utility does not meet the requirements of this
section concerning the removal of debris and the restoring of property
including, but not limited to, the installation of a hot patch, within a
right-of-way to its previous condition within 90 days of placement,
replacement or removal of a pole or an underground facility, there shall
be a fine imposed of $100 each day until the requirements of this
section are met. At least five business days prior to the end of the
§ 130.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 130.04
001:274
§ 130.05. Violations. [Added 7-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-10]
Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100
nor exceeding $1,000.
Chapter 131
PUBLIC HEALTH UTILITY
§ 131.01. Legislative finding and policy. [Added 12-28-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-36]
The Township of Pequannock determines and declares that there should
be a public health system operated through a public health utility which
provides for the delivery of public health to all residents within the
Township of Pequannock. The benefits of such a system should include, but
are not limited to: a modern and manageable array of public health services;
the development of an integrated systems approach for local public health;
cooperation among community partners to protect and improve the health
of the residents; a reliable and cost-effective public health system;
protection and promotion of physical and mental health; and, prevention of
disease, injury, and disability, thereby assuring the health of the citizens of
Pequannock Township.
§ 131.02. Definitions. [Added 12-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-36]
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PUBLIC AND COMMUNITY HEALTH ACTIVITIES — Programs and
activates as established in "Public Health Practice Standards of
Performance for Local Boards of Health in New Jersey (N.J.A.C. 8:52-1.1 et
seq.)
PUBLIC HEALTH UTILITY — A self-liquidating agency with a dedicated
budget, created to provide public and community health activities. Said
utility operations are separate and distinct but not autonomous from other
municipal operations as provided for under N.J.S.A. 40A4-34 through 36.
ninety-day period established by this subsection, the public utility shall
be notified that the penalties authorized by this subsection shall begin
to be assessed against the utility after the end of the ninety-day period
unless the utility complies with the requirements of this subsection.
E. Any penalty imposed under this section shall be collected or enforced in
a summary manner, without a jury, in any court of competent
jurisdiction according to the procedure provided by "The Penalty
Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.).
§ 130.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 131.03
001:275
§ 131.03. Creation of public health utility. [Added 12-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-36]
A Public Health Utility is hereby created to deliver public and community
health services as provided by law. Said Utility shall be self-liquidating with
a dedicated budget as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:4-34 through 36.
§ 131.04. Funding of public health utility. [Added 12-28-2010 by
Ord. No. 2010-36; 12-28-2011 by Ord. No. 2010-36]
§ 131.05. Public health fund. [Added 12-28-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-36]
All revenues generated by or on behalf of the public health utility shall be
deposited in a public health utility fund and used exclusively for the public
health utility.
§ 131.06. Operating budget. [Added 12-28-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-36]
The Township of Pequannock Board of Health shall adopt an operating
budget for the public health utility each fiscal year. The operating budget
shall set forth for such fiscal year the estimated revenues and the estimated
costs for operations and maintenance, and debt service.
Chapter 132
ITINERANT VENDORS
§ 132.01. License or notification required. [Amended 3-24-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-02]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale as an itinerant
vendor any goods, wares, merchandise or product of any kind without first
obtaining a license as provided in this chapter.
A. Funding for the public health utility's activities may include, but not be
limited to, the following:
1. Interlocal Public Health Services Contracts with participating
municipalities.
2. Public health permit, licensing, and inspection fees.
3. Vital Statistics fees.
4. Other funds or income obtained from federal, state, local, and
private grants, commissions, fees for service, or revolving funds.
§ 131.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 132.02
001:276
§ 132.02. Definitions. [Amended 1-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-2;
3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
ITINERANT VENDOR —
PERSON — Not only an individual, but also any organization, firm,
partnership, corporation, company, association, church, religious
denomination, society, class, league or other entity or group.
SUNSET — Shall be the time designated as "sunset" by the National
Weather Service for northern New Jersey.
§ 132.03. Itinerant vendors license. [Amended 2-25-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-09; 3-24-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
A person who goes from place to place or from house to house for the
purpose of selling services or merchandise to persons at their residence
("door to door itinerant vendor";) or
a)
A person who sells merchandise from a vehicle that travels from place
to place or that is temporarily parked at a specific location ("mobile
itinerant vendor".)
This chapter shall not be construed to restrict lawful deliveries of merchandise
made from regular or stationary businesses.
b)
A. Every application for an itinerant vendor's license shall be made in
writing to the Township Clerk on forms provided and approved by the
Township Manager. The application shall be signed by the applicant
giving residence and business address and a description of and license
number of each vehicle to be used in such business. The application
shall also include information about the location and dates of the
proposed sales activity. If a vehicle is to be used in any portion of the
activity, a description of the vehicle(s) including color, make model,
year, license plate number, including state of registration, as well as
name and address of registered owner shall be included in the
application.
B. Each person conducting sales pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:24-9b and N.J.S.A.
45:24-10 shall present such license to the Township Clerk for
identification at least 24 hours before conducting any business
pursuant to this chapter.
C. Every application for a license shall also include a valid tax sale
certificate of authority issued to the vendor pursuant to Section 15 of
PL 1966, c.30 (C.54:32B-15) empowering the vendor to collect sales
tax.
D. Fees. The application fee for each itinerant vendors license issued
pursuant to this article shall be $100. Such license shall permit the
holder thereof to conduct such sales. The holder of such license shall
pay an additional fee of $25 for each additional vehicle used by the
§ 132.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 132.03
001:277
§ 132.04. through § 132.08. (Reserved)5
Chapter 135
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 135.01. Title. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
This chapter shall be known as the "Commercial Maintenance Code of
the Township of Pequannock, County of Morris and State of New Jersey
Fixing Minimum Standards Governing the Maintenance, Appearance and
Condition of Commercial Property; Fixing Responsibilities and Duties upon
license. The fee shall be due when an application is filed and shall not
be refundable if the application is denied.
E. Expiration. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall expire on
December 31 next after the granting of the same.
F. Availability of license for inspection. Any person holding a license
issued pursuant to this article shall produce the same for inspection
whenever requested to do so.
G. Suspension or revocation of license. Every license granted under the
provisions of this article may be suspended or revoked for a violation of
the rules established by this chapter by the Township Council after the
holder is provided with an opportunity to be heard. Upon suspension on
or after such license shall be revoked, such license shall be inoperative
and of no effect.
H. Limits on mobile itinerant vendors license. Except in conjunction with a
licensed activity pursuant to Chapter 75 of this Code (Fair or Festival),
no mobile itinerant vending shall be permitted along major or minor
arterial roadways, namely; The Boulevard, the Newark Pompton
Turnpike, Jacksonville Road, Lincoln Park Road, Jackson Avenue, State
Highway Route 23, and Interstate 287. No mobile itinerant vendor shall
remain in one location for more than 15 minutes. Mobile vending shall
be limited to vending from the curb-side of vehicles which are parked in
legal spaces or areas.
I. Limits on door to door itinerant vending. No door to door sales shall
commence before 10:00 a.m. and shall end no later than one hour after
sunset from October 1 through March 31 and at sunset the remainder
of the year.
J. The itinerant vendors license is required in addition to any other license
which may be required for the activity being conducted including a
license from the Health Department which is required for the sale of
food products.
5. Note: Repealed by Ord. No. 2015-02.
§ 132.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 135.01
001:278
Owners, Operators and Others; Authorizing and Establishing Procedures
for the Inspection of Commercial Property and Fixing Penalties for
Violations" and is referred to in this chapter in the short form as "this code."
§ 135.02. Purpose. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance and condition of commercial premises and shopping centers;
to fix responsibilities and duties upon owners, operators and occupants;
to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of commercial
premises and shopping centers; to fix penalties for the violations of this
code; and to provide for the right of access by the agents and employees
of the Township to enforce compliance with the provisions hereof whenever
necessary. This code is hereby declared to be remedial and essential for the
public interest, and it is intended that this code be liberally construed to
effectuate the purpose as stated herein.
§ 135.03. Definitions. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
The following terms, wherever used herein, shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — A building or buildings or any part thereof,
and the lot or tract upon which the building or buildings are situated, where
commercial activity of any kind takes place. "Commercial activity" shall
include, but is not limited to, gasoline service stations; stores for retail
sales; liquor stores; taverns and inns; restaurants, including but not limited
to drive-in restaurants, snack bars, hot dog, hamburger or ice cream stands;
professional activities, including but not limited to, medical, dental, legal,
architectural and accounting; personal services, including but not limited
to, real estate, insurance, barber shops, hair dressers and repair shops of
all kinds; and amusements, including but not limited to, movies, skating
rinks, bowling alleys; whether part of a shopping area or not. "Commercial
activity" shall not include sale of agricultural products produced on the
premises.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Those portions of a building that are
exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any
building erected thereon.
HARBORAGE — Any condition, man-made or natural, which affords a
breeding place or hiding place for rodents, insects or other pests.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on
the premises, which constitute a health hazard.
NUISANCE —
Any common law nuisance or as provided by the laws of the State of
New Jersey or ordinance of the Township of Pequannock.
A.
§ 135.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135.03
001:279
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of children, whether in a building or upon a lot. This includes, but
is not limited to, any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber,
trash, fences, debris, or vegetation such as poison ivy, poison oak or
poison sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
B.
Abandoned vehicles, trailers, carts, wagons, vessels or other things;
any vehicle, trailer, cart, wagon, vessel or other thing which is
inoperable, physically or by operation of law, or which remains outside
in an unfenced area of premises which are not used or maintained for
the sale of motor vehicles, trailers, campers or boats.
C.
Any physical condition dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the condition exists.
This includes, but is not limited to, harborage, as defined above,
existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which mosquito
larvae breed or exist; any deposit or accumulation of trash, litter,
garbage, refuse, debris or any organic or inorganic matter which may
attract flies and to which flies may have access, or in which fly larvae
or pupae breed or exist; the existence, presence or maintenance of any
brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, limbs, obnoxious
growth, filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris which is or may become
a fire hazard or otherwise detrimental to the health, safety and welfare
of persons; the existence or presence of any ragweed, poison ivy, poison
sumac or other noxious growth of any kind; the presence, existence
or maintenance of any holes, excavations, breaks, projections or
obstructions; accumulations of ice, snow or water; and excretion of pets
and other animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking
areas and other parts of the exterior of the premises which are intended
for use by persons or which are accessible to and likely to be used by
such persons.
D.
The escape into open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any other
entrance to the open air of such quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust,
fumes, vapors, mists or gases which endanger or interfere with the
health, safety and general welfare of persons, or the creation of
excessive and noxious amounts of dust.
E.
Any act or maintenance of any condition which causes or threatens
pollution, as defined by the laws of the State of New Jersey, of any
waters in this Township in such manner as to endanger the health,
safety or general welfare of persons upon any premises within this
Township.
F.
Unsanitary conditions or anything unreasonably offensive to the senses
or dangerous to health, in violation of this code.
G.
Whatever renders air, water, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental
to the health of human beings.
H.
I. Fire hazards.
§ 135.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 135.03
001:280
OCCUPANT — Any person having actual possession of the premises or any
part thereof.
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care or control of the premises or
any part thereof, whether with or without the consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with other, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or control of any
premises as owner or as fiduciary, including but not limited to, executor,
executrix, administrator, administratix, trustee, receiver, or guardian of the
estate or as mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such possession
was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part
or all of any premises shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and
shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises subject or
assigned by said lessee.
SHOPPING CENTER — One or more buildings or parts thereof designed or
existing as a unit, occupied or to be occupied by one or more businesses for
the conduct of retail sales, with parking space.
§ 135.04. Scope; applicability. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-02]
All commercial premises and shopping centers and any buildings situated
thereon in the Township of Pequannock shall comply with the provisions of
this code, whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered
or repaired before or after the enactment of this code. This code establishes
minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and use of all
such buildings and premises and does not replace or modify standards
otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of such
buildings or premises contained therein. Where there is a mixed occupancy
with commercial and other uses on the same premises, all such uses shall
be nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of this code.
§ 135.05. Prevalence of higher standards. [Amended 4-24-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-02]
In any case where the provisions of this code impose a higher standard than
is set forth in any other ordinances of the Township of Pequannock or under
the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth therein
shall prevail, but if the provisions of this code impose a lower standard than
any other ordinances of the Township of Pequannock or the laws of the
State of New Jersey, then the higher standard contained in any other such
ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 135.06. Liability of owners and operators. [Amended 4-24-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-02]
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities
prescribed in this code, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any
§ 135.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135.06
001:281
such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of
violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also.
§ 135.07. Liability of occupants. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-02]
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
135.12, 135.13, 135.14, 135.15, 135.16 and 135.17 of this code, and the
occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be
entitled to defend against any charge or violation thereof by reason of the
fact that the owner or operator is also responsible therefor and in violation
thereof.
§ 135.08. Duty of occupant to report violations. [Amended
4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
Upon discovery by an occupant of any condition of the premises, which
constitutes a violation of this code by the owner or operator, the occupant
shall report same to the Township Manager, who shall be responsible for
enforcement of the provisions of this code.
§ 135.09. Landscaping. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
Premises shall be landscaped, and lawns, trees, hedges and bushes shall be
kept trimmed and alive. The front and side yards of all premises shall be
maintained so that grass shall not exceed eight inches in height.
§ 135.10. Signs. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
All signs and printed matter, and pictures or illustrations contained thereon,
permitted by reasons of other regulations or as a lawful nonconforming use,
shall be maintained, painted and in good repair.
§ 135.11. Maintenance of exterior of structure. [Amended
4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
The exterior of every structure or accessory structure (including fences,
signs and store fronts) shall be maintained in good repair. All structural
surfaces shall be maintained free of safety hazards, including but not
limited to broken windows, loose and falling shingles, roofing or siding and
crumbling and falling stone or brick, and fire hazards.
§ 135.12. Removal of garbage and refuse. [Amended 4-24-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-02]
Every owner, operator and occupant shall have the duty and responsibility
of providing sufficient and suitable receptacles with tight fitting covers
for receiving and holding refuse and garbage; and the receptacles shall
be maintained in a manner, with the cover in place so as to prevent the
creation of a nuisance, and shall be kept in an enclosed space separate and
§ 135.06 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 135.12
001:282
apart from sidewalks and other pedestrian areas, except when set out for
collection during the hours of a day scheduled for such collection.
§ 135.13. Maintenance of sidewalks. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-02]
The owner, operator and occupant shall maintain paths, walks, driveways,
parking lots, parking areas and other parts of the premises, in good repair,
free from safety hazards and unsanitary conditions, including but not
limited to holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, ice,
uncleared snow, litter, excretion of pets and other animals. All such holes
and excavations shall be filled and repaired, and other conditions removed
where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary conditions with
reasonable dispatch upon their discovery. It shall be the responsibility of
the owner, operator and occupant to take reasonable steps to discover,
remove and abate any hazards or unsanitary conditions, which may exist
on the premises. Any sidewalk in need of replacement shall be replaced
with a portland cement concrete sidewalk meeting present standards for
new construction. No sidewalk replacement shall commence without the
approval of the Township Manager or his designee.
§ 135.14. Duty to keep premises in sanitary condition. [Amended
4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant shall be kept in
a clean and sanitary condition and performing any acts which would render
other parts of the premises unclean or unsanitary or which would obstruct
the owner or operator from performing any duty required hereunder or
maintaining the premises in a clean and sanitary condition is prohibited.
§ 135.15. Duty to keep premises free from infestation. [Amended
4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
Every owner, operator and occupant shall be responsible for the elimination
of infestation in and on the premises subject to his control.
§ 135.16. Duty to keep premises free from nuisances and hazards.
[Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free
from all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians
and other persons utilizing the premises and free from unsanitary
conditions.
§ 135.17. Responsibilities of owners and operators of shopping
centers. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
The owner and operator of every shopping center shall be responsible for
providing and/or maintaining the following:
A. A fire lane.
§ 135.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 135.17
001:283
§ 135.18. Outside storage. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-02]
§ 135.19. Incomplete building additions or renovations. [Amended
4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-02]
All exterior building additions or renovations requiring the issuance of a
building permit shall be completed within six months from the date the
building permit is issued and all construction supplies shall be neatly stored
during construction. The Construction Official may extend the period of
time for completion if he is satisfied that the extent of the construction
activity reasonably requires a period of time greater than six months to
complete or that the property owner establishes a hardship or other good
cause for extension.
§ 135.20. Violations; procedure. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-02]
This chapter may be enforced by any Township official or employee (the
"Enforcement Official") who shall be designated and directed by the
Township Manager to address any particular violation(s) of this chapter. The
Enforcement Official shall have the authority to issue a Notice of Violation
and Abatement (the "Notice") directing the abatement of any violation of
this chapter and specifying a time period for abating the violation. In the
event the property owner has not provided the Township with a current
address for service, the Notice may be posted upon the property. The failure
to comply with the Notice shall constitute a violation of this chapter and the
penalties, as set forth in Chapter 178 shall apply.
B. Means of ingress and egress shall be clearly marked by signs.
C. A covered trash basket with at least a twenty-gallon capacity shall be
provided for each 150 feet of store frontage in the shopping area. Such
baskets may be placed in the walking or pedestrian area.
A. Outside storage or display of merchandise or equipment shall be
forbidden. However, this section shall not apply to outside storage of
motor vehicles, trailers, campers, boats or other similar merchandise
held for retail sale. This section shall apply but not be limited to storage
of merchandise or equipment in trailers, motor vehicles, shacks, sheds
or other outside containers.
B. Waiver of this provision may be applied for by written request to the
Township Council and granted based on the size and kind of
merchandise or equipment, duration and location of the outside storage
and the purposes of this code.
§ 135.17 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 135.21
001:284
§ 135.21. Emergency situations. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-02]
Where the violations or conditions existing on the premises are of such a
nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless abated
without delay, the Enforcement Official may either cause the violation to
be abated or order the owner, occupant or operator to correct the violation
or condition within a period of time not to exceed three days. Upon failure
to do so, the Enforcement Official may cause the condition to be abated
subject to the provisions of 135.22 of this chapter. In addition, any other
remedies set forth in other sections of the Pequannock Township Code shall
be available.
§ 135.22. Abatement by Township; expense. [Amended 4-24-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-02]
The Township may abate a violation of this chapter when the Enforcement
Official is unable to serve the Notice upon a property owner or when the
property owner, after service of the Notice, fails to satisfactorily abate
the violation. The Township may also abate a violation, without any prior
notice, in an emergency situation as set forth in Section 135.21 of this
chapter. If the Enforcement Official recommends that the Township abate
a violation, the Enforcement Official shall submit a report of the findings
and recommendations to the Township Council. The Township Council may
thereupon, by resolution, authorize the abatement of the condition as may
be necessary to put the premises in a condition so as to comply with
the requirements of this code. The Township Council may also, by such
resolution, authorize the expenditure of municipal funds and fix the amount
to be used for such purpose.
Upon completion of the abatement the Enforcement Official shall submit a
report of the monies expended to the Township Manager for presentation
to the Township Council. After review of the report, the Township Council
may approve the expenses and costs by resolution and thereupon, the
stated amount of expenses and costs spent shall become a lien against
the premises, collectible as provided by law in conformity with N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.14. A copy of the resolution approving the expenses and costs shall
be certified by the Township Clerk and filed with the Tax Collector of the
Township, who shall be responsible for the collection thereof; and a copy
of the report and resolution shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of the affected premises.
Chapter 136
NON-COMMERCIAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 135.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136.01
001:285
§ 136.01. Purposes. [Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect public health, safety
and general welfare on or upon premises in the Township of Pequannock as
herein set forth by:
§ 136.02. Definitions. [Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
BLIGHTING EFFECT — When the manner in which property is maintained
results in a diminution in the value of at least one surrounding property by
at least 5% assessable value as determined by the Township Tax Assessor.
BUILDING — Any structure, or part thereof, used for or intended to be
used for habitation or occupancy including any accessory structures and
appurtenance belonging thereto.
PROPERTY — Any land or buildings located in the Township of Pequannock
which are not regulated by Chapter 135 "Commercial Property
Maintenance".
RUBBISH — Combustible and non-combustible waste materials including,
but not limited to, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, tree
branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, material matter, grass, trees,
play equipment, or outdoor furniture in disrepair.
SEMITRAILER — Every vehicle with or without motive power designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is
carried by another vehicle.
TRAILER — Every vehicle with or without motive power, designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle.
TRUCK — Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for
the transportation of property.
TRUCK TRACTOR — Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than
a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
§ 136.03. Maintenance of exterior premises. [Amended 11-22-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-23]
A. Establishing minimum maintenance standards for private real property.
B. Affixing responsibilities of property owners.
C. Establishing penalties for unabated violations.
A. Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a
clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of
the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a
clean and sanitary condition. The property shall be kept free of litter
§ 136.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 136.03
001:286
and free of nuisances and hazards to the safety of tenants, occupants,
pedestrians and other persons having access to the premises.
B. Weeds and plant growth.
(i) All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
weeds and plant growth which create a sight obstruction and/or
safety hazard to motor vehicles in their operation on roadways.
(ii) All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
grass or weeds in excess of six inches in height. All noxious weeds
shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as grasses, annual
plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided;
however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
(iii) All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from
dead and dying trees and other natural growth which, by reason of
rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, are or may be
dangerous to persons or property in the vicinity thereof. Tree shall
be trimmed and pruned to avoid overhanging and projecting limbs
which constitute a danger to persons or property in the vicinity
thereof.
C. Landscape maintenance.
(i) Where exposed to public view, the landscaping of premises shall be
maintained in an orderly state with lawns and bushes trimmed and
free from becoming overgrown, littered and unsightly where such
would constitute a blighting effect, depreciating adjoining and
nearby property. Open areas shall be graded evenly to eliminate
holes, depressions, gullies, mounds, accumulations of debris or
other unsightly or unsafe conditions.
(ii) Dead or dying trees and other natural growth which, by reason of
rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage, are or may be
dangerous to persons in the vicinity thereof and shall be removed.
D. All property shall be maintained free from broken or discarded
furniture, household or business equipment and furnishings or the
accumulation or storage of any other rubbish.
E. All property shall be maintained free from any condition dangerous to
the public including but not limited to abandoned, broken or neglected
equipment, machinery, pools, excavations and fences.
F. Sidewalks, curbs and driveways. All sidewalks, curbs, monolithic curbs/
gutters, walkways, stairways, driveways, parking spaces and similar
areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and maintained free from
hazardous conditions.
G. Fences and walls. All fences and walls shall be kept in good repair and
in a safe condition.
§ 136.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136.04
001:287
§ 136.04. Incomplete building additions or renovations. [Amended
11-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
§ 136.05. Parking or storage of commercial semitrailer or truck.
[Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-23]
§ 136.06. Motor vehicles. [Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
No inoperable motor vehicle or motor vehicle which is currently
unregistered or uninspected or without a current or valid license plate shall
be parked, stored, or left on any property for more than one week unless
such vehicle is:
A. All exterior building additions or renovations requiring the issuance of a
building permit shall be completed within six months from the date the
building permit is issued and all construction supplies shall be neatly
stored during construction. The Construction Official may extend the
period of time for completion if he is satisfied that the extent of the
construction activity reasonably requires a period of time greater than
six months to complete or that the property owner establishes a
hardship or other good cause for extension.
B. It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner or occupant of
property to leave buildings which are left in a state of partial
construction for a period of 90 days or more or which represent a
hazardous or unsafe condition to the inhabitants or the community.
A. Parking or storage of a commercial Semi trailer or Trailer or Truck shall
be prohibited if the same is:
(1) Over 20,000 pounds (10 tons) registered gross weight.
(2) And/or over 10 feet in height as measured from the ground.
(3) And/or is over 24 feet from bumper to bumper.
B. No permitted vehicle shall use any type of motor, other than that used
for the moving of the vehicle, and the motor of said vehicle shall be
turned off upon the parking of the same.
This section shall not apply to a vehicle which is parked in a completely
enclosed garage and is owned by a resident of the premises and which
conforms to Township zoning ordinances.
C. Nothing in this section shall curtail the use of commercial vehicles
making deliveries to or performing services at premises in a residential
district.
A. Kept inside a garage or other enclosed building; or
B. Underneath a car cover custom manufactured for that vehicle.
§ 136.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 136.07
001:288
§ 136.07. Building maintenance. [Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
§ 136.09. Ingress and egress. [Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
Safe ingress and egress from all structures on property shall be maintained.
§ 136.10. Violations; procedure. [Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
A. Any building or structure which is dangerous to life or health or which
presents a fire hazard shall be considered a nuisance.
B. General. The exterior of the premises shall be maintained so that the
appearance thereof shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with
the standards of the neighborhood or such higher standards as may be
adopted by the Township of Pequannock and such that the appearance
thereof shall not constitute a blighting effect upon neighboring
properties.
C. The exterior of every structure shall be maintained in good repair. The
exterior of all buildings shall be kept free of broken glass or windows,
peeling paint, rotten, missing or substantially destroyed window frames
and sashes, doors and door frames and other exterior building
components, including porches and decks.
A. This chapter may be enforced by any Township official or employee (the
"Enforcement Official") who shall be designated and directed by the
Township Manager to address any particular violation(s) of this chapter.
The Enforcement Official shall have the authority to issue a Notice of
Violation and Abatement (the "Notice") directing the abatement of any
violation of this chapter and specifying a time period for abating the
violation. In the event the property owner has not provided the
Township with a current address for service, the Notice may be posted
upon the property. The failure to comply with the Notice shall constitute
a violation of this chapter.
B. For a violation of this chapter, the offender shall be subject to
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days or by a
fine not exceeding $1,000, or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days. Any person who is convicted of violating this
Ordinance within one year of the date of a previous violation of the
same Ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation, shall be
sentenced by the Court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the Court upon a person for repeated offense
shall not exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of this chapter,
but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of the Ordinance.
§ 136.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136.11
001:289
§ 136.11. Emergency situations. [Amended 11-22-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-23]
Where the violations or conditions existing on the premises are of such a
nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless abated
without delay, the Enforcement Official may either cause the violation to
be abated or order the owner, occupant or operator to correct the violation
or condition within a period of time not to exceed three days. Upon failure
to do so, the Enforcement Official may cause the condition to be abated
subject to the provisions of 136.12 of this chapter. In addition, any other
remedies set forth in other sections of the Pequannock Township Code shall
be available.
§ 136.12. Abatement by Township; expense. [Amended 11-22-2005
by Ord. No. 2005-23]
The Township may abate a violation of this chapter when the Enforcement
Official is unable to serve the Notice upon a property owner or when the
property owner, after service of the Notice, fails to satisfactorily abate
the violation. The Township may also abate a violation, without any prior
notice, in an emergency situation as set forth in Section 136.12 of this
chapter. If the Enforcement Official recommends that the Township abate
a violation, the Enforcement Official shall submit a report of the findings
and recommendations to the Township Council. The Township Council may
thereupon, by resolution, authorize the abatement of the condition as may
be necessary to put the premises in such a condition so as to comply
with the requirements of this code. The Township Council may, by such
resolution, authorize the expenditure of municipal funds and fix the amount
to be used for such purpose.
Upon completion of the abatement the Enforcement Official shall submit a
report of the monies expended to the Township Manager for presentation
to the Township Council. After review of the report, the Township Council
may approve the expenses and costs by resolution and thereupon, the
stated amount of expenses and costs spent shall become a lien against
the premises, collectible as provided by law in conformity with N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.14. A copy of the resolution approving the expenses and costs shall
be certified by the Township Clerk and filed with the Tax Collector of the
Township, who shall be responsible for the collection thereof; and a copy
of the report and resolution shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the owner of the affected premises.
Chapter 143
RIDING ACADEMIES AND LIVERY STABLES
§ 136.11 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 143.01
001:290
§ 143.01. License required.
No person shall open, operate or maintain any riding academy or livery
stable within the Township without first obtaining a license therefor from
the Township.
§ 143.02. License application.
Application for a license under this chapter shall be made in writing to the
Township Clerk and shall state the name of the applicant, the owner of the
premises and the number of horses that will be kept on the premises.
§ 143.03. Granting of license at discretion of Council; signing of
license.
The granting of a license under this chapter shall be at the discretion of the
Township Council. Each such license shall be signed by the Township Clerk.
§ 143.04. Fees.
The fee for a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be $15.
§ 143.05. Term of license.
Each license issued under this chapter shall begin on the first day of January
or on the date of issuance and end on the 31st day of December following.
Chapter 147
SPECIAL SALES
§ 147.01. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
CHRISTMAS SALE — The sale of Christmas trees and related items for the
Christmas season, held where said goods are sold or displayed in the open
air.
CLOSEOUT SALE — Includes, but shall not be limited to, the sale, or
an offer to sell, to the public, goods, wares, and merchandise of any and
all kinds and description on hand in stock in connection with a declared
purpose, as set forth by advertising, on the part of the seller that such sale
is anticipatory to the termination, closing, liquidation, revision, winding up,
discontinuance, conclusion or abandonment of the business in connection
with such sale. It shall also include any sale, advertised to be an adjustment
sale, creditor's sale, executor's sale, administrator's sale, insolvent sale,
insurance salvage sale, mortgage sale, assignee's sale, adjustor's sale,
receiver's sale, loss-of-lease sale, forced-out-of-business sale, removal sale,
and any and all sales advertised in such manner as to reasonably convey to
§ 143.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147.01
001:291
the public that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business
will cease and be discontinued.
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE — A sale held out in such
manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer
goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
FLEA MARKET — An open air sale involving multiple vendors selling a
variety of goods on a common property.
GOODS — Includes any goods, wares, merchandise or other property
capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
GRAND OPENING SALE — A sale where a new line of goods is offered to
the public of any kind and all descriptions, whether in the new opening of a
store or in the introduction of a new line of goods.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Is defined to mean any organization
recognized as a nonprofit organization by the Internal Revenue Code.
OPEN-AIR SALE — Any sale, such as a parking lot sale, sidewalk sale or any
sale where goods are displayed and/or sold in an unenclosed area such as
the sidewalk or parking lot on premises of the seller.
PERSON — Includes an individual, association, partnership or corporation.
PUBLISH or PUBLISHING or ADVERTISEMENT or ADVERTISING — Any
and all means of conveying to the public notice of sale or notice of intention
to conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, letter, newspaper
advertisement, magazine advertisement, handbill, written or printed
display, billboard display or poster, whether in or away from the business
location, radio announcement and any and all other means, oral or written.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE — A sale held out in such manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale
will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the
stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new
location or will then continue business from other existing locations.
§ 147.02. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to publish, announce or conduct any sale
of the type or kind herein defined without first obtaining a license therefore
in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. No license shall be
issued for an open air sale unless sponsored by a nonprofit organization or
as otherwise permitted by this ordinance and with the exception of a flea
market or Christmas sale all participating displayers or sellers shall own
or lease permanent premises within 25 feet of the place where the outdoor
display or sale will be conducted and shall consist of merchandise normally
sold by the displayer or seller.
§ 147.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 147.03
001:292
§ 147.03. License application.
A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this ordinance shall
make written application to the Township Zoning Officer setting forth and
containing the following information:
§ 147.04. License fee. [Amended 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-2;
10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-24; 11-9-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-31]
Any applicant for a Christmas Sale license hereunder shall submit to the
Zoning Officer, with his application, a license fee of $200 together with
a refundable deposit of $500 which shall be returned upon cleaning and
restoring of the site and compliance with such other conditions which may
be provided with the license; except that the $200 fee shall be reduced to
$50 for a permit issued to an organization that has a 501(c)(3) exemption
issued by the IRS.
A. The true names and addresses of the owners of the goods to be the
object of the sale.
B. A description of the place where such sale is to be held.
C. The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the
effective date of termination of such occupancy.
D. The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted.
E. The means to be employed in advertising said sale, together with the
proposed content of any advertisement.
F. A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at said sale is
disclosed by applicant's records. Said inventory shall be attached to and
become part of the application.
G. A complete and detailed inventory shall not be necessary in applications
for a grand opening or flea market sale. A flea market sale shall list the
names of the participating vendors together with an indication of the
type of wares intended to be sold.
H. All applications shall contain a hold harmless clause running to the
Township. In the event that any sale will occur within any part of the
right-of-way of the Township, evidence of insurance shall be submitted
with the application in an amount deemed sufficient by the Township
Zoning Officer.
I. All applications shall be co-signed by the property owner or his
authorized agent. When the owner is not signed personally, the
authority of the agent must be in writing.
J. For nonprofit organizations, a copy of the IRS tax exemption
certification shall be submitted.
§ 147.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147.05
001:293
§ 147.05. Duties of Township Zoning Officer.
The Township Zoning Officer shall have the following duties:
§ 147.06. Action of Township Chief of Police and Zoning Officer.
§ 147.07. Time limitations on licenses.
A. To receive applications for all licenses hereunder and process the same
as required herein. No application shall be accepted by the Township
Zoning Officer unless submitted a minimum of one calendar week prior
to the sale event.
B. After the receipt of all fees and charges and reports required by the
nature of the application, to refer the application, with the required
attachments to the Chief of Police for review and approval.
C. In the event of favorable action by the Township Chief of Police to issue
the license, provided that all regulatory fees and charges and municipal
taxes, if any, pertaining to the licenses have been paid.
D. To keep all records pertaining to said licenses, licensees and agents.
E. To establish the application forms for issuance of all licenses hereunder,
including, where desired, a requirement that said application be
executed under oath, and establish procedures for processing to
minimize duplication.
A. In considering the application, the Zoning Officer may grant or deny a
license dependent upon whether or not the applicant can show good
and proper traffic patterns, sufficient parking to handle the sale traffic,
that there will be no impairment of the general welfare and that the
health, safety and welfare of the public will not be adversely affected.
B. Where the sales are to take place in the parking lot outside the
premises, in front of the premises or in an area contiguous to the
premises, the applicant shall submit to the Zoning Officer a plot plan
detailing the name and title of the applicant; all dimensions of setbacks,
side yards, and rear yards; landscape area; the size, kind and location of
fences; the size and type of plant material; the location and dimensions
of all signs and exterior lighting; the location of existing and/or
proposed principal building and all accessory structures; a proposed
plan for traffic control, parking of cars, public safety; and the area
where the sale is to take place.
A. Closeout and grand opening sales. The license shall authorize the sale
described in the application for a period of not more than 30
consecutive days following the issuance thereof.
B. All other sales. The license shall authorize the sale described in the
application for a period of not more than three consecutive days
following the issuance thereof. Such license shall be renewed, in the
§ 147.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 147.07
001:294
§ 147.08. License to specify type of sale and goods offered.
The license shall authorize only the type of sale and goods for sale described
in the application at the location named therein.
§ 147.09. Transferability of license.
Any license provided for herein shall not be assignable or transferable.
§ 147.10. Duties of licensee.
A licensee hereunder shall:
discretion of the Zoning Officer, for an additional period of time not
exceeding three days, upon application being made for such renewal,
which application must be accompanied with a revised inventory
showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold
and not listing any goods not included in the original application and
inventory.
C. Christmas sales. The license shall authorize the sale for a period of not
more than 45 days commencing November 15 in any one year.
A. In the case of closeout sales, make no additions whatsoever during the
period of the licensed sale to the stock of goods set forth in the
inventory attached to the application for license.
B. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading
advertising.
C. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising
incidental thereto.
D. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the
filed inventory as being objects of sale and make such distinction clear
to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the
place of sale, apprising the public of the status of all such goods.
E. Display the license in a prominent place on the window of the premises
where the sale is to be held so that it is clearly visible from the exterior
of said premises.
F. Keep suitable books and records at the place of sale and make the same
available for inspection by the Zoning Officer or his authorized
representatives.
G. Make provisions for security and traffic control as determined by the
Chief of Police whose decisions shall be attached to license as a
condition of approval.
H. No off-tract signage will be permitted.
§ 147.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147.10
001:295
§ 147.11. Construal of provisions; prevalence of more restrictive
provisions.
§ 147.12. Death of licensee.
Upon the death of the person doing business in this Township, his or her
heirs, devisees or legatees or executors or administrators shall have the
right to apply at any time for a license under this chapter.
§ 147.13. Limitation of number of licenses allowed.
Any person who has held a sale, as regulated hereunder, at the location
stated in the application, within one year last past from the date of such
application shall not be granted a license for the same type or promotion or
sale, except that a person may receive one additional license for a different
type of promotion or sale within the aforesaid one-year period so long as
that promotion or sale is different in kind from the first license granted.
§ 147.14. Location of sales.
§ 147.15. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons:
Approval for a temporary on-site sign may be obtained in accordance with the
provisions of the Township Sign Ordinance.
A. The provisions of this chapter are intended to augment and be in
addition to the provisions of other applicable licensing ordinances of
the Township.
B. Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon persons,
premises, businesses or other practices than is imposed by any other
licensing ordinance of the Township, then this chapter shall control.
A. Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more than
one place of business, the license shall apply only to the one store or
branch specified in the application, and no other store or branch shall
advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it, or in any way
participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch
conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store
or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the
licensed sale.
B. Sales may take place in front of premises, in the parking lot outside
premises or in any approved contiguous area to premises, but only for
time specified in the license, and thereafter sales shall return within the
confines of regular sales area.
§ 147.10 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 147.15
001:296
§ 147.16. Sidewalk cafes.
A. Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
B. Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction.
C. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
A. Purposes. The sidewalk cafe regulations as established by this section
are designed to permit sidewalk cafes to be established on public
property in locations where they are determined to be appropriate by
these regulations and all applicable related ordinances established to
promote and protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
These general purposes include the following specific purposes: To
insure that adequate space is provided for pedestrian circulation
through areas where sidewalk cafes are established and to insure
adequate access to adjoining properties and businesses.
To encourage the establishment of sidewalk cafes as one means of
developing a pleasant and distinctive shopping atmosphere.
B. Definition.
SIDEWALK CAFE — The extension of the services of an existing
restaurant preparing and serving foods for consumption within an
existing building, to the extent that food is permitted to be served
and consumed at tables placed on the public sidewalk adjacent to and
within the confines of the frontage of that portion of the building in
which the restaurant is situated. A sidewalk cafe may contain readily
removable tables, chairs, temporary railings and planters but shall be
otherwise unenclosed by fixed walls and open to the air except for
retractable awnings, umbrellas or other nonpermanent covers provided
such covers do not interfere with pedestrian circulation.
C. License required. Any person, firm or corporation may operate a
sidewalk cafe (hereinafter called a "cafe") within the Township of
Pequannock in any zone in which a restaurant use is permitted on the
sidewalk adjacent to an existing restaurant operated by such person,
firm or corporation upon obtaining a license from the Planning Director.
Such license shall allow the operation of a cafe from April 1 up to and
including November 1 of any calendar year and may be renewed
annually.
D. Application Procedures, Requirements and Fee.
(1) Application and fee. Each applicant for a license shall submit a
letter of application together with three copies of a development
plan for the cafe and a nonrefundable fee of $100 to the Planning
Director. The letter of application shall state the name and address
of the applicant, the property owner if other than the applicant, the
§ 147.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 147.16
001:297
person preparing the development plan and the written
authorization of the owner of the property to submit the application
if the applicant is not the owner.
(2) Development plans. The following information shall be shown on all
development plans:
a. The applicant's entire property and adjacent properties.
b. The design and location of all temporary structures proposed
including tables, chairs, planters, awnings and other
equipment as well as lighting and electrical outlet locations, if
any.
c. Capacity of the existing restaurant and proposed cafe.
d. Proposal for providing adequate pedestrian circulation.
(3) Referral of development plans. Prior to the issuance of a license
pursuant to this section, the development plans and applications
shall be referred to the construction official and fire official along
with the Planning Director who shall recommend approval,
disapproval or modification of said plans within 10 days of
submission of the plans.
(4) Conditions for issuance of license. Upon approval of the application
and plans submitted by the applicant pursuant to this section, the
Planning Director shall issue a license to the applicant provided the
applicant has furnished the Township of Pequannock the following:
a. An agreement by the applicant to repair any damage caused to
the sidewalk in the operation of the cafe at the expense of the
applicant. The Township Administration may require a bond to
be filed by the applicant in an amount to be fixed by the
Township.
b. An agreement by the applicant indemnifying the Township
against loss, including costs and expenses, resulting from
injury to person or property as a direct or indirect result of the
operation of the cafe or for injury to person or property
occurring on the premises occupied by the cafe. The applicant
shall provide an insurance policy to the Township in the
amount of $500,000 which amount shall be stipulated on the
liability policy and naming the Township as co-insured.
(5) Rules, regulations and specifications. A cafe authorized and
operated pursuant to this section shall comply with all of the
following rules, regulations and specifications.
a. The applicant and/or operator shall fully comply with all plans
submitted and approved by the Planning Director under the
terms of this Ordinance.
§ 147.16 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 147.16
001:298
Chapter 150
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
b. Within 30 minutes after the closing of the cafe, the operator
shall have all furniture, utensils, customers or any other
materials used in the operation of the cafe or within the area
used by the cafe, removed from the sidewalk area. Said closing
shall be no later than 10:00 p.m.
c. The area of operation shall be kept clean and free of litter.
Sidewalks shall be washed daily and trash receptacles shall be
provided as approved by the Health Department.
d. Music, if any, shall be kept at a reasonable level that is not
unnecessarily loud or objectionable to persons in or around the
area.
e. The operator shall maintain an area free of any obstruction a
distance of 36 inches from the curb and an aisle for pedestrian
movement through the area at least 44 inches in width and
shall see to it that tables, chairs and other materials do not
interfere with these required open areas and pedestrian traffic.
f. The operator shall comply with all the requirements of N.J.A.C.
8:24-1 et seq., also known as Chapter XII of the New Jersey
State Sanitary Code, and N.J.S.A. 24:15-1 et seq.
g. The operator shall comply with all other ordinances of the
Township of Pequannock.
(6) Notice of Violation; Failure to Comply. Upon a finding by the
Township Zoning Officer that a sidewalk cafe or the owner of the
Property on which a sidewalk cafe is operated has violated any
provisions of this section, the Township Zoning Officer shall give
notice to the responsible individual to correct said violation within
24 hours of receipt of said notice. Upon failure to correct said
violation within 24 hours, the Township Zoning Officer may revoke
the operator's license issued pursuant to this section. Upon the
revocation of such license the operator shall be entitled to a
hearing and notice thereof, if such is requested, within five days of
revocation.
(7) Sale and Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. The
consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited within a
cafe.
(8) Penalties for Offenses. Any person violating the provisions of this
section shall be subject to the revocation of the license and a
penalty of $100 each day that an offense continues.
§ 147.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150.01
001:299
§ 150.01. Title.
There is established a new section entitled Chapter 150 "SEWAGE
DISPOSAL SYSTEMS, INDIVIDUAL".
§ 150.02. Adoption of standards.
Chapter 150 shall be entitled "SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS,
INDIVIDUAL", and pursuant to the New Jersey Statutes Annotated 58:22.23
et seq. including 58:11-36 and 13:1B-3 and the amendments thereto, there
is adopted Chapter 7:9A-1.1 through 7:9A-12.8 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code and the supplements and additions thereto.
§ 150.03. Permit required.
No person shall locate, construct, or alter any individual sewage disposal
system, nor shall a completed or altered system be backfilled without the
approval of the Health Department.
A. The Health Department shall examine all applications for permits, and
approve or deny in whole or in part the application, within 20 business
days. If the application is denied in whole or in part, the Health
Department shall set forth the reason therefor in writing. If the Health
Department fails to grant, in whole or in part, or deny an application
within 20 days, such failure shall be deemed a denial of the application
for the purposes of an appeal as provided by law, unless such period of
time has been extended with the consent of the applicant.
B. Suspension of permit. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the
authorized work is not commenced within nine months after the
issuance of the permit or completed within one year after the issuance
of the permit. The Health Department may consider an extension
beyond the one-year period completion date provided an application is
made in writing prior to the termination of the one-year period
explaining the reason for the delay. Said extension, if granted, shall not
exceed three months commencing from the original date of termination.
C. Approved plans. The Department of Health shall stamp or endorse in
writing the approved plans. One set of approved plans shall be retained
by the Department of Health and the other set shall be kept on the
construction site open to inspection to the Health Department or its
authorized representative at all reasonable times.
D. Revocation of permits. The Health Department may revoke a permit or
approval issued under the provision of this code in case of any false
statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans
on which the permit or approval was based.
E. Posting of permit. A true copy of the permit shall be kept on the site of
operations open to inspection during the entire time of prosecution of
the work and until the completion of same.
§ 150.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 150.03
001:300
§ 150.04. Fee established. [Amended 9-24-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-21]
There shall be a fee established pursuant to the Chapter as follows:
§ 150.05. Certificate of approval.
New individual sewage disposal systems shall not be placed in operation,
nor shall new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied
which must rely on such a system for sewage disposal, until the Health
Department shall have issued a certificate indicating that such disposal
system has been located and constructed in compliance with the terms of
the permit issued and the requirements of the code adopted by this chapter.
Issuance of such certificate shall be required for alterations to an existing
individual sewage disposal system.
§ 150.06. Nuisance defined.
No person shall own or operate an individual sewage disposal system
which is designed, constructed, or located in a manner that will permit
F. Notice of start. At least 24 hours of start of work under a sanitary
permit shall be given to the Health Department.
G. Conditions of permit. The issuance of the sanitary permit shall be
conditioned upon the following:
1. The payment of appropriate fees;
2. That work will conform to the approved application, plans and
specifications on which the permit has been issued, including prior
approvals and amendments thereto;
3. That the permit is a license to proceed with the work and shall not
be construed as authority to violate, cancel or set aside any of the
provisions of the regulations;
4. That the owner, his agent, contractor or other employees will assist
the enforcing agency in its inspection work, if requested.
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate,
construct, alter, or repair an individual sewage disposal system, $150.
B. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to repair a baffle,
connecting pipe, or distribution box of an individual sewage disposal
system, $25.
C. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system or part
thereof, caused by the failure of the permittee to locate and construct or
alter the same in accordance with the terms of the permit issued or the
terms of the code adopted by this chapter, an inspection fee of $25 shall
be charged.
§ 150.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 150.06
001:301
the discharge of an effluent onto the surface of the ground or into any
watercourse.
Chapter 152
SEWERS
§ 152.01. General Provisions.
§ 152.01.010. Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the "Sewer System Ordinance of the Township
of Pequannock."
§ 152.01.020. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOD — Denotes biochemical oxygen demand, and means the quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matters under
standard laboratory procedure, in five days at 20° C., expressed in parts per
million by weight.
ENGINEER — The Township Engineer, or his authorized deputy, inspector,
agent or representative.
FLOOD AREA — All land along the Passaic or Pompton Rivers, or any
tributaries thereof, which are subject to surface flooding.
GARBAGE — Includes, severally and collectively, garbage, offal and swill.
It includes, but not by way of limitation, solid waste resulting from the
preparation, cooking, dispensing or consumption of food or from the
handling, storage and sale of vegetables and other produce.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Township Health Officer, or his authorized deputy,
inspector, agent or representative.
HOUSE SERVICE CONNECTION — The piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil and waste pipes inside the walls of the
building and conveys it to the clean out.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM OR FACILITY — Refers to a
subsurface sewage disposal system designed and constructed to treat
sewage in a manner that will retain most of the settleable solids in a
watertight tank and to discharge the liquid portion to an adequate disposal
area.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial processes
distinct from sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or ground water.
§ 150.06 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.01.020
001:302
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEM or PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A
sanitary sewer system owned or controlled by the Township.
PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM or PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A
sanitary sewer system owned or controlled by the Township.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage, and to which storm,
surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE LATERAL — The extension of the house service connection from
the street curbline to the street sewer.
SEWAGE PIPE — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWER DEPARTMENT — The division of the Pequannock Township
Department of Public Works responsible for construction, engineering and
maintenance of the Township sewer utility.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of goods that have been shredded to such degree that all
particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing
in street sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries storm and
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial
wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, continuously
or intermittently.
§ 152.01.030. Method of disposal of waste.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in an insanitary manner, upon public or private property within
the Township, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other
objectionable waste.
§ 152.01.040. Discharge of material into natural outlet restricted.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within or under the
jurisdiction of the Township, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other
§ 152.01.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.01.040
001:303
polluted material, unless suitable treatment is provided in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter, hereinafter set forth.
§ 152.01.050. (Reserved)6
§ 152.02. Individual Sewage Disposal Facilities.
§ 152.02.010. Prohibitions.
Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault or individual sewage disposal system.
§ 152.02.020. Connection of house service.
Where a public or private sanitary sewer system is not available under the
provisions of 152.01.050, the house service connection shall be connected
to an individual sewage disposal system.
§ 152.02.030. Permit required.
Before the commencement of construction of an individual sewage disposal
system, the owner shall obtain a written permit from the Health Officer.
§ 152.02.040. Inspection and approval.
Inspection and approval by the Health Officer of an individual sewage
disposal system shall be in accordance with the provisions and
requirements of the Sanitary Code of the Township of Pequannock.
§ 152.02.050. Abandonment of facilities. [Amended 6-22-2004 by
Ord. No. 2004-21; 5-28-2010 by Ord. No. 2009-08; 7-24-2018 by
Ord. No. 2018-17]
Connection to the Township sanitary sewer system is required for all
properties located within 100 feet from the system, measured from the
corner of the individual property, provided that the property is located
within an area where the Township has determined that capacity is
available for new sewer connections. The property owner shall make a
direct connection to the public sewer system within three years of formal
Township acceptance of that portion of the sewer system serving the real
property. Any individual sewage disposal system serving the property shall
be abandoned and filled with suitable material at the time of connection to
the public sewer system.
When the direct costs to the owner for the connection of a house service
to a public or private sewer for a property being served by an existing onsite
sewage disposal system exceeds 15% of the 100% assessed value of
the property, the owner may petition the Township for a relaxation of this
section. For the purposes of this section assessed values will be computed
6. Note: Repealed by Ord. No. 2018-17.
§ 152.01.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.02.050
001:304
based on the Morris County Equalization Tax Table for the year the petition
is filed. Applications for a relaxation shall be made in writing to the Health
Officer and Township Engineer setting forth the reasons therefor, including
a site plan of the affected property along with specifications identifying the
route of the proposed house sewer and costs associated with construction.
Upon a report from the Health Officer, the Board of Health will determine if
merit exists for a relaxation of this section and will so affirm or deny.
§ 152.02.060. Sanitary operation and maintenance required.
The property owner shall operate and maintain the individual sewage
disposal system in a sanitary manner at all times.
§ 152.02.070. Construal of provisions.
This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the imposition of additional
requirements by the Health Officer, the Board of Health or by any other
body having jurisdiction.
§ 152.03. Building Sewers; Connections; Fees; Public Sewer System
Extension.
§ 152.03.010. Permit required.
No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use,
alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without a written
permit from the Township Engineer.
§ 152.03.020. Building sewer permits; fees.
A. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
(1) A residential or commercial building sewer permit for residential
and commercial service.
(2) An industrial building sewer permit for service to establishments
producing industrial wastes.
B. Application; fees.
(1) The owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished
by the Township.
(2) The applications shall be supplemented by plans, specifications or
other information considered pertinent by the Health Officer and
the Township Engineer.
(3) A permit and inspection fee of 25 for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit and $40 for an industrial building sewer
permit, plus the service connection charge, as hereinafter
provided, shall be paid at the time the application is filed.
§ 152.02.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.03.030
001:305
§ 152.03.030. Application for service.
Application for public sewer service shall be made on a form prescribed
by the Township Engineer and signed by the owner of the property or
his agent. Signing of the application shall signify assent to the rules,
regulations and schedule of public sewer fees, rentals and charges of the
Township.
§ 152.03.040. Fees and charges; responsibility for payment; bills.
[Amended 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-24]
§ 152.03.050. Sewer rental fees. [Amended 4-27-1999 by Ord. No.
99-6; 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-40; 3-25-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-06; 11-22-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-16]
The sewer rental fees and charges for residential, commercial and industrial
or other premises connected to the sanitary sewer system shall be as
follows:
A. The Township shall fix all the public sewer fees, rentals and charges.
B. The owner of each building connected to the public sewer system shall
be responsible for the payment of bills for sewer service, as rendered by
the Township of Pequannock. All sewer rentals, fees and other charges
incurred in the installation and building of the sewer shall be a lien
against the property until paid.
C. Bills; termination of service upon nonpayment.
(1) Bills for sewer service shall be rendered quarterly. The amount
charged shall be due on the date of the rendering bill. If bills are
not paid within 30 days from that date, interest at the rate of 8%
per annum of the amount of the bill shall be added. Notice shall be
served or mailed that unless the bill is paid within 15 days from the
date of the notice, the sewer service will be terminated.
(2) Termination of sewer service shall be achieved by a turn off of
water service by the Township Water Department. When sewer
service is terminated under such conditions, it shall remain
terminated until the total amount due, including interest, turn-off
and turn-on charges have been paid in full. A fee of $30 shall be
charged to cover the charge of turning off and turning on the water
service.
A. For each one-family dwelling (or equivalent dwelling unit) annually:
2017: $780.
All other commercial, multifamily, industrial or other enterprises,
including schools, churches, and hospitals supplied through a single
metered water service shall pay an amount in four quarterly
installments equal to the number of equivalent dwelling units
§ 152.03.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.03.050
001:306
§ 152.03.060. Sewer lateral installation.
The sewer lateral, including the making of the tap to the street and the
excavation, backfilling and resurfacing of the trench from the street to the
curbline, shall be done by the applicant, at his expense, by a contractor
acceptable to the Sewer Department. A street opening permit is required
from the appropriate jurisdiction, Township, County, or State, for work
related to a sewer connection within the right-of-way of a public street.
comprising such use times the rate for a residential dwelling unit per
year for the year as set forth above. The equivalent dwelling unit
measurement is based on the actual water usage, it being expressly
understood that 235 gallons per day of metered water service shall
constitute one equivalent dwelling unit for purposes of this chapter.
B. For the purpose of this section, the following types of units shall be
assigned a proportionate share of equivalent dwelling units:
Single-family residence 1.0 EDU's
Attached single-family unit 0.9 EDU's (condominium
ownership)
Individual commercial enterprise 1.0 EDU's
Attached apartment unit 0.6 EDU's
Multiple/mixed use Sum of EDU's as listed
Any single building that contains more than one unit (commercial
and/or residential) will be considered a Multiple/Mixed use. Each
separate unit will be billed regardless of the number of physical
connections into the sewerage system.
Multiple buildings on the same property shall be billed as individual
units, regardless of the number of physical connections into the
sewerage system.
Each unit and/or building connecting into the sewerage system must
be separately metered.
A senior citizen housing facility financed and governed by the New
Jersey Housing Finance Agency shall be considered to be a single
commercial enterprise for the purpose of this section.
Commercial, industrial and all other nonresidential sewer uses shall
be billed based on water consumption at a rate (as indicated below)
per thousand gallons of water used, with a minimum charge of the
rate then current for 1 EDU.
2017 $9.09
C. Where the premises does not use water service, the annual sewer rental
fee and charge shall be estimated based on type of use and size of use in
accordance with good engineering practice.
§ 152.03.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.03.070
001:307
§ 152.03.070. Separate laterals required.
§ 152.03.080. Old laterals.
Old sewer laterals may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the engineer, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
§ 152.03.090. House service connections.
A. A separate and independent sewer lateral shall be provided for:
(1) Each building under one roof owned by one person and occupied as
one business or residence;
(2) A combination of buildings owned by one person in one common
enclosure occupied by one family or business; or
(3) One side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall,
making it subject to divided ownership.
B. A building owned by one person containing more than one store,
apartment or office may be supplied by one or more sewer laterals at
the discretion of the Engineer.
C. If one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and
separate house service connection is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the
house service connection from the front building may be extended to
the rear building.
A. The house service connection shall be installed at the expense of the
applicant. The house service connection shall be in conformance with
the requirements of the current plumbing code as evidenced by a
plumbing permit issued by the Construction Department.
B. Whenever practical, the house service connection shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor. The depth shall
be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The house service
connection shall be laid at uniform grade in straight alignment insofar
as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly
curved pipe and fittings and cleanouts shall be constructed as directed
by the Plumbing Subcode Official at each bend.
C. In all buildings in which any house service connection is too low to
permit gravity flow to the street sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such
connection shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged
to the sewer lateral. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
any applicable permits from the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection and Energy.
D. All excavations required for the installation of a house service
connection shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the
§ 152.03.070 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.03.090
001:308
§ 152.03.100. Joints and connections.
All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight and are
subject to approval of the Plumbing Subcode official.
§ 152.03.110. Inspection and connection of house service.
The applicant for the sewer permit shall notify the Plumbing Sub-Code
Official when the house service connection is ready for inspection and
connection to the sewer lateral. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the Plumbing Sub-Code Official.
§ 152.03.120. Maintenance of laterals and house service
connections.
The sewer lateral shall be maintained by the Department of Public Works.
The house service connection shall be maintained by the property owner.
§ 152.03.130. Installation of sewer system not to imply acceptance
of street.
The installation of a public sewer system in any street, by the Township
or by others, shall not imply Township ownership or acceptance of such
streets.
§ 152.03.140. Assessment; capacity fee. [Amended 4-27-1999 by
Ord. No. 99-6; 3-23-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-7]
Plumbing Subcode Official. Pipe laying and backfilling shall be
performed in accordance with the requirements of the Plumbing
Subcode Official and no backfill shall be placed until the work has been
inspected.
A. The cost of installing a public sewer system in any area, street, land,
road and the like shall be assessed, in whole or in part, against the
property owners benefitting by such installation.
B. In addition to any service charges or assessments, a separate charge in
the nature of a connection/capacity fee is hereby imposed upon the
person making the connection. The fee is hereby established in the
amount of $1,119 for each equivalent dwelling unit. An equivalent
dwelling unit (EDDY) is defined as a single-family dwelling of three
bedrooms estimated to generate 300 gallons per day of sewage.
Connection/capacity fee for all single-family dwellings, apartments and
condominiums shall be based on the number of bedrooms per unit. All
commercial, mixed-use (commercial plus residential in the same
structure), multifamily, industrial or other enterprises, including
schools, churches, and hospitals shall pay a fee equal the number of
equivalent-dwelling-units comprising such use times the equivalent
dwelling unit rate. The capacity fees per user type are as follows:
§ 152.03.090 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.03.140
001:309
User Type Bedrooms GPD Fee
*Single
family
2 225 $840
(1 EDDY) 3 300 $1,119
4 375 $1,398
Apartment/
condo
1 150 $559
(1 EDDY) 2 225 $840
3 300 $1,119
* Each additional bedroom adds 75 GPD and $279
Commercial:
Office: Actual GPD X EDDY or 0.125 gal/sf/day X EDDY
Store: Actual GPD X EDDY or 0.125 gal/sf/day x EDDY
Beauty
salon:
Actual GPD X EDDY OR 120 gal/sink/day X EDDY
Connection/capacity Fees for commercial uses not specified herein
shall be based on known water consumption from billing records or
estimated by the Township Engineer using criteria specified in N.J.S.A.
7:9A.
Commercial connection/capacity fees calculated under this section
which amount to less than 1 EDDY shall be charged the fee for 1 EDDY.
C. Each year the capacity/connection fee shall be calculated as follows. All
prior costs for principal and interest on debt plus direct capital
expenditures as of December 31, of the previous year divided by the
total single-family dwelling units plus the total equivalent single-family
dwelling for commercial, apartment, condominium and not-for-profit
users as of December 31. This shall be calculated annually by the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township no later than March 31 of the
succeeding year.
D. Any off site capital expenses not required by existing users but
necessary for the supply of sewer service to the new user shall be added
to capacity/connection fee identified above.
E. In the case of new construction, no certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until payment of all fees has been received by the Township.
F. In the case of existing residential or commercial buildings, no sewer
permit shall be issued until payment of all fees has been received by the
Township.
G. When the eligibility requirements of the Morris County Community
Development Housing Rehabilitation Program are met the property
owner may petition that the connection fee may be paid in payments
§ 152.03.140 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.03.140
001:310
§ 152.03.150. Public sewer system extension. [Amended 7-28-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-20]
over a period of no more than three years with interest of 8% when the
connection is for an existing property and is mandated by the Township.
In order to qualify for the payment of the connection fee through a
payment plan the property owner must provide satisfactory proof of
the inability to pay the connection fee by submitting an application for
approval by the Township Council. If the Township Council agrees to
accept payment of the connection fee by a payment plan it shall do
so conditioned upon the property owner executing documents securing
the payment to the Township as is determined by the Township Attorney
to be necessary.
A. Sewer extensions for new developments receiving Board approval that
include a sewer extension shall be governed by the following:
1. Developers shall pay the entire cost of installing a public sewer
system, including associated facilities such as pumping stations,
force mains, or any appurtenances required by the Township
Engineer, in the same manner as any other subdivision
improvement. Ownership thereof shall vest in the Township when
such installation meets the approval of the Township Engineer.
2. Developers shall enter into a contract covering the foregoing and
other related matters before undertaking any associated new
construction to the Township sewer system.
B. The following shall apply to applications to the Township Council for
sewer extensions to serve existing properties:
1. Developers shall pay the entire cost of installing a public sewer
system, including associated facilities such as pumping stations,
force mains, or any appurtenances required by the Township
Engineer, in the same manner as any other subdivision
improvement. Ownership thereof shall vest in the Township when
such installation meets the approval of the Township Engineer.
2. The applicant shall identify any properties that could be subject to
mandatory connections as a result of the proposed extension, and
any future extensions that may result from the mandatory
connections.
3. The Council shall conduct a hearing to review the potential
mandatory connections and the availability of treatment capacity.
The applicant shall notify the owners of the identified properties of
their obligation to connect as well as the date of the public hearing.
C. The Engineer shall review and, if found satisfactory, approve the type,
size, and location of all public sewer pipes, pumps, force mains, etc., on
all new extensions. The entire system shall be subject to the Engineer's
inspection and approval and shall be tested under the Engineer's
§ 152.03.140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.03.150
001:311
§ 152.03.160. Construction standards for public sewer systems.
supervision. The developer or individual property owner shall be
responsible for obtaining all applicable permits as required by N.J.A.C.
7:9 and N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
A. General. The standards outlined herein are applicable to developers,
builders, contractors and any other persons receiving approval to
expand, construct or relocate the Township Sewer Department's sewer
collection facilities. Any work relating to the utility shall be under the
jurisdiction and supervision of the Township Sewer Department.
B. Sewer pipe. Sewer pipe of a type, class and size shall be installed by
proper methods, with all necessary appurtenances, at the grades and
locations and of the types, classes and sizes approved by the Engineer.
1. Materials.
(a) Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe. Polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC) and
fittings shall conform to the latest ASTM D-3034 and Unibell
specifications.
(b) The pipe shall be accurate and of uniform dimensions. All pipe
shall be straight and true to form without bulges, dents,
cracks, tears or other defects which will affect the strength.
The internal surfaces shall be smooth. Nominal laying lengths
shall be 10 feet to 20 feet.
(c) Joints shall be integral bell, bell and spigot joints meeting the
requirements of ASTM D-3212 and contain an elastomeric ring
gasket conforming to ASTM F-477. Each joint shall be
furnished with one elastomeric ring gasket. Joints shall be
lubricated with the instructions of the manufacturer and joints
at all manholes.
(d) The pipe shall be made of PVC plastic having a cell
classification of 12454-B as defined in ASTM D-1784 and the
fittings shall be made of PVC plastic having a cell classification
as defined in ASTM D-1784.
(e) Each length of pipe shall be marked to show the
manufacturer's name or trademark, nominal pipe size, PVC cell
classification, class of PVC (SDR) and the ASTM Specification.
(f) The contractor shall procure from the pipe manufacturer and
deliver to the Engineer a certificate of tests for each different
class, size and batch of pipe. The tests conducted shall include,
but not be limited to the measurements conforming to the
latest ASTM D-2122 Specifications, the impact resistance test
conforming to the latest ASTM D-2444 Specifications, the
extrusion quality test conforming to the latest ASTM-2152
Specifications, the pipe stiffness test conforming to the latest
§ 152.03.150 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.03.160
001:312
ASTM-2412 Specifications, and the pipe flattening test
conforming to the latest ASTM-3034 Specifications.
(g) The minimum impact strength, pipe stiffness and wall
thickness shall be as follows:
Minimum Impact Strength at 73° F.
Pipe Size
(inches)
Impact Strength
(feet/pound)
4 150
6 210
8 210
10 220
12 220
15 220
Minimum Pipe Stiffness
SDR Stiffness
35 46
Pipe Size
(inches)
Wall Thickness
(inches)
4 0.120
6 0.180
8 0.240
10 0.300
12 0.360
15 0.437
18 0.536
21 0.632
24 0.711
27 0.801
§ 152.03.160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.03.160
001:313
(i) Ductile Iron Pipe: Ductile iron pipe shall conform with
A.N.S.I. A21.51 for ductile iron pipe centrifugally cast in
metal or sand lined molds, for water and other liquids.
The pipe shall be cast utilizing iron conforming to Grade
60-42-10 as required in the above noted A.N.S.I.
Specification. Pipe shall be furnished in nominal 16-foot
to 20-foot laying lengths. The pipe thickness shall
conform to A.N.S.I. Specification A21.50, latest revision.
The lining of the pipe shall consist of cement mortar
of full thickness to the ends of the individual lengths
of pipe and shall be in accordance with A.N.S.I. A21.4.
A bituminous interior seal coat shall be applied to the
cement mortar lining. The exterior of the pipe shall
receive standards coal tar or asphalt foundry dip. The
weight, class and pipe material shall be conspicuously
indicated by the manufacturer on the outside of the pie.
Joints for ductile iron pipe shall be mechanical joints or
push-on joints conforming to A.N.A.I. A21.11.
Wye, or tee fittings, as required for the ductile iron pipe,
shall be ductile or cast iron standard mechanical joint
or push-on joint fittings conforming to the requirements
of A.N.S.I. A21.10 and with joints in accordance with
A.N.S.I. A21.11. Standard mechanical joint accessories
shall be furnished for each bell opening on fittings and
shall consist of high strength cast iron tee-head bolts,
cast iron glands and rubber gaskets. Assembly shall be in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
Fittings shall be cement lined and bituminous coated
inside and outside as specified hereinbefore for ductile
iron pipe. In all cases, the fittings and appurtenances
shall at least meet the strength and pressure
requirements shown or listed in A.N.S.I. A21.10.
2. Laying. The pipe shall be installed in accordance with approved
plans and specify the manufacturer's recommendations. No pipe,
couplings, or rubber rings known to be defective or damaged shall
be installed and pipe, couplings or rubber rings found defective or
damaged shall be removed and replaced. All joint surfaces shall be
in proper condition and protected from damage. No pipe shall be
installed on frozen soil. The contractor shall be solely responsible
for ensuring that each pipe in constructed at the specified
alignment and grade.
The pipe shall be installed to provide maximum solid bearing along
its entire length.
The trench shall be excavated to a minimum depth of six inches
below the grade (pipe invert) to provide for a pipe foundation of
crushed stone. The crushed stone shall be carefully placed and
§ 152.03.160 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.03.160
001:314
thoroughly compacted. The same material which is used for the
pipe foundation shall be used for the pipe launching. The launching
shall be placed up to the pipe spring line; that is, up to the center
line of the pipe. The initial backfill shall be placed to a depth of
12 inches above the top of the pipe. This backfill shall be tamped
lightly so as not to disturb the embedded pipe.
The final position of the pipe shall be thoroughly secured and amply
supported to prevent settlement, disturbances or flotation.
The sewer lateral branch 45° Wye joint fitting on the sewer pipe
shall be positioned so that the installation of the sewer lateral
will not be less than 1/4 inch per one-foot slope unless otherwise
directed by the Engineer.
The sewer lateral branch 45° Wye joint shall be manufactured to
accept the sewer lateral pipe spigot end for the material size and
class used.
3. Jointing. The pipe shall be carefully jointed in conformity with the
best practice and the detailed instructions of the manufacturers.
All pipe ends, rubber rings, and couplings shall be void of defects
and shall be thoroughly cleaned prior to and during the jointing
operation. Just prior to lowering the pipes, the surfaces of the joint
rings shall be wiped clean and the joint rings and rubber gasket
shall be liberally lubricated with an approved type of vegetable oil
soap. The spigot end, with the placed in the groove, shall be
entered into the bell of the pipe already laid, making sure that both
pipes are properly aligned. The pipe ends shall be protected from
damage by equipment used to "home" the pipe. Before the joint is
fully "home" the position of the gasket in the joint shall be
determined by means of a suitable feeler gage supplied by the pipe
manufacturer. If the gasket is found not to be in the proper
position, the pipes shall be separated and the damaged gasket
replaced. Maximum joint openings shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer's recommendations. Suitable equipment shall be
used for the storage, and laying of pipe and fittings. Lifting hooks
or bars intended to be inserted into the ends of pipes will not be
permitted.
C. Sewer laterals. Polyvinyl chloride pipe, joints and fittings shall conform
to applicable portions of 152-28A. (1) in addition to the following
standards:
1. Materials. Sewer Lateral Piping: Shall be PVC Pipe, Schedule 40, or
ductile iron pipe, Class 52, or inch cast iron soil pipe, extra heavy.
Wye Connections: Connections shall be used at the junction of
the sewer lateral and street sewer. Tee-wye clean-outs shall be
installed in the vicinity of the street right-of-way line or as directed
by the Engineer.
§ 152.03.160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.03.160
001:315
Risers: Shall have a cleanout at grade and cast-iron riser cover, and
shall be used for any off-street bend 45° or greater, and at the main
for sewer laterals more than eight feet below grade.
2. Laying and Jointing. The laying and jointing shall be in accordance
with approved plans and specifications and shall be in conformance
with the best practice and the detailed instructions of the
manufacturer.
D. Manholes.
1. General. Manholes shall conform with the typical manhole details
as shown on approved plans. The walls shall be brought up
vertically to approximately three feet from the top, shall then
gradually decrease the diameter of the manhole and shall be of
proper dimensions to receive the manhole frame and cover at the
top. Watertight manholes are required as directed by the Engineer.
Concrete block manholes will be used only when approved by the
Engineer. Precast manholes will be used in all cases except where
conditions may require block manholes.
2. Concrete Block Manholes Walls. Manhole walls should be
constructed of precast Portland Cement concrete block of proper
radius, conforming to the New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction, 1989, Section 603 and N.J.A.C. 7:9.
All joints between blocks shall be completely filled with cement
mortar consisting of one part Portland Cement and two parts sand.
Joints shall be made to produce a smooth and uniform surface. The
outside and inside surface of each manhole shall be plastered 1/2
inch thick and troweled smooth with cement mortar of the same
consistency. The outside plastered surface shall be painted with
one seal coat of coat tar or asphalt, Koppers No. 50 or approved
equal.
Manhole Bottom: Upon completion of excavation for standard
manholes, six inches of crushed stone shall be placed prior to
placement of concrete. Manhole bottoms shall be of 3,000 psi
concrete of dimensions as shown on the approved plans. Concrete
channels shall be formed in the bottom with a minimum depth of
two-thirds the sewer diameter, shall slope to the outlet, and shall
have as smooth a surface as possible. Where stubs at manholes are
herein specified, channels shall be formed to connect with stubs.
The surfaces of the bottom shall slope one inch to the channels.
3. Precast manholes. Manholes shall consist of a precast concrete
base and precast barrel and precast reinforced concrete roof slab
or precast reinforced concrete manhole cone. On shallow
manholes, a precast slab-type top shall be used in place of the
manhole cone. Precast "slab-type tops" of standards manufacture
§ 152.03.160 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.03.160
001:316
may be used providing detail drawings are submitted and
approved.
Precast manhole sections shall be circular, tongue and groove type.
They shall conform with the requirements of A.S.T.M. Designation
C478-68, Class IV, or the latest applicable revision thereof. The
minimum compressive strength of all sections shall be 4,000 psi.
Lifting holes shall be tapered holes and shall be plugged with a
rubber plug and mortar- finished flush with the walls. Joints shall
be tongue and groove and shall be sealed by a continuous ring
gasket, free from pits or other imperfections. When installed, the
ring shall be enclosed and compressed continuously on all sides.
After the manhole is completed and prior to backfilling, all joints
shall be filled with mortar and pointed to form a dense hard joint.
Thereafter, one coat of coal tar or asphaltic pitch shall be applied to
the surface of the manhole covering all mortared joints, lift holes,
etc.
4. Brick collars. When necessary to bring the manhole frame to
proper grade, brick collars shall be used. All brick shall be
thoroughly wet before laying and shall be laid in a full bed and joint
of mortar. Joints shall be 1/4 inch on the interior face and shall be
struck smooth with the interior face. Brick shall be laid as headers
with joints broken between courses and finished collar shall be
plastered on the outside with cement mortar as shown and
thoroughly waterproofed with two coats of asphaltic paint. The
collar shall be completely sealed to prevent water intrusion. Brick
shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C32 Grade MA.
5. Steps. Each manhole shall have drop-type aluminum steps,
projecting six inches into the manhole, and shall extend through
the wall. The steps shall be aluminum alloy 6061-T6 or equal as
shown.
6. Cover and Frame. The manhole cover and frame shall be Type No.
1203 as manufactured by Campbell Foundry Company. Manhole
cover shall be cast with the letters, "PEQUANNOCK TOWNSHIP
SANITARY SEWER."
7. Pipe to Manhole Connection. All pipe to manhole connections shall
be watertight flexible seals and shall meet Rubber Gasket
Specifications ASTM C-443 and Test Performance Requirements
ASTM C-425 for compression joints.
8. Watertightness. Each manhole shall be absolutely watertight.
Manholes that are not watertight will not be accepted. Plastering
on top of defective joint to correct leaky conditions will not be
permitted.
§ 152.03.160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.03.170
001:317
§ 152.03.170. Inspection and testing.
Inspection and testing shall be performed by the Engineer to insure
compliance with the requirements of Chapter 152, approved plans and
specifications and the manufacturers' recommendations.
A. Inspection. Inspection of the work will be conducted at all times during
construction. The Contractor shall cooperate and assist in the
inspection of all work.
The inspection of newly installed sewers shall be done to detect and
record any and all areas of improperly installed pipe. Improperly
installed pipe shall include those sections of pipe that are broken,
crushed, misaligned, deflected, or in any other way damaged; in which
case, the Contractor shall be obligated to remove said damaged section
of pipe and make all necessary repairs and/or replacement at the
direction of and to the satisfaction of the Engineer, to affect the proper
operation and capacity of the sewer.
B. Testing.
1. Infiltration. All infiltration noticeable during construction, whether
an air exfiltration test has been performed or not, and judged to be
above the allowable by the Engineer, shall be stopped and
corrected immediately. Infiltration shall not exceed 50 gallons per
inch of pipe diameter per mile per 24 hours.
Rates of infiltration shall be determined by means of V-notch weirs
or pipe spigot in an approved manner and at such times and
locations as may be directed by the Engineer during the progress
and at the completion of the work.
Testing shall be conducted during the progress of the work, at
the time and over completed pipe sections as determined by the
Engineer. No test shall be accepted unless witnessed by the
Engineer or his authorized representative. Maximum length of test
sections shall be 2,000 feet. All visible leaks shall be made tight and
tests shall be repeated until the results are satisfactory.
2. Deflection (Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe Only). After all polyvinyl
chloride pipe has been laid and trenches backfilled, a deflection
test shall be performed on each section of pipeline between
manholes. The maximum allowable deflection shall be 5.0% and the
device for testing shall be a properly sized mandrel.
3. Low Pressure Air Exfiltration Test. After the pipe has been laid and
backfilled, a low pressure air test shall be made on each section of
pipe. Air shall be slowly supplied to the unplugged section of pipe
to be tested until the internal air pressure reached 4.0 psi greater
than the average back pressure of a groundwater that may
submerge the pipe. At least two minutes shall be allowed for
temperature stabilization before proceeding further. The back
§ 152.03.170 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.03.170
001:318
§ 152.03.180. Service to commercial or industrial establishments or
other institutions.
Where sewer service is requested by any commercial or industrial
establishment or by any institution, such as a school, hospital, nursing
home and the like, the applicant shall provide engineering drawings and
specifications to be reviewed by the Township Engineer. The applicant
shall obtain all required permits and approval and shall have full financial
responsibility for installation of the sewer service.
§ 152.03.190. Extensions or changes in system.
Extensions to or changes in the public sewer system may be initiated by the
governing body by petition from property owners, or by application from a
real estate developer. If such extension or change is deemed advisable by
the governing body, it shall prescribe the terms and conditions under which
the extension shall be made and shall require written acceptance thereof by
the petitioners or applicant.
§ 152.03.200. Prohibited discharges.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water
or unpolluted industrial process water into any public or private sanitary
sewer system or individual sanitary sewage disposal facility.
§ 152.03.210. Discharge of unpolluted waters.
Stormwater, cooling water and all other unpolluted process water or
drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated
as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Health Officer.
pressure of any groundwater caused by the water head above the
center line of the pipe must be determined by a method approved
by the Engineer. This back pressure must be added to the standard
test pressures to compensate for the groundwater effect on the air
test. Maximum length of test sections shall be 650 feet.
The rate of air loss shall then be determined by measuring the
time interval required for the internal pressure to decrease from
3.5 psi to 2.5 psi greater than the average back pressure of any
groundwater that may submerge the pipe.
The pipeline shall be considered acceptable, when the time interval
for the 1.0 psi pressure drop is not less than the holding time
required by the Engineer.
If the pipe installation fails to meet these requirements, the
Contractor shall repair or replace all defective materials or
workmanship. The complete pipe installation shall meet the
requirements of this test.
§ 152.03.170 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.03.220
001:319
§ 152.03.220. Restricted discharges.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described wastes or waters to any public
or private sanitary sewer system or individual sanitary sewage disposal
facility:
§ 152.03.230. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
A. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 65° C.
B. Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million,
by weight, of fat, oil or grease.
C. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
D. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded.
E. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure or any other solid or
viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewer or
other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works.
F. Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.0 or
having other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard
to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works or sewers.
G. Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in
sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process that constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any
hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
H. Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle
such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
I. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
A. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Health Officer, they are necessary for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable
wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Health Officer, and shall be located as to be readily and easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection.
B. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and
§ 152.03.220 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.03.230
001:320
§ 152.03.240. Preliminary treatment facilities.
§ 152.03.250. Control manhole.
When required by the Health Officer, the owner of any property served by
a sewer lateral carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the house service connection to facilitate observation, sampling
and measuring of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Township Engineer. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times.
equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place,
shall be gastight and watertight.
C. Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
A. The admission into the public sewers of any wastes or waters having a
five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts per million,
by weight, of suspended solids; or any quantity of substances having the
characteristics described in 152.03.230; or an average daily flow
greater than 2% of the average daily sewage flow of the Township
sewage treatment plant, shall be subject to the review and approval of
the Health Officer.
B. Where necessary in the opinion of the Health Officer and the Township
Engineer, the owner shall provide, at his own expense, such preliminary
treatment as may be necessary to:
(1) Reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to 300 parts per million by
weight: or more than 350 parts per million, by weight, of
suspended solids; or
(2) Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents so that they
do not exceed the maximum limits provided in 152.03.220; or
(3) Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes.
C. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the Health officer and the Township Engineer. Construction
of such facilities shall not be commenced until approval is obtained in
writing.
D. Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
§ 152.03.230 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.03.260
001:321
§ 152.03.260. Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in 152.03.230 and 152.03.250 shall
be determined in accordance with recognized standard methods for the
examination of water and sewage, and shall be determined at the control
manhole provided for in 152.03.250 or upon suitable samples taken at said
control manhole. If a special manhole has not been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
street sewer to the point at which the sewer lateral is connected.
§ 152.03.270. Special agreements with industrial concerns.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to prevent a special
agreement or arrangement between the Township and an industrial concern
whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted
by the Township for treatment subject to additional payment therefor by the
industrial concern.
§ 152.03.280. Backwater valves. [Added 5-27-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-06]
§ 152.04. Illicit Connections.
A. Where required.
1. Fixtures and/or drain inlets subject to backflow and flooding from
blocked or restricted public sewers shall be protected by a
backwater valve.
2. Such situations include those where the flood level rim of fixtures
and/or drain inlets is below the overflow level of the first upstream
manhole in the public sewer that will overflow due to a blockage or
flow restriction in the public sewer.
3. Backwater valves shall be installed in branches of the drainage
system that receive flow only from fixtures and/or drains subject to
such backflow from the public sewer.
4. Other portions of the drainage system not subject to such backflow
shall drain directly to the public sewer.
B. Material standard and accessibility. Backwater valves shall conform to
ASME A112.14.1 and be installed so that their internal working parts
are accessible for periodic cleaning, repair or replacement.
C. Notice of installation of backwater valves. When backwater valves are
installed in building sanitary drainage systems, a notice shall be posted
at the building water service shutoff valve(s) describing where
backwater valves are located.
§ 152.03.260 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.04.010
001:322
§ 152.04.010. Purpose. [Amended 8-22-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-19]
It shall be unlawful to allow illicit connections to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Pequannock as to
protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the
failure to comply.
§ 152.04.020. Definitions. [Amended 8-22-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-19]
For the purpose of this subsection of the ordinance, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein
unless their use in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different
meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present
tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the
singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural
number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The
definitions below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in
the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any physical or non-physical connection that
discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process
wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to the
municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Pequannock, unless that discharge is authorized under an NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit Number NJ0141852). Non-physical connections may include, but are
not limited to leaks, flows or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Non-domestic waste, including but not limited to,
those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the Federal
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317 (a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Pequannock or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — A permit issued by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used to reduce temperature
for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into direct contact
with any raw material, intermediate product (other than heat) or finished
product. Non-contact cooling water may however contain algaecides, or
§ 152.04.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.04.020
001:323
biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat exchangers, and/or
corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Any water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct,
or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is not limited to,
leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling water.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or drainage facilities,
or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 152.04.030. Prohibited conduct. [Amended 8-22-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-19]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Pequannock any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 152.04.040. Enforcement. [Amended 8-22-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-19]
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Health Officer of the Township of
Pequannock.
§ 152.04.050. Penalties. [Amended 8-22-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-19]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
ordinance shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.
§ 152.05. Damage Claims for Backups Onto Certain Premises.
§ 152.05.010. Certain claims recognized. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003]
The Township of Pequannock will recognize certain claims for damages
resulting from the backup of sewage from the public sewerage system onto
certain private premises occurring after the effective date of this ordinance
and occurring under the certain specific circumstances, all as hereinafter
specified, notwithstanding the immunity from such claims afforded by Title
59 of the Statutes of the State of New Jersey but nevertheless without
prejudice to any defense whatsoever that the Township may have as to any
other similar claims not recognized hereunder.
§ 152.04.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.05.020
001:324
§ 152.05.020. Basis for claims. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-24]
Claims recognizable hereunder shall be limited to only such claims for
actual damage to property directly caused by contact with public sewage
that has backflowed from the public sewerage main into such private
premises as the result of a blockage within a public sewerage main into
which such private premises is connected. Specifically excluded are claims
resulting from blockages within the sewerage system of private premises
and any lateral or other type of connection leading from that sewerage
system on private property into the public main, including the connection
to the main, even though such lateral or other type of connection may be
partially located in a public right-of-way. For the purpose of this section, the
lateral or other type of connection shall include collar or other devices by
which connection into the public main is made.
§ 152.05.030. Backflow preventer required. [Added 7-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-24]
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no claim shall be recognized in the event
that the sewerage system upon the premises includes any drains or other
appurtenances or other openings or receptacles below the highest point
of the grade level of the lateral or other device connecting that sewerage
system into the main unless there is installed a backflow preventer in the
system at a point nearer to the connection to the public system than any of
those drains, appurtenances, openings or receptacles with the exception of
one cleanout opening before the backflow preventer which shall be securely
sealed. Such backflow preventer must be such type as required under the
plumbing code in effect at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance for new
construction under such circumstances. Such required backflow preventer
must have been maintained in accordance with the requirements of its
manufacturer for the proper operation of such device and any cleanout
opening required in connection therewith shall be kept securely sealed.
§ 152.05.040. Persons covered. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-24]
Only individual owners of single-family, two-family or three-family
residential dwelling premises who make such premises their primary
residence and who own such premises in their own individual name or
names, and from whose insurance coverage the claim is either fully or
partially excluded, shall be qualified to make a claim under this section.
§ 152.05.050. Extent of recognizable claim. [Added 7-22-2003 by
Ord. No. 2003-24]
The Township will recognize such claims which otherwise qualify under this
section only to the extent of such actual and direct compensatory damage
against which the claimant exercised a reasonable effort in mitigation.
Nominal, prospective, anticipated, speculative, remote, consequential and
§ 152.05.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.05.050
001:325
exemplary damages are excluded herefrom. Any claim partially covered by
private insurance shall be excluded from coverage under this section to the
extent of such private insurance coverage.
§ 152.05.060. Extent of compensation. [Added 7-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-24]
The Township will compensate a qualifying claim for any of the aforesaid
recognizable damages only as follows:
§ 152.05.070. Procedures for claim and satisfaction. [Added
7-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-24]
Any claimant qualifying hereunder may seek recovery as herein provided
by filing in writing an application signed and certified as to truthfulness
by the qualifying owner of owners of the premises. Such application shall
be filed with the Township Manager upon such form as he or she may
hereafter require within five days of the discovery of the damage for which
the recovery is sought. Any claim made thereafter shall be barred. The
Township Manager shall determine whether and to what extent such claim
is recognizable in accordance with the conditions and limitations
hereinbefore provided. The Township Manager may thereupon forward the
said claim to licensed claim adjuster of the State of New Jersey to be
designated by the governing body for investigation and a determination
as to the amount of compensation to be payable under this section if the
Manager deems necessary. Both the Township Manager and the claims
adjuster may require as they or either of them deem in their own discretion
reasonably necessary such further proof and inspection; any applicant
refusing any request for the same shall be disqualified for recovery
hereunder. Such payment as determined to be payable shall not be paid to
the claimant or claimants until each of them has duly executed a full and
complete release from any and all further liability of the Township.
§ 152.06. Administration and Enforcement.
§ 152.06.010. Protection from damage. [Amended 7-22-2003;
9-12-2007]
No person shall break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of a private or public
sewer system.
A. Cost of removal of sewage and of cleaning and sanitizing premises,
fixtures and salvageable personality: 100% to a limit of $1,500.
B. The cost of repair to or replacement of damaged structure, fixtures or
personality: 100% to a limit $2,500.
§ 152.05.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.06.020
001:326
§ 152.06.020. Right of entry by duly authorized officials. [Amended
7-22-2003; 9-12-2007]
The Township Engineer, Health Officer and other duly authorized officers
and employees of the Township, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling and testing.
§ 152.06.030. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-22-2003;
9-12-2007]
§ 152.06.040. Liability for expenses resulting from damage from
violation. [Amended 7-22-2003; 9-12-2007]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable to the
Township for any expense, loss or damage incurred by the Township by
reason of such violation.
§ 152.07. Sump Pump Connection to Sanitary Sewer Prohibited.
§ 152.07.010. Purpose. [Added 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
The purpose of this subsection is to limit and reduce the inflow of additional
water into the sanitary sewer system. By prohibiting the discharge of any
storm, ground, well, sump pump, swimming pool, other natural
precipitation or other sources of inflow into the Township's sanitary sewer
system, the Township is seeking to reduce costs as well as protect against
other damaging effects. The Township's sanitary sewer will and has on
occasion been overloaded thereby creating the potential to cause significant
damage or threat to the system. Further, all water that enters the system
must be treated at the sewage treatment plant. Therefore, by reducing and
eliminating this inflow of "clean water" into the sanitary sewer system and
the subsequent unnecessary treatment, the expenses to the Township and
the citizens will be reduced and will assist in protecting the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the Township.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter except
152.06.010 shall be served by the Township with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
B. Any person who continues any violation beyond the time limit provided
for in said notice described in Subsection A of this section or any person
who violates the provisions of 152.06.010 shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
continues.
§ 152.06.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.07.020
001:327
§ 152.07.020. Definitions. [Added 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person who alone, jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The water-carried household and toilet waste from
residences, business buildings, institutions, commercial and industrial
establishments.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM — All facilities and appurtenances connected with the
collection and conveyance system.
SUMP PUMP — A device used to convey water from areas of lower elevation
in a building or yard to prevent accumulation of water or flooding.
SUMP PUMP PIPING — That part of the sump pump through which the
effluents are carried to their discharge point.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel through which water
flows.
§ 152.07.030. Regulations of sump pumps, floor drains and related
apparatus. [Added 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
§ 152.07.040. Correction of icy or unsafe conditions. [Added
4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-0]
A. No person shall connect any sump pump, floor drain, roof drain, and/or
related apparatus to any sanitary sewer line. No property owner shall
allow any sump pump, floor drain, roof drain, and/or related apparatus
which has been connected to remain connected to any sanitary line.
B. Any sump pump which was connected to the sanitary sewer system
may, upon disconnection from the system after adoption of this
Ordinance, discharge into an established watercourse (i.e. a catch
basin, storm sewer, street gutter) or a natural drainage course. Where
an established watercourse is not available sump pumps may discharge
into a seepage pit or a rear or side yard, if such rear or side yard is
capable of absorbing the discharge without draining onto neighboring
properties. If a seepage pit is used it shall not be constructed within 10
feet of an adjoining property line whether public or private.
A. Notwithstanding compliance with the regulations in this section
whenever sump pump discharge causes an icy condition on either a
sidewalk or street, the owner of record must:
(1) Spread an abrasive material on the street and/or sidewalk to
provide traction for the safe progress of vehicles and/or
pedestrians thereon.
(2) Immediately cease discharging in the manner which creates such a
condition.
§ 152.07.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 152.07.040
001:328
§ 152.07.050. Violations. [Added 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
§ 152.07.060. Enforcement. [Added 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
The Township Engineer, Plumbing Inspector or other duly authorized
representative is hereby authorized to request entrance to any property for
the purpose of inspecting, observing, testing and sampling to confirm that
there is no sump pump and/or other prohibited discharge into the sanitary
sewer system in violation of the regulations.
§ 152.07.070. Compliance. [Added 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
(3) Install/provide a permanent remedy within 180 days.
A. Prohibited discharges. No person or entity shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any stormwater, ground water, roof runoff, yard
drainage, yard fountain, swimming pool, pond overflow or any other
substance other than sanitary sewage into the sanitary sewer collection
system. No person, business or other entity shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any hazardous substances into any public sewers.
B. Amnesty Period for Disconnection.
(1) On or before December 31, 2016 any person, business or other
entity who shall have a connection described above and who shall
voluntarily report said connection to the Township, so that said
illegal connection shall be remedied, shall have any and all permit
and inspection fees waived by the Township. This waiver of fees
applies only to Township fees and does not include the actual cost
of remediation or any State surcharges.
(2) After December 31, 2016, any person, business or other entity in
violation of Subsection 152.07.050 A. that fails to voluntarily report
such connection by December 31, 2016, shall be liable for all
permit fees, inspection fees and connection fees as required by the
Township, to remedy the illegal connection.
A. A surcharge as provided in Subsection 152.07.080 will be imposed on
any property found to have a sump pump connected to the sanitary
sewer system after December 31, 2016. The surcharge will continue
until the sump pump has been inspected and found to be proper
disconnected from the sanitary sewer system. The surcharge shall be in
addition to any fine or other penalty provided for the violation of this
section.
B. A surcharge as provided in Subsection 152.07.080 will be imposed on
any property which has sanitary sewer service where the owner or
occupant has failed to schedule an appointment with the Township for
inspection to determine compliance with this section within 60 days of
receiving a notice to schedule the inspection from the Township. Said
property shall remain subject to the surcharge until it is determined
§ 152.07.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152.07.070
001:329
§ 152.07.080. Surcharge. [Added 4-26-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-06]
Chapter 153
(RESERVED)
Chapter 155
SMOKING ON DESIGNATED PUBLIC LANDS PROHIBITED
§ 155.01. Purpose. [Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-17]
there is no violation or the violation has been abated. The surcharge
shall be in addition to any fine or other penalty provided for the
violation of this section.
C. All disconnections of said illicit connections shall be accomplished by a
complete and permanent method and performed in a competent
manner and inspected by the Township Engineer or other duly
authorized representative. Any disconnection, plugging, capping, rerouting,
altering or modifying must be done in accordance with all
applicable State and municipal construction codes.
D. After issuance of the surcharge pursuant to Subsection 152.07.080, if
the property owner, tenant, landlord or other person with a property
interest remedies the illicit connection, said property owner, tenant,
landlord or other person with a property interest shall call the Township
Engineer for a follow-up inspection by the Township Engineer or other
duly authorized representative. Upon certification that the illicit
connection has been remedied, the surcharge shall be lifted, beginning
the quarter following the inspection for which a property was subject to
the surcharge.
A. A surcharge of $150 per quarter is hereby imposed upon every sewer
utility bill to property owners, tenants, landlords or other persons with
a property interest for the following conditions:
(1) Not in compliance with this Ordinance.
(2) Failure to schedule a property inspection.
A. The United States Surgeon General has determined that there is no safe
level of exposure to secondhand smoke and that nonsmoking Americans
exposed to secondhand smoke in public places are at significantly
increased risk of heart disease and lung cancer (see U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, The Health Consequences of Involuntary
Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: a Report of the Surgeon General, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Coordinating Center for Health Promotion, National
§ 152.07.070 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 155.01
001:330
§ 155.02. Definitions. [Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-17]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE — An electronic device that can be used
to deliver nicotine or other substances to the person inhaling from the
device, including, but not limited to, an electronic cigarette, cigar, cigarillo,
or pipe.
SMOKING — The burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or the
possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other matter or substance
which contains tobacco or any other matter that can be smoked, or the
inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking device.
§ 155.03. Smoking on Outdoor Grounds of Township Property
Prohibited. [Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-17]
No person shall smoke while on the outdoor grounds of the following
Township-owned properties:
Foothills Park (including The Bark Park)
Lyon Park
Lyman Ave Park
Hillview Fields
Pequannock Valley Park
Riverside Park
Railroad Station-Museum
Town Hall Field
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on
Smoking and Health, 2006); and
B. Smoking is the leading cause of death in the United States and the
United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has
determined that reduction of the death and disease caused by tobacco
use and exposure to secondhand smoke is one of six top national
healthcare priorities; and
C. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, the Township is given the authority to
adopt ordinances for the public health, safety and welfare of the
Township, its residents and guests; and
D. The New Jersey Smoke-Free Air Act ("NJSFAA"), N.J.S.A. 26:3D-63,
specifically authorizes local restrictions on smoking "equivalent to, or
greater than those provided in the NJSFAA for purposes of "protecting
public health".
§ 155.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155.03
001:331
Washington Park
Greenview Park
Golden Panther Park
§ 155.04. Enforcement. [Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-17]
Whenever the Health Officer or his or her designee or a law enforcement
officer or a Township Code Enforcement Officer observes or reasonably
believes that there exists a violation of this chapter, he or she may issue
a summons and complaint to the violator. The complaint shall be written
and served on the violator. Citizens of the Township may also bring private
complaints for the violation of this chapter.
§ 155.05. Penalty. [Added 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-17]
Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be subject to the
following penalties:
Chapter 156
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 156.01. Purpose.
A. First offense: A fine of $50, plus court costs and a period of community
service not to exceed five days.
B. Second offense: A fine of $100, plus court costs and a period of
community service not to exceed 10 days.
C. Third offense: A fine of $150, plus court costs and a period of
community service not to exceed 15 days.
A. It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls:
1. To reduce artificially induced flood damage to public health, life,
and property;
2. To minimize increased stormwater runoff from any new land
development where such runoff will increase flood damage;
3. To maintain the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and
bridges, dams and other structures;
4. To induce water recharge where natural storage and geologically
favorable conditions exist where practical;
5. To prevent, to the greatest extent feasible, an increase in nonpoint
source pollution;
§ 155.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 156.01
001:332
§ 156.02. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT — Land uses normally associated with
the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale. For purposes of this
ordinance, such uses shall not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacture of agriculturally related
products.
APPROVING AGENCY — The Pequannock Township Planning Board, Zoning
Board of Adjustment or Township Council or other agency or board of the
County of Morris or State of New Jersey when acting pursuant to this
ordinance.
DETENTION BASIN — An embankment and associated space for
impoundment of water or, alternatively, the space for impoundment partially
or entirely created by excavation rather than by embankment, in either case
designed to temporarily detain stormwater runoff.
DETENTION FACILITY — A detention basin or alternative structure
designed to temporarily detain stormwater runoff.
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS — The floodway and flood fringe areas as
determined by the Department of Environmental Protection under Section
3 of the Flood Hazard Area Control Act (P.L. 1979, c. 359).
FLOODPLAIN — The flood hazard areas of delineated streams and areas
inundated by the one-hundred-year flood in nondelineated areas.
"Floodway" means the channel of a natural stream and portions of the flood
hazard areas adjoining the channel, which are reasonably required to carry
and discharge the flood water or flood flow of any natural stream.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
6. To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological
functions, as well as for drainage and other purposes;
7. To reduce the impact of development upon downstream erosion;
8. To reduce erosion from any development or construction project;
9. To minimize the increase in pollutants in runoff due to land
development, which otherwise would degrade the quality of water
and may render it both unfit for human consumption and
detrimental to biological life; and
10. To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources
by means of controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion,
and runoff pollution.
§ 156.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156.02
001:333
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation; provided, however, that the
Department of Environmental Protection, in designating a wetland, shall
use the three parameter approach (that is, hydrology, soils and vegetation)
enumerated in the April 1, 1987 interim-final draft "Wetland Identification
and Delineation Manual" developed by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, and any subsequent amendments thereto.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — That, in addition to the definition of
development in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-4, the activity
must satisfy Subsection A or B below:
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
from any discernible, confined and discrete conveyances, and shall include,
but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, silvicultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
RETENTION BASIN — A retention facility designed to infiltrate retained
water to the subsurface and which is not an injection well.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Flow on the surface of the ground, resulting
from precipitation.
TOWNSHIP APPROVAL — Approval of the Pequannock Township Planning
Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment or Township Council.
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Pequannock Township Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
Any site plan or subdivision plan that will ultimately cover land with one
or more acres of additional impervious surfaces;
A.
Any construction of one or more of the following uses:
Feeding and holding areas that provide for more than 100 head of
cattle or 15,000 hens, 500 swine, 4,000 turkeys, 10,000 ducks; this
section shall also apply to all other equivalent numbers of animal
units as determined by the SCS Agricultural Waste Management
Field Manual for measuring BOD (biochemical oxygen demand)
producing potential;
1.
Pipelines, storage, or distribution systems for petroleum products
or chemicals;
2.
Storage, distribution or treatment facilities (excluding individual
on-site sewage disposal systems) for liquid waste;
3.
4. Solid waste storage, disposition, incineration or landfill;
5. Quarries, mines or borrow pits;
6. Land application of sludge or effluents;
7. Storage, distribution or treatment facilities for radioactive waste.
B.
§ 156.02 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 156.02
001:334
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed to practice in
the State of New Jersey and duly appointed under the requirements of
Chapter 3 of the code of the Township of Pequannock or a consulting
engineer authorized by the Pequannock Township Council to act in place of
or in concert with the appointed Township Engineer.
WET BASIN — A detention basin designed to retain some water on a
permanent basis.
§ 156.03. Applicability.
A. The provisions of this ordinance shall be applicable to each of the types
of development named below:
1. All site plans and major subdivision plans, as defined by the
Pequannock Township Land Development Ordinances and the
Municipal Land Use Law, that propose an increase of impervious
surfaces.
2. Any minor subdivision plans or floodplain development plans, as
defined by the Pequannock Township Land Development Ordinance
and the Municipal Land Use Law, that in the opinion of the Planning
Board may have a negative impact on neighboring properties and
the community with respect to stormwater runoff.
3. Any proposed construction of a residential structure or alteration
of a residential structure which, in the opinion of the Construction
Official, may have a negative impact on neighboring properties and
the community with respect to stormwater runoff.
4. Any construction of one or more of the following uses:
(a) Confined feeding and holding areas that provide for more than
100 head of cattle, 15,000 head of poultry, 500 swine, 4,000
turkeys and 10,000 ducks; this section shall also apply to all
other equivalent numbers of animal units as determined by the
Soil Conservation Service Agricultural Waste Management
Field Manual procedure for measuring BOD (biochemical
oxygen demand) producing potential.
(b) Pipelines, storage, or distribution systems for petroleum
products or chemicals;
(c) Storage, distribution or treatment facilities (excluding onsite
sewage disposal systems) for liquid waste;
(d) Solid waste storage, disposition, incineration or landfill;
(e) Quarries, mines or borrow pits;
(f) Land application of sludge or effluents; and
§ 156.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156.03
001:335
§ 156.04. Procedure.
§ 156.05. Technical standards.
Each proposed project not exempted from the implementation of this
ordinance shall meet the following stormwater management standards.
(g) Storage, distribution or treatment facilities for radioactive
wastes. Except where permitted and subject to a New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) permit.
5. In the case of projects for which County as well as Township
approval of proposed drainage facilities is required, the applicants
shall be required to comply with all provisions of this ordinance. In
such a case, the only provisions of this ordinance which shall
govern are those requirements which are stricter than those of the
County.
A. Burden of Proof. Whenever an applicant seeks Township approval of a
development to which this ordinance is applicable from any Board of
the Township, that applicant shall be required to demonstrate that his
project meets the standards set forth in this ordinance.
B. Submission Materials Due. The applicant shall submit materials, as
required by Section 156.06 hereof, to the Township Board from which
he seeks Township approval prior to or at the same time he submits his
application for the Township approval.
C. Review. The applicant's project shall be reviewed by the Township
Board from which he seeks his Township approval. That Township
Board shall consult with the Township Engineer to determine if the
project meets the standards set forth in this ordinance.
D. Time for Decision. The Township Board shall promptly determine if the
project meets the standards set forth in this ordinance. The time for
that determination should be the time permitted to review and act on
the applicant's application for a Township approval.
E. Variance. For good reason, the Township may grant a waiver of the
standards given in Section 156.05 below. In each such case, the
Township Board must make a report within 30 days to the County
Planning Board, giving a full explanation of the nature of the variance,
and the reasons why it was granted.
F. Failure to Comply. Failure of the applicant to demonstrate that the
project meets the standards set forth in this ordinance is reason to deny
the applicant's underlying application for Township approval.
I. General Standards:
A. Flood and erosion control;
§ 156.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 156.05
001:336
1. The flood and erosion control standards for detention will
require that volumes and rates be controlled so that after
development the site will generate no greater peak runoff from
the site than experienced prior to development, for a two-year,
ten-year, and one-hundred-year storm considered individually.
Consideration of a waiver or reduction of this requirement will
be given by the Township Board for sites adjacent to a
watercourse where a hydrologic study indicates that detention
will have a detrimental effect on downstream properties.
2. These design storms shall be defined as either a twenty-fourhour
storm using the rainfall distribution recommended by the
U.S. Soil Conservation Service when using U.S. Soil
Conservation Service procedures, (such as U.S. Soil
Conservation Service, "Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds", Technical Release No. 55) or as the estimated
total rainfall uniformly throughout the critical storm duration
(which may equal or exceed the estimated time of
concentration) at the site when using a design method such as
the Rational Method or Modified Rational Method.
3. For purposes of computing runoff, all undeveloped or unpaved
lands (e.g., cultivated, pasture, wooded or grassy) in the site
shall be assumed, prior to development, to be in good
hydrologic condition, regardless of conditions existing at the
time of computation. For lands to be considered cultivated,
they shall have been used for such purposes uninterruptedly
for a period of at least 7 of the last 10 years prior to the time of
computation. If such uninterrupted use has not occurred or
cannot be satisfactorily documented, woods shall be assume to
be the predeveloped land condition of the undeveloped or
unpaved lands.
4. Any major agricultural development as defined in the
ordinance shall be submitted to the Morris County Soil
Conservation District for review and comment in accordance
with this ordinance and any Soil Conservation District
guidelines. A Township Board may condition approval of such
stormwater control measures upon a positive approval of the
Morris County Soil Conservation District.
5. Soil erosion and sediment control shall be provided in
accordance with Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control promulgated by the State Soil Conservation
Committee pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:24-42 administered by the
Morris County Soil Conservation District.
B. Water Quality Control; In order to provide sediment transport and
particulate contaminant pollution control from stormwater runoff,
all site development stormwater management plans must provide
for the control of a water quality design storm. The water quality
§ 156.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156.05
001:337
design storm shall be defined as either the one-year frequency,
twenty-four-hour storm using the rainfall distribution
recommended for New Jersey by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service
or a storm of 1.25 inches of rainfall falling uniformly in two hours.
The water quality design storm shall be controlled by one of the
following practices:
1. The water quality requirement for detention will require
prolonged detention of the runoff from the water quality design
storm. Provisions shall be made for it to be detained and
released so as to evacuate 90% of the design storm stormwater
runoff to the basin in 18 hours in the case of residential
development and 36 hours in the case of all other
developments. The detention time shall be considered a
drawdown time of the elected water quality design storm and,
therefore, shall begin at the time of peak storage of that storm.
Drawdown time means the time for a detention basin to
translate from a peak storage condition for the water quality
design storm (maximum detention basin stage for that storm)
to a time at which 90% of the volume of design storm runoff
stored has evacuated through the basin. Evacuation shall be a
gradual translation. If the above requirement would result in
flow outlet smaller than three inches in diameter, the period of
detention shall be waived so that three inches will be the
minimum outlet size used. In the case of wet detention basins,
the permanent storage water shall not be included in the
analysis.
2. Where soils have sufficient permeability, the production of zero
runoff from the site under conditions of the 1.25 inch water
quality storm will be considered sufficient to meet the water
quality requirement for residential developments, provided
that the seasonal high ground water does not rise to within
four feet of the bottom of the detention facility. (In this
situation the detention facility is functioning as a retention
facility.) However, a retention facility cannot be applied on
sites where subsurface conditions allow for rapid infiltration.
For other than residential developments, approvals will be on a
case-by-case basis after technical review by the Township
Engineer. The object of this review will be to avoid the
potential for contamination of ground water. Other technology
may be substituted pursuant to Section 10.5 below.
C. In all cases, multiple level outlets or other fully automatic outlets
shall be designed so that peak discharge rates from the
development for the design storms will not be increased from what
would occur if the development were not constructed. Outlet
waters shall be discharged from the development at such locations
and velocities as not to cause additional erosion or additional
channels downstream of the development and shall be in
§ 156.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 156.05
001:338
accordance with Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
administered by the Morris County Soil Conservation District.
D. Where the project consists of two phases (I) new construction
which requires provisions of storm drainage under the terms of this
ordinance and (II) repair or rehabilitation of existing structures and
surfaces which does not result in increasing the extent of
impervious areas or in rendering existing surfaces less pervious,
the detention requirements may be computed on the basis of phase
(I) exclusively.
E. If detention basins or other detention facilities are provided
through which water passes at times other than following rainfall,
the Township Engineer shall be consulted concerning design
criteria. It will become necessary for detention requirements to be
met, despite the necessity of passing certain low flows. This applies
to all on-stream or online detention basins.
F. Detention basins located in freshwater wetlands may be allowed
only in accordance with the Freshwater Wetlands Protection Act,
N.J.S.A. 13:9B-1 et seq., and any rules adopted pursuant thereto.
G. Any detention facility that impounds water through the use of an
artificial dike, levee or other barrier and raises the water level five
feet or more above the usual mean low water height when
measured from the downstream toe-of-dam to the emergency
spillway crest is classified as a dam and subject to the New Jersey
Dam Safety Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:20. All such dams must be
designed, constructed, operated and maintained in compliance
with the rules of N.J.A.C. 7:20.
H. In many instances, the provision of separate detention facilities for
a number of single sites may be more expensive and more difficult
to maintain than provision of joint regional facilities for a number of
sites. In such cases, the applicant or applicants may seek approval
under this ordinance of joint regional detention facilities which will
fulfill the requirements of this ordinance. However, compliance
with this ordinance must be achieved and may not be postponed.
II. Planning and Design Standards for Maintenance and Repair:
A. The goal for the planning and design of a stormwater management
facility is for its operation with the least practical amount of
maintenance. To accomplish this, the facility shall be developed to
eliminate avoidable maintenance tasks, minimize the long term
amount of regular maintenance, facilitate the performance of
required maintenance tasks, and reduce the potential for extensive,
difficult, and costly remedial or emergency maintenance efforts.
B. Strong, durable and noncorrodible materials, components, and
fasteners shall be used to reduce required maintenance efforts.
These include but are not limited to lightweight noncorrodible
§ 156.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156.05
001:339
metals such as aluminum for trash racks, orifice plates, and access
hatches; hardy, disease resistant grasses for bottoms and side
slopes as prescribed by Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Standards administered by the Morris County Soil Conservation
District; reinforced concrete for outlet structures and inlet
headwalls; and gabions for channel and outlet linings.
C. Detention or retention facilities shall be designed to minimize
propagation of insects, particularly mosquitoes.
D. Detention or retention facilities should be designed in a
harmonious and attractive manner.
E. Detention facility outlets shall be designed to function without
manual, electric or mechanical controls.
III. Design Standards: All elements of a stormwater management facility
which includes the collection system as well as the detention or
retention basin, shall be designed in accordance with accepted
standards and approved by the Township Engineer.
A. Estimation of Stormwater Runoff Quantities; The following are
some of the accepted methods for the estimation of stormwater
runoff quantities:
1. Rational Method: The Rational Method is based on the Rational
Formula, Q = CIA where: Q = Peak rate of runoff or discharge
in CFS C = Runoff coefficient, I = Intensity of rainfall, in inches
per hour, for the time of concentration (TC) of the drainage
area, A = Drainage basin area, in acres.
The rational method is acceptable for estimating stormwater
runoff quantities for drainage basins up to an area of five acres.
The applicant shall determine the variables such as runoff
coefficient, time of concentration and rainfall intensity which
shall be subject to approval of the Township Engineer. Runoff
coefficients and the estimation of the time of concentration
are discretionary but subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer.
2. Modified Rational Method: The Modified Rational Method is an
expansion of the rational method which utilizes the same
equation and variables previously explained. This method is
acceptable for estimating stormwater runoff in basins up to an
area of 25 acres.
3. U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service (SCS) TR-55 Runoff Curve
Number Method: This method is published by the U.S.D.A. Soil
Conservation Service in Technical Release No. 55 (TR-55)
which requires the determination of a Runoff Curve Number.
This number designates the hydrologic soil group of the
watershed which is dependent upon soil and ground cover
§ 156.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 156.05
001:340
conditions and is subject to the approval of the Township
Engineer as are the other required variables such as the time
of concentration. This method is recommended for drainage
basins with areas from five acres to 300 acres.
B. Storm Drainage Collection System Design; The location and
spacing of drainage inlets shall be in conformance with accepted
design standards so as not to have excessive gutter flow which
exceeds inlet grate capacities. Inlet locations, in conjunction with
site grading and the storm drainage system shall be designed so as
not to transfer surface drainage from one watershed to another
without approval of the Township Engineer. Pipe design shall be
based upon an accepted method such as the Manning Equation.
Design variables and coefficients are subject to the approval of the
Township Engineer. Drainage inlets and pipes shall be designed to
carry the stormwater generated by a one-hundred-year design
storm as evidenced by appropriate design calculations. For
stormwater collection systems proposed within a floodplain or for
other site-specific circumstances, the Township Engineer may
approve a design storm of a return frequency less than 100 years.
The stormwater management report must include adequate
information and calculations in the form of an analysis between the
one-hundred-year design storm and the requested design storm. All
calculations pertaining to the design of drainage inlets and pipes
must be presented in a form acceptable to the Township Engineer.
C. Detention/Retention Basin Design; Detention and retention basins
must be designed with an appropriately sized outlet structure that
will operate satisfactorily and safely in passing the two-year, tenyear
and one-hundred-year design storms at a rate not to exceed
that of the same design storm under a pre-developed condition. An
acceptable hydraulic design method must be used to
mathematically route the designed storms through the proposed
basin. There are many accepted hydraulic methods for detention
basin routing, one being the Storage Indication (Modified-Puls)
Method. This method uses the continuity equation which may be
expressed as: where; I = mean inflow into basin during routing
period Wt, O = mean outflow from basin during routing period Wt,
WS = change in basin storage during routing period Wt. The
routing procedure is as follows:
- plot a hydrograph of pre-development conditions from which the
maximum basin outflow is determined
- plot a post-development hydrograph which is to be routed
through the proposed detention basin
- assume a size and shape for the first trial basin and outlet works
- compute a table and/or curve of water depth versus storage (a
function of basin geometry), water depth is measured above the
spillway or outflow pipe invert
§ 156.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156.05
001:341
- compute a table and/or curve of water depth versus outflow
(stage discharge relationships are a function of the outlet
structure)
- select a routing period, t, such that there are five or six points
on the rising side of the inflow hydrograph, one of which coincides
with the inflow peak; construct a graph of
2S
(t + 0)
versus 0
S = storage volume,
t = outing period,
0 = outflow rate
-the routing procedure is now accomplished using a tabular
method for the solution of the Modified-Puls equation:
- compare the maximum outflow rate with the allowable rate of
discharge from the drainage area
- adjust size, shape and/or outlet structure if the maximum
outflow rate is greater than the allowable
- repeat the design procedure for alternative design solutions
IV. Safety Measures: Safety measures are to be incorporated in the design
of all stormwater control projects. These may include but not be limited
to fencing, warning signs and outlet structures designed to limit public
access.
V. Detention basins in floodplains:
A. There will be no detention basins in the floodway except for those
on-stream.
B. New development must be in compliance with all applicable
regulations under the Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A.
58:16A-50 et seq.
C. In addition, new development, including construction of detention
basins, should be avoided in floodplains, but where this is
unavoidable, a special examination to determine adequacy of a
proposed detention facility during extreme storm events shall be
required. This examination is required to determine what effects, if
any, the backwater created by the floodplain have on the outflow
from and effective storage within the detention facility. All designs
of basins in floodplains, therefore, should be based upon an
accurate and thorough determination of backwater effects
§ 156.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 156.05
001:342
§ 156.06. Requirements for a site development stormwater plan.
resulting from runoff from the site and the watershed contributing
to the floodplain.
D. In cases where detention basins, other than on-stream basins, are
to be built in floodplains and in default of an analysis such as
described above, detention storage provided below the elevation of
the one-hundred-year flood (either specially calculated or taken
from an official State floodplain delineation map) will be credited as
effective storage at a reduced proportion as indicated in the table
below:
Table 1
Allowable proportion of storage to be assumed usable in
detention basins in the floodplain
Less than 5
Square Miles
5 to 100
Square Miles
Over 100
Square Miles
< 2 feet 40% 65% 90%
2 to 4 feet 25% 50% 75%
> 4 feet 10% 25% 50%
NOTE: Elevation of storage provided below one-hundred-year
flood level.
E. This effective detention storage plus any other supplementary
measures will be required to provide for stormwater detention, in
accordance with established standards.
VI. Alternatives to Detention Basins:
A. It is not necessary that basic requirements for water quantity and
quality control be satisfied by means of detention basins. A
combination of measures including, but not limited to, rooftop
storage, tanks, dry wells, or sheet flow through vegetated areas
may be used for the purpose, with consideration for the
appropriateness of the facility, anticipated length of life, feasibility
of continued maintenance, and environmental impacts (e.g.,
contamination of ground water).
B. Non-structural management practices including, but not limited to,
cluster land use development, open space acquisition, stream
encroachment and flood hazard controls, protection of wetlands,
steep slopes and vegetation, should be coordinated with detention
requirements. Changes in land use can often reduce the
appropriate changes in runoff coefficients.
I. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan:
§ 156.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156.06
001:343
A. Whenever an applicant seeks Township approval of a development
subject to this ordinance, the applicant shall submit all the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan as part of the submission of the application for subdivision or
site plan approval.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this ordinance.
C. The applicant shall submit copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection III of this section.
II. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval: The applicant's Site
Development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the Township Board from which municipal
approval is sought. That Township Board shall consult the Township
Engineer or engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board of
Adjustment (as appropriate) to determine if all the checklist
requirements have been satisfied and to determine if the project meets
the standards set forth in this ordinance.
III. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
A. Drainage area map. A drainage area map which delineates the
entire tributary drainage area to the site proposed for development
shall be submitted. The map shall be drawn to a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet, or as approved by the Township Engineer showing
two-foot contour intervals. The map shall indicate the following:
watercourses, existing stormwater conveyance systems and
detention facilities, wetlands, roads, structures and significant
natural or man-made features.
B. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of a site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, and vegetation on the site. Particular attention should be
given to unique, unusual, or environmentally sensitive features and
to those that provide particular opportunities or constraints for
development. This description shall be included in the
environmental impact statement required for site plans and
subdivisions.
C. Detailed Design Plans. Detailed site plans, subdivision plans or plot
plans, as the case may be, shall be submitted which include the
following:
1. Existing Conditions Plans should indicate all existing roads,
paved areas, structures, watercourses and stormwater
collection systems, land contours at two-foot intervals, and
wetlands.
§ 156.06 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 156.06
001:344
2. Proposed Improvements All proposed improvements shall be
indicated on the plans in sufficient detail for review by the
Township Engineer and shall include road profiles and/or
parking lot grading, contours at two-foot intervals, stormwater
collection and detention/retention facilities, wetlands buffer
and mitigation areas, and soil erosion and sediment control
measures and construction sequence schedule.
D. Calculations.
1. Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in Section 156.05 of this ordinance.
2. When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., retention basins) depend upon the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soil report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on onsite borings or soil pit profiles. The number
and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be
determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location
of the control measure.
E. Maintenance and Repair Plan.
1. The design and planning of the stormwater management
facility shall meet the objectives of Section 156.07.
2. Preventative, corrective and aesthetic functional maintenance
procedures shall be detailed which ensure the continuation of
the intended function of the facility.
3. Maintenance and repair plans for stormwater management
facilities shall identify the parts or components of the facility
that need to be maintained, and when repairs are required the
equipment and skills or training necessary. Plans for
stormwater management facilities shall detail the accessibility
of maintenance personnel and equipment. Costs and sources of
funds shall be identified when possible.
4. A schedule shall be developed of when and how often
maintenance will occur to maintain proper function of the
stormwater management facility. To reduce the potential for
extensive, difficult, and costly remedial or emergency
maintenance efforts the schedule of maintenance activities
shall include inspections to ensure proper performance of the
facility between scheduled cleanouts.
5. Where a stormwater management facility is used for sediment
control during construction, a debris and sediment disposal
site shall be confirmed before the facility is constructed. The
disposal site may or may not be at the site of the proposed
§ 156.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156.06
001:345
§ 156.07. Continued maintenance, repair and safety.
development. The responsible party shall demonstrate that he
or she is capable of financing the removal and disposal of
debris and sediment before the facility is operating. Disposal
site(s) shall be included in the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Plan and certified by the Morris County Soil
Conservation District.
6. Provisions for periodic review and evaluations to determine the
overall effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need
for revised or additional maintenance procedures, personnel,
and equipment shall be included in the facilities maintenance
and repair plan.
F. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The Township Official or
Board reviewing an application under this ordinance may, in
consultation with the engineer, waive submission of any of the
requirements this chapter when it can be demonstrated that the
information requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a
hardship on the applicant to obtain and its absence will not
materially affect the review process.
I. Applicability:
A. Projects subject to review as in Section 156.05 of this chapter shall
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
II. Responsibility for Continued Maintenance, Repair and Safety:
A. The requirements of this section do not apply to stormwater
management facilities that are dedicated to and accepted by the
municipality or another governmental agency. Responsibility for
operation and maintenance of stormwater management facilities,
including periodic removal and disposal of accumulated particulate
material and debris, shall remain with the property owner, unless
assumed by a governmental agency, with permanent arrangements
that it shall pass to any successor or owner. If portions of the land
are to be sold, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass
the basic responsibility to successors in title. These arrangements
shall designate for each project the property owner, governmental
agency, or other legally established entity to be permanently
responsible for inspection and maintenance, hereinafter in this
section referred to as the responsible person.
B. Prior to granting approval or as a condition of final subdivision or
site plan approval to any project subject to review under this
ordinance, the applicant shall enter into an agreement with the
Township to ensure the operation and maintenance of the
stormwater management facility. In cases where property is
subdivided and sold separately, a homeowners' association or
§ 156.06 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 156.07
001:346
Chapter 157
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
similar permanent entity shall be established as the responsible
person, absent an agreement by a governmental agency to assume
responsibility. It shall be demonstrated to the Township that a
proposed new responsible entity has the capability to complete and
finance necessary maintenance.
C. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance, the Township shall so notify the responsible person in
writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall
have 14 days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in a
manner that is approved by the Township Engineer or his designee.
If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such
maintenance and repair, the Township may immediately proceed to
do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
III. Continued Maintenance and Repair Procedures:
A. Preventative maintenance procedures are required to maintain the
intended operation and safe condition of the stormwater
management facility by greatly reducing the occurrence of
problems and malfunctions. To be effective, preventative
maintenance shall be performed on a regular basis and include
such routine procedures as training of staff, periodic inspections,
grass cutting and fertilizing, silt and debris removal and disposal,
elimination of mosquito breeding habitats, pond maintenance and
review of maintenance and inspection work to identify where the
maintenance program could be more effective.
B. Corrective maintenance procedures are required to correct a
problem or malfunction at a stormwater management facility and
to restore the facility's intended operation and safe condition.
Based upon the severity of the problem, corrective maintenance
must be performed on an as needed or emergency basis and
include such procedures as structural repairs, mosquito
extermination, removal of debris, sediment and trash removal
which threaten discharge capacity, erosion repair, snow and ice
removal, fence repair and restoration of vegetated and
nonvegetated linings.
IV. Penalties. Any responsible person who violates any portion of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 or imprisoned
for not more than 90 days, or both, for each violation, and in addition
shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the Township from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
§ 156.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.01
001:347
§ 157.01. Scope and purpose. [Added 6-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-09]
A. Policy statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs (Best Management
Practices). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in Section 157.02.
C. Applicability.
1. This ordinance shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions
for the following major developments that require preliminary or
final site plan or subdivision review:
a. Nonresidential major developments; and
b. Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This ordinance shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Pequannock.
3. This ordinance shall also be coordinated with Chapter 156 of the
Township Ordinances dealing with the structural design standards
of the Township's stormwater facilities.
D. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this ordinance are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This
ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions
§ 157.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.01
001:348
§ 157.02. Definitions. [Added 6-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. The
definitions below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions
in the Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES or NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the County Board
of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management plans
and implementing ordinance(s). The county review agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels,
the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration,
relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building or
other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any person, for which
permission is required under the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq. In the case of development of agricultural lands, development
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation,
or other provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher
standards shall control.
A. A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
B.
§ 157.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.02
001:349
means: any activity that requires a State permit; any activity reviewed
by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State Agriculture
Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any activity not
exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody
or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer of
material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — Is the process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any development or construction activity that
provides for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance
for the purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or
exposure and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or
removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, borough, town, Township, or village.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, Township of Pequannock, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
§ 157.02 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.02
001:350
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the State, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy Map
and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be the
focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Is defined as the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the Official Map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
§ 157.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.02
001:351
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to State resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Is defined as previously developed
portions of areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
§ 157.03. General standards. [Added 6-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-09]
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
A.
B. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
C. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
D.
A. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in § 157.04. To the maximum extent practicable, these
standards shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies into the design. If these strategies alone
are not sufficient to meet these standards, structural stormwater
management measures necessary to meet these standards shall be
incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this ordinance apply only to new major
development and are intended to minimize the impact of
stormwater runoff on water quality and water quantity in receiving
water bodies and maintain groundwater recharge. The standards
do not apply to new major development to the extent that
alternative design and performance standards are applicable under
§ 157.02 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.03
001:352
§ 157.04. Stormwater management requirements for major
development. [Added 6-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09]
a regional stormwater management plan or Water Quality
Management Plan adopted in accordance with Department rules.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with § 157.10.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department' Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150,
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlenbergi (bog turtle).
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsections F and G of this section:
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsections F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsections F and G to the
maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsections F and G, existing structures currently in use, such
as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
§ 157.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.04
001:353
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection D.3 above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream, that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
subsections F and G that were not achievable on-site.
E. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in subsections F
and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural stormwater
management strategies set forth at subsection E into the design.
The applicant shall identify the nonstructural measures
incorporated into the design of the project. If the applicant
contends that it is not feasible for engineering, environmental, or
safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural stormwater
management measures identified in Paragraph two below into the
design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify the
strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
a. Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
b. Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
c. Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
d. Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction
to post construction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
e. Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
f. Minimize soil compaction;
g. Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
h. Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
i. Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
§ 157.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.04
001:354
[1] Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy subsection E(3) below;
[2] Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
[3] Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
[4] When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under subsection E(2)(i)[2] above
shall comply with the following standard to control passage of solid
and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of
this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means sediment,
debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or settleable solids.
For exemptions to this standard see subsection E(3)(c) below.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
[1] The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
[2] A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
[3] Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
§ 157.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.04
001:355
c. This standard does not apply:
[1] Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
[2] Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in subsection G(1) are conveyed through any
device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space four and 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall
netting facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
[3] Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in subsection G(1); or
[4] Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsections F and
G shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Section 157.07, or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
§ 157.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.04
001:356
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
a. The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
b. The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
[1] The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at Subsection 5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual preconstruction
groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from pre-construction to post-construction for the
two-year storm is infiltrated.
[2] This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to [3] below.
[3] The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
§ 157.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.04
001:357
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
[4] The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
c. In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at Subsection 5, complete one
of the following:
[1] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten-, and one-hundredyear
storm events do not exceed, at any point in time, the
pre-construction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
[2] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and onehundred-
year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
[3] Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
one-hundred-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the pre-construction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to post-
§ 157.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.04
001:358
construction stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
[4] In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with [1], [2] and [3] above shall only
be applied if the increased volume of stormwater runoff
could increase flood damages below the point of
discharge.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at Section 157.02 shall be
submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review
and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section
and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purposes of
this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
G. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of non-structural and structural stormwater management
measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
§ 157.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.04
001:359
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(inches)
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Section 157.07, or found on the Department's
website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual and other
sources of technical guidance are listed in Section 157.07. TSS
reduction shall be calculated based on the removal rates for the
BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and methods of
calculating removal rates may be used if the design engineer
provides documentation demonstrating the capability of these
alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of any
approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal rate
shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418 Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B - (AXB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
§ 157.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.04
001:360
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention systems 90%
Constructed stormwater
wetland
90%
Extended detention basin 40% to 60%
Infiltration structure 80%
Manufactured treatment device See § 157.06C
Sand filter 80%
Vegetative filter strip 60% to 80%
Wet pond 50% to 90%
4. If there is more than one onsite drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in Subsections F and G.
6. Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in Section 157.07.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
§ 157.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.04
001:361
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follows:
a. The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
[1] A three hundred foot special water resource protection
area shall be provided on each side of the waterway,
measured perpendicular to the waterway from the top of
the bank outwards or from the center line of the waterway
where the bank is not defined, consisting of existing
vegetation or vegetation allowed to follow natural
succession is provided.
[2] Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection [1] above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subparagraph shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
b. All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards For
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
c. If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
[1] Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
§ 157.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.04
001:362
§ 157.05. Calculation of stormwater runoff and groundwater
recharge. [Added 6-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09]
[2] Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
subsection shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction
removal rate;
[3] Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
[4] The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
[5] A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
[6] All encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
d. A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection G(8) has been approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection, then the provisions
of the plan shall be the applicable special water resource
protection area requirements for that waterway. A stream
corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to G(8) shall
maintain or enhance the current functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area as
defined in Subsection G(8)(a)[1] above. In no case shall a
stream corridor protection plan allow the reduction of the
Special Water Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet
as measured perpendicular to the waterway subject to this
subsection.
e. Paragraph G(8) does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
§ 157.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.05
001:363
a. The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
b. The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the pre-construction
condition of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection A.1.a and the Rational and
Modified Rational Methods at Subsection A.1.b. A runoff coefficient
or a groundwater recharge land cover for an existing condition may
be used on all or a portion of the site if the design engineer verifies
that the hydrologic condition has existed on the site or portion of
the site for at least five years without interruption prior to the time
of application. If more than one land cover have existed on the site
during the five years immediately prior to the time of application,
the land cover with the lowest runoff potential shall be used for the
computations. In addition, there is the presumption that the site is
in good hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn,
or park), with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with
good hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land
use type is cultivation).
3. In computing pre-construction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts, that may reduce pre-construction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
§ 157.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.05
001:364
§ 157.06. Standards for structural stormwater management
measures. [Added 6-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09]
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427 Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of § 157.08D.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
Section 157.08.
§ 157.05 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.06
001:365
§ 157.07. Sources for technical guidance. [Added 6-26-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-09]
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by Section
157.04 of this ordinance.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of Section 157.04 of this ordinance, provided the pollutant removal
rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at 1 and 2 below, which are available from
Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540;
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, 732-932-9306; and
3. The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
§ 157.06 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.07
001:366
§ 157.08. Safety standards for stormwater management basins.
[Added 6-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09]
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
A. This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This subsection applies to any new stormwater management basin.
B. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
a. The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
b. The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
c. The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
d. The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ft sq.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
a. The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
b. The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
c. The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs/ft sq.
3. For purposes of this paragraph 3, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
§ 157.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.08
001:367
§ 157.09. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
[Added 6-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09]
a. If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection C a free-standing outlet structure may be exempted
from this requirement.
b. Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one feet to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water
surface. See Subsection D for an illustration of safety ledges in
a stormwater management basin.
c. In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
C. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
A. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this ordinance, the applicant shall submit all of the
required components of the Checklist for the Site Development
§ 157.08 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.09
001:368
Stormwater Plan at Subsection C below as part of the submission
of the applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this ordinance.
3. The applicant shall submit 10 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection C of this section.
B. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's Site
Development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this ordinance.
C. Checklist requirements. The following information shall be required:
1. Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and floodplains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
2. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
§ 157.09 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.09
001:369
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Subsections 3
through 6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall be to describe
how the site is being developed to meet the objective of controlling
groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and stormwater
quantity problems at the source by land management and source
controls whenever possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
a. Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
b. Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
a. Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the pre-development and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in Section 157.04 of this ordinance.
b. When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on onsite boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Section 157.10.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this ordinance may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsections C.1 through C.6 of this section
when it can be demonstrated that the information requested is
impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant
§ 157.09 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.09
001:370
§ 157.10. Maintenance and repair. [Added 6-26-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-09; 9-25-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-27]
to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the review
process.
A. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in § 157.01C of this ordinance shall
comply with the requirements of Subsections B and C.
B. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B.2 above is not a public agency, the maintenance plan
and any future revisions based on Subsection 10.B.7 below shall be
recorded upon the deed of record for each property on which the
maintenance described in the maintenance plan must be
undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
§ 157.09 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.10
001:371
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B.2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B.2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of the
maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and the
deed as needed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection B.2 above shall retain and make available, upon request
by any public entity with administrative, health, environmental, or
safety authority over the site, the maintenance plan and the
documentation required by Subsections B.6 and B.7 above.
9. The requirements of Subsections B.3 and B.4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
11. Applicable projects where construction activities disturb more than
an acre of property shall be required to have posted, and
maintained for the life of the account, an escrow account that will
ensure the project's stormwater management measures and
practices are functioning as designed. This includes seeing that
they are free of debris, trash and the like, that any eroded areas are
attended to and vegetation and non-vegetation linings are restored.
12. The installation of these measures shall be assured via the posting
of a standard Performance Guarantee as covered under Section
163.04.350 of the Township Code. The escrow account shall be
posted at the time of building occupancy and shall be established
for a five-year period. This account can be drawn upon should the
owner or operator fail to comply with this chapter. The Township
will be assured that compliance is to be attained or they will have
the appropriate matters addressed either by their own forces or
§ 157.10 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 157.10
001:372
§ 157.11. Improper disposal of waste. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-20]
with a private subcontractor. The amount of the deposit shall be
at least 20% of the amount of the stormwater management portion
of the project's performance guarantee or $10,000 whichever is
greater.
C. Nothing in this chapter shall alter the requirement for the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prohibit the spilling, dumping,
or disposal of materials other than stormwater to the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) operated by the Township of
Pequannock, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings stated
herein unless their use in the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a
different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number
include the singular number, and words used in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A
conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the
Township of Pequannock or other public body, and is designed and used
for collecting and conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain
and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
C. Prohibited Conduct: The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system
operated by the Township of Pequannock is prohibited. The spilling,
dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater in such a
manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
D. Exceptions to Prohibition:
A. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
§ 157.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157.11
001:373
§ 157.12. Penalties. [Added 6-26-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-09]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this ordinance shall be
subject to a penalty of a term of imprisonment in the County jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days or by a fine not less than $100 nor exceeding $1,000,
or by a period of community service not exceeding 90 days.
Chapter 158
SOIL REMOVAL
B. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
waters).
C. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact
cooling water).
D. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
E. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
F. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
G. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
H. Flows from firefighting activities.
I. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
(1) Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use
for their intended purposes; and
(2) Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing
materials immediately following salt and de-icing material
applications. Prior to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt
and de-icing materials must be removed from equipment and
vehicles to the maximum extent practicable using dry cleaning
methods (e.g., shoveling and sweeping). Recovered materials
are to be returned to storage for reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
E. Enforcement: This section shall be enforced by the Municipal Officials
designated by the Township Manager of the Township of Pequannock.
§ 157.11 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 158.01
001:374
§ 158.01. Permit required.
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil for sale or for use
other than on the premises from which the soil shall be taken, except
in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on such
premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto, without first having
procured a permit therefor from the Township Council.
§ 158.02. Permit application; map of premises; approval of contour
lines and grades.
The Township Council shall not consider any application for the removal
of soil from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until the owner
of the premises shall first file with the Township Clerk an application
requesting such a permit, together with a map of the premises showing the
contour lines and proposed contour grades resulting from such intended
removal of soil in relation to the topography of the premises. Such proposed
contour lines and proposed grades shall be subject to the inspection and
approval of the Township Council. No such permit for soil removal shall be
issued until such map has been filed and until the proposed contour lines
and grades have been approved by the Township Council.
§ 158.03. Hearing; factors to be considered in reviewing permit
application.
§ 158.04. Issuance of permit.
If, after examining the application for a permit and the map required by
158.02, and after the hearing in the event a hearing is requested by the
applicant, the Township Council shall be of the opinion that the proposed
soil removal will not create conditions inimical to the public health, welfare
A. Upon written request for a hearing made by the applicant to the
Township Council, an opportunity to be heard shall be granted within
30 days thereafter.
B. The Township Council, in considering and reviewing the application and
in arriving at its decision, shall be guided and take into consideration
the public health, safety and general welfare. Particular consideration
shall be given to the following factors:
(1) Soil erosion by water and wind.
(2) Drainage.
(3) Soil fertility.
(4) Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
(5) Land values and uses.
(6) Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Township.
§ 158.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158.04
001:375
and safety and will not result in the creation of any sharp declivities, pits
or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems, depressed land values, nor
create any drainage, sewerage problems or other conditions of danger, a
permit to remove the soil shall be granted.
§ 158.05. Bond requirements.
Before any permit for soil removal shall be granted or issued, the owner
or applicant shall file with the Township Council a bond, in form and with
surety acceptable to the Township, in such amount as, in the opinion of the
Township Council, shall be sufficient to insure the faithful performance of
the work to be undertaken pursuant to the permit granted by the Township
Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 158.06. Substantial alteration of contour and topography
prohibited.
No soil removal shall be permitted which will substantially alter the existing
contour and topography of the land. The Township Council shall, at the
time of the hearing provided for in 158.03, render a determination as to
whether the application for soil removal which is the subject of such hearing
constitutes a substantial alteration of existing contour and topography of
the land. In making such determination, the Township Council shall be
bound by the following standard: Any soil removal in excess of that
necessary and incidental to the establishment of a permitted use as such
is defined and delineated in the Zoning Ordinance of the Township7 shall
be determined to be a substantial alteration of the existing contour and
topography. It is the intent of this section that, in determining the amount
of soil which it is necessary to remove where such removal is incidental to
the creation of a permitted use as aforesaid, the minimal amount which may
be necessary to reasonably develop the land in a permitted use shall be the
maximum of soil removed.
§ 158.07. Duties of owner or person in charge.
If a permit to remove soil shall be granted pursuant to this chapter, the
owner or person in charge shall conduct the operations so that there shall
be no sharp declivities, pits or depressions and in such a manner that the
area shall be properly leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to conform
to the contour lines and grades approved by the Township Council.
§ 158.08. Retention of topsoil on premises.
The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of soil,
when a permit has been duly granted, shall not take away the top layer of
arable soil for a depth of six inches, but such top layer of arable soil to a
depth of six inches shall be set aside for retention on the premises, and shall
7. Note: See Ch. 189, Zoning.
§ 158.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 158.08
001:376
be respread over the premises when the rest of the soil has been removed,
pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the Township Council.
§ 158.09. Conformance required.
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed from any
premises except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 159
PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETROFITTING
§ 159.01. Purpose. [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-14]
An ordinance requiring the retrofitting of existing storm drain inlets which
are in direct contact with repaving, repairing, reconstruction, or
resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property, to prevent the
discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles, cans, food
wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer system(s)
operated by the Township of Pequannock so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 159.02. Definitions. [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-14]
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — A conveyance or
system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of Pequannock or other
public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — An opening in a storm drain used to collect
stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet, curbopening
inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams
and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or artificial, within
the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its jurisdiction.
§ 158.08 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159.03
001:377
§ 159.03. Prohibited conduct. [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-14]
§ 159.04. Design standard. [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-14]
A. No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with
one single family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing
(excluding the repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top
coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot
bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact
with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm
drain inlet either:
1. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
2. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in Section 159.04
below prior to the completion of the project.
A. Storm drain inlets identified in Section 159.03 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable
materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph,
"solid and floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other
floating, suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this
standard see item 3 below.
1. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever
they use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water
body under that grate:
a. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT
Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and
Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
b. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate
has an area of no more than seven square inches, or is no
greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in
grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch
grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted
drains. Examples of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads
(including bridges), driveways, parking areas, bikeways,
plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields, open channels, and
stormwater basin floors.
2. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the
curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no
§ 159.03 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 159.04
001:378
§ 159.05. Enforcement. [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-14]
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or other
Municipal Officials of the Township of Pequannock.
§ 159.06. Penalties. [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-14]
Chapter 160
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 160.01. General Provisions.
§ 160.01.010. Playing of games on public places.
No person shall engage or participate in any practice, sport or exercise
having a tendency to annoy, disturb or frighten any person on any sidewalk,
street, road, avenue, park or other public place.
more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than 2.0 inches
across the smallest dimension.
3. This standard does not apply:
a. Where the municipal engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not
practicably be overcome by using additional or larger storm
drain inlets that meet these standards;
b. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch
basin hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery
of all solid and floatable materials that could not pass through
one of the following:
[1] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[2] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
c. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars; or
d. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet
this standard is an undertaking that constitutes an
encroachment or will damage or destroy the New Jersey
Register listed historic property.
§ 159.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160.01.020
001:379
§ 160.01.020. Obstruction of sidewalks.
No person shall place or permit to be placed upon any sidewalk any object
or thing that shall in any manner obstruct such sidewalk or render travel
upon such sidewalk dangerous or unsafe.
§ 160.01.030. Removal or damaging of warning lights, signals and
signs.
No person shall remove, displace, break or change any sign or light or
signal set up or placed in any street or public places as a warning of danger,
or indicating an excavation or obstruction, or showing that any street or
public places is closed to traffic. No person shall, between the hours of
sunset and sunrise, extinguish any light used for any purpose set forth in
this section.
§ 160.01.040. Opening of manholes and drain inlets.
No person shall open any manhole or drain inlet, or remove the cover
or grate thereof without authorization from the Director of Public Works
or other administrative authority. Such opening shall be appropriately
barricaded and shall be so marked both day and night, as to be plainly seen
at a distance of 50 feet. The barricade shall be maintained as long as the
manhole shall remain opened or uncovered. Barricades must conform to
the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest
edition, and shall be approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 160.01.050. Riding or driving on sidewalks.
No person shall ride, drive or pass over or along any sidewalk with horses,
motor vehicles or motorcycles. This section shall not prevent the use of
driveways or the crossing of a sidewalk at right angles for the purpose of
entering upon property.
§ 160.01.060. Temporary closing of streets.
The Township Manager or his agent may close any street or public place or
section thereof to public traffic for the purpose of repairing, constructing or
reconstructing the same.
§ 160.01.070. Parades.
No person shall organize or conduct or assist in the organization or conduct
of any parade upon any of the public streets or public places without
obtaining a permit therefor from the Township Manager.
§ 160.01.080. Fires on roadways.
No person shall make, light, start or maintain any fire upon any street or
roadway.
§ 160.01.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 160.02
001:380
§ 160.02. Drains, Culverts and Other Drainage Structures.
§ 160.02.010. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or install a drainage
ditch, culvert, drain pipe, bridge or any other drainage structure or
obstruction affecting the drainage of any type of premises in the Township
without first obtaining permission therefor from the Township Council or
other agency having jurisdiction.
§ 160.02.020. Permit applications.
Applications for permits under this section shall be submitted in writing to
the Township Council and shall include the following:
§ 160.02.030. Referral of application to Engineer; recommendation.
Applications for permits under this section shall be immediately referred
to the Township Engineer or other authority designated by the Township
Council. The application and site shall be examined by such engineer or
other authority for its compliance with the master drainage system of the
Township, and a report or recommendation shall be made concerning the
proposal to the Township Council at its next subsequent meeting.
§ 160.02.040. Criteria for granting permit.
In passing upon applications for permits under this section, the Township
Council shall require that all drainage structures which drain water off the
premises of the applicant shall be extended and tied into storm drains,
ditches or other existing publicly owned or controlled drainage for the area.
It shall also require that the pipe or structure be of sufficient size and
be installed to the proper grade, taking into consideration the size of the
area to be drained. If all standards are complied with and the drainage
structure meets good construction and engineering practice, a permit shall
be granted by the Township Council.
A. A map or diagram of the property with the location of all present or
proposed ditches, streams, brooks, pipes and/or drainage structures.
B. Elevations based on United States Geodetic datum of all such features
shown.
C. The percentage of grade of the flow line of the proposed drainage
structure, pipe or other construction.
D. The disposition which will be made of the water being drained or
channeled from the premises.
E. Permits or statements of nonjurisdiction from the appropriate county,
state or federal agencies.
§ 160.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160.02.050
001:381
§ 160.02.050. Drainage structures to be kept open; obstructions
prohibited.
All drainage ditches, culverts, drains, pipes and drainage structures shall be
kept open and free flowing at all times. It shall be unlawful for any person
to throw or place debris or material of any manner whatsoever or to cause
such to be thrown or placed into any drainage ditch or drainage structure
under the control of the Township or any municipal, county, state or federal
governmental agency.
§ 160.03. Removal of Snow and Ice from Sidewalks.
§ 160.03.010. Duty of owner, occupant or tenant.
§ 160.03.020. Depositing of snow or ice in streets prohibited.
No person shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice into or upon any
street in the Township, it being the intent and purpose of this provision
to prohibit all persons from throwing, casting, placing or depositing snow
and ice, which accumulated within the private property belonging to such
person, upon the sidewalks or streets of the Township.
§ 160.03.030. Removal by Township; costs to become lien.
In case snow and ice shall not be removed from such sidewalks or shall
be cast, deposited thereon or placed upon any sidewalks or street by the
owner, tenant or occupant of any premises as provided in 160.03.010 and
160.03.020, the same shall be removed forthwith and under the direction
of the Township Engineer, and the cost of such removal, as clearly as can
be ascertained, shall be certified by the Township Engineer to the Township
Council. The Township Council shall examine such certification, and if found
to be correct, shall cause such cost to be charged against such real estate
so abutting or bordering upon such sidewalks, and the amount so charged
shall forthwith become a lien and a tax upon such real estate or land and
be added to, recorded and collected in the same way and manner as the
taxes next to be levied and assessed upon such premises, and shall bear
interest and be enforced and collected by the same officers and in the same
A. The owner, occupant or tenant of premises abutting or bordering upon
any street in the Township shall remove all snow and ice from the
abutting sidewalks of such streets, or in case of ice, which may be so
frozen as to make removal impracticable, shall cause the same to be
thoroughly covered with sand or ashes or a de-icing material, within 12
hours of daylight after the same shall fall or be formed thereon.
B. In case the building is occupied by more than one family or business
unit, then the tenant or occupant of the first floor or story thereof is
hereby required to remove all snow and ice from such portion of the
sidewalks, or in the case of ice which it is impracticable to remove,
cover the same with sand or ashes or a deicing material, within 12
hours of daylight after the same shall be formed or fall thereon.
§ 160.02.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 160.03.030
001:382
manner as other taxes. The imposition and collection of a fine imposed for
a violation of this section shall not constitute any bar to the right of the
Township to collect the cost as certified for the removal of such snow and
ice in the manner herein authorized.
§ 160.03.040. Penalties.
Penalties for failure to comply with Section 160.03.030 shall be $35 plus
$15 court cost payable through the "Violations Bureau."
§ 160.04. Vegetation Bordering Public Ways.
§ 160.04.010. Height restrictions.
When it shall be deemed by the Township Zoning Officer to be expedient
for the preservation of public safety, owners or tenants of lands lying within
the Township may be required to keep all brush, hedges and other plant life
growing within 10 feet of any roadway or within 25 feet of the intersection
of two or more roadways cut to a height of not more than 2-1/2 feet.
§ 160.04.020. Notice to owner or tenant to cut vegetation.
In such cases, the Township Zoning Officer shall give written notice to
the property owner or tenant, specifying the reasons why it is deemed
necessary that the brush, hedges or other plant life be cut to required
height and directing such property owner or tenant to comply with the
order of the Township Zoning Officer within 10 days from the receipt of such
notice.
§ 160.04.030. Cutting of vegetation by Township; costs to be
charged against land.
If the notice provided for in 160.04.020 is not complied with in the time
specified, the Township Manager may direct the cutting of the brush,
hedges or other plant life to the required height. In such case, the Township
Manager shall certify the cost thereof to the Township Council, and if such
cost is found to be reasonable, it shall be charged against the land is
affected. Should the Township Council determine the cost as certified to be
excessive, it shall cause the reasonable cost thereof to be charged against
such lands.
§ 160.04.040. Costs to become lien.
The amount charged pursuant to 160.04.030 shall forthwith become a lien
upon such lands and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes next
to be assessed and levied thereon, the same to bear interest at the same
rate as other taxes and to be collected and enforced by the Tax Collector in
the same manner as taxes.
§ 160.05. Street Construction Standards.
§ 160.03.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160.05.010
001:383
§ 160.05.010. Compliance required.
Whenever it is required by the Township Council or Planning Board that
streets be installed or upgraded by a property owner or developer, such
streets shall conform to the specifications and construction standards and
procedures set forth in this section.
§ 160.05.020. Conformance with state standards.
All work, methods, procedures and materials shall conform to New Jersey
Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction of 1989 and addenda to said specifications, unless otherwise
stated herein and shall be referenced to, herein, as the "NJDOT Standard
Specifications."
§ 160.05.030. Minimum standards of road construction drawing.
There is attached hereto and made a part hereof a drawing entitled
"Minimum Standards of Road Construction, Township of Pequannock." This
drawing and these specifications shall complement the regulations and
requirements of the Pequannock Township Subdivision Ordinance.
§ 160.05.040. Street opening permits.
All work performed in the public right-of-way shall require a street opening
permit, issued by the Township Clerk in accordance with § 160.06 of this
chapter. Construction permits shall not be required in developments where
site plans have been approved by the Township Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment and proper performance bonds have been posted.
§ 160.05.050. Inspection of improvements and installations.
All improvements shall be installed under the supervision and inspection of
the Township Engineer or his authorized representative. No underground
installation shall be covered until inspected and approved by the Township
Engineer or his authorized representative.
§ 160.05.060. Responsibility for costs of review and inspections.
In all roadway construction and improvement work requiring municipal
approval and/or inspections, the Township shall be reimbursed for the cost
of reviewing plans and/or inspections. Inspection costs shall also include
laboratory tests required by the Township Engineer or his authorized
representative of any materials to be used in the construction project.
§ 160.05.070. Specifications.
A. Public utilities. All construction work for the installation of electric
power and light, gas mains, and telephone services shall be performed
in accordance with the regulations and requirements of the public
utility having jurisdiction thereto.
§ 160.05.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 160.05.070
001:384
B. Public water supply. The installation of water mains shall be in
accordance with the approved plans and the regulations and
requirements of the Pequannock Township Water Department.
C. Street drainage. All drainage work, including piping, catch basins,
manholes and other appurtenances shall be installed in accordance
with the approved plans and as directed by the Township Engineer or
his authorized representative. Drainage design shall be based on the
requirements of Chapter 156, Stormwater Management or as specified
by the Township Engineer.
D. Street sewers. All new sanitary sewers, including house connections
within the public right-of-way, shall be installed in accordance with the
approved plans, and as directed by the Township Engineer or his
authorized representative.
E. Curbing. Concrete curbing shall conform to the details shown on the
Roadway Construction Standards Drawing and requirements of the
NJDOT Standard Specifications.
F. Pavement.
(1) General provisions.
(a) Road pavements and pavement width shall conform to the
approved plans and to the details shown on the Roadway
Construction Standards Drawing.*
(b) Where existing road pavements are excavated, broken up, or
show other visible signs of damage caused by the installation of
public utilities, construction traffic, the replaced roadway
subgrade, base, and surface shall be better than or equal to the
original.
(c) Material excavated from the roadway may be used as trench
backfill, provided that it is free from roots, large stones,
chunks of clay, concrete or asphalt.
(d) The dense graded, aggregate base course, bituminous
stabilized base course, and bituminous concrete surface course
shall conform to the approved plans, to the details shown on
the Roadway Construction Standards drawing, and to the
NJDOT Standard Specifications.
(e) In all cases, the bituminous concrete surface course material
shall extend to the furthest limit of surface damage, in the
construction area, as determined by the Township Engineer or
his authorized representative, or 1 1/2 times the excavation
width beyond all sides of the trench area, whichever is greater.
(f) All areas where new surface material shall meet existing
surface material shall be smooth, tight seams.
§ 160.05.070 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160.05.070
001:385
(2) Dense Graded Aggregate.
(a) Materials. The materials shall *[be broken stone of trap rock,
granite, gneiss, dolomite or limestone or blast furnace slag.
The large aggregate shall be 2-1/2 inches in size. The materials
shall]* conform to the requirements of Section 901 of the
NJDOT Standard Specifications.
(b) Methods of construction.
[1] Dense graded aggregate shall not be laid on the subgrade
until the subgrade has been thoroughly inspected by the
Township Engineer or his duly authorized representative
and meets with his approval.
[2] The dense graded aggregate base course shall be rolled to
a minimum thickness of four or *[six inches,]* as specified,
with a three-wheeled power roller weighing not less than
10 tons and a weight on the rear rolls of not less than 330
pounds per inch of width of roll. The rolling shall begin at
the sides and progress to the center parallel to the center
line of the road.
[3] The dense graded aggregate base course shall be placed in
a manner which meets the requirements of Section 301 of
the NJDOT Standard Specifications.
(3) Bituminous stabilized base course Type CA-BC.
(a) Materials.
[1] Bituminous stabilized base course materials shall conform
to the requirements therefor as specified in Section 903 of
the NJDOT Standard Specifications.
[2] Bituminous stabilized base course shall be Mix I-2 as
specified in Section 903 of the NJDOT Standard
Specifications.
(b) Methods of construction.
[1] The bituminous stabilized base course shall be spread, in
conformance with the cross section shown on the Roadway
Construction Standards drawing, by a bituminous
concrete paver which shall be self-contained, powerpropelled,
provided with an activated screed or strike-off
assembly. No bituminous concrete material shall be placed
when the atmospheric temperature is below 45° F. or when
the weather is foggy, rainy or otherwise unfavorable unless
approved by the Township Engineer or his duly authorized
representative.
§ 160.05.070 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 160.05.070
001:386
[2] After the material has been properly spread, initial
compaction shall be obtained by rolling with a three-wheel
power-driven roller having a load of not less than 330
pounds per inch of width of rear wheel and a total metal
weight of not less than the 10 tons.
[3] Subsequent rolling shall be done with a two-axle tandem
roller which shall be power driven and shall have a load of
not less than 250 pounds per inch of width of tread of drive
roll and shall have a total metal weight of not less than
eight tons.
[4] Rolling shall begin at the sides and progress gradually to
the center, until the entire surface has been rolled by the
rear wheels. If the width of the base course permits, it
shall be subjected to a diagonal rolling crossing the lines of
the first. Placement of the base course shall be in a manner
which meets the requirements of Section 304 of the
NJDOT Standard Specifications.
[5] Any pavement that becomes loose and broken or mixed
with dirt, or is in anyway defective shall be removed and
replaced with new material which shall be immediately
compacted to conform to the surrounding area. Any area
showing an excess of bituminous material shall be
removed and replaced.
[6] When directed by the Township Engineer or his duly
authorized representative, core samples shall be cut from
the completed pavement and the same forwarded to the
Township Engineer. The areas of pavement so removed
shall be replaced with new material and refinished. No
structure served by said street shall be occupied during
the period between November 15 and March 15 unless the
bituminous stabilized base course has been installed or
unless otherwise consented by the Township Council.
(4) Bituminous concrete surface course.
(a) Material. Bituminous concrete surface course, Mix I-5,
materials shall conform to the requirements therefor as
specified in Section 903 of the NJDOT Standard Specifications.
(b) Methods of construction.
[1] The bituminous-concrete surface course shall be spread in
conformance with the cross section shown on the Roadway
Construction Standards drawing by a bituminous concrete
paver which shall be self-contained, power propelled,
provided with an activated screed or strikeoff assembly.
No bituminous concrete material shall be placed when the
atmospheric temperature is below 45° F., or when the
§ 160.05.070 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160.05.070
001:387
§ 160.05.080. Sidewalks.
weather is foggy, rainy or otherwise unfavorable, unless
approved by the Township Engineer or his duly authorized
representative.
[2] After the material has been properly spread, initial
compaction shall be obtained by rolling with a three-wheel
power-driven roller, have a load of not less than 330
pounds per inch of width of rear wheel and a total metal
weight of not less than 10 tons.
[3] Subsequent rolling shall be done with a two-axle tandem
roller which shall be power driven and shall have a load of
not less than 250 pounds per inch of width of tread of drive
roll and shall have a total metal weight of not less than
eight tons.
[4] Rolling shall begin at the sides and progress gradually to
the center, until the entire surface has been rolled by the
rear wheels. If the width of the surface course permits, it
shall be subjected to a diagonal rolling in two directions,
the second diagonal rolling crossing the lines of the first.
Rolling shall be continued until all roller marks are
eliminated and the finished surface meets the
requirements specified in Section 404 of the NJDOT
Standard Specifications.
[5] Along curbs and at other places not accessible to the roller,
the material shall be thoroughly compacted with hand or
mechanical tampers and hot smoothing irons in a manner
which shall be suitable to the Township Engineer or his
duly authorized representative.
[6] Any pavement that becomes loose or broken or mixed with
dirt, or is in any way defective, shall be removed and
replaced with new material which shall be immediately
compacted to conform to the surrounding pavement area.
Any area showing an excess of bituminous material shall
be removed or replaced.
[7] When directed by the Township Engineer or his duly
authorized representative, core samples shall be cut from
the completed pavement and the same forwarded to the
Township Engineer. The areas of pavement so removed
shall be replaced with new material and refinished.
A. Concrete sidewalks.
(1) Concrete sidewalks shall conform to the details shown on the
Roadway Construction Standards Drawing.
§ 160.05.070 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 160.05.080
001:388
§ 160.05.090. Restoration of site; cleanup.
Upon completion of construction, all equipment, unused materials and
refuse shall be removed from the site of the work, and all public and private
properties damaged or disturbed during the course of construction shall
be replaced or repaired. The site shall be put as nearly as possible into
conditions corresponding to that which existed prior to construction, all to
the satisfaction of the Township Engineer or his authorized representative.
§ 160.05.100. Access.
Under no circumstances will an existing street or roadway be completely
closed to vehicular traffic during construction or reconstruction. Access to
existing driveways having ingress and egress to existing public streets or
roadways being affected by said improvements shall be maintained at all
times.
§ 160.05.110. Winter construction restricted.
All roadway and utility construction on any roadways shall not be performed
during the winter months between November 15 and March 15 of any year
unless written approval had been obtained from the Township Engineer
or his authorized representative to allow construction of said utilities or
improvements during this time period.
(2) The concrete shall be Class B air entranced and shall conform to
the requirements of Section 914 of the NJDOT Standard
Specifications.
(3) Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed in a manner which meets
the requirements of Section 607 of the NJDOT Standard
Specifications.
B. Bituminous concrete sidewalks.
(1) Bituminous concrete sidewalks shall conform to the details shown
on the Roadway Construction Standards Drawing.*
(2) The sidewalks shall have a four-inch thick dense graded aggregate
base, meeting the requirements of Section 301 of the NJDOT
Standard Specification.
(3) Bituminous concrete surface course shall consist of compacted
bituminous concrete Mix I-5, two inches in depth, and shall be
constructed in accordance with Section 404 of the NJDOT Standard
Specifications.
C. Alternative sidewalk types. Materials for sidewalk construction other
than concrete or bituminous concrete will be considered and, if
approved, materials and construction methods must be in accordance
with all standards deemed applicable by the Township Engineer.
§ 160.05.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160.06
001:389
§ 160.06. Construction Work on Dedicated Public Ways.
§ 160.06.010. Definitions and word usage.
§ 160.06.020. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place any form of construction, in,
over or upon any Township-owned or unaccepted dedicated street, avenue,
highway, lane, alley or public place in the Township without first obtaining
a permit from the Township for each separate undertaking. Any public
utility maintaining pipe, line or other underground facility in or under the
surface of any street may proceed with an opening without a permit when
emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately. The
utility shall thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day.
A. The following words, when used in this section, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes the application for a permit.
DIRECTOR — The person in charge of the Department of Public Works
in the Township or his authorized deputy or representative.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the
existing of which constitutes a clear and immediate danger to persons
or properties.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — Any body corporate and politic created
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey.
PERMITTEE — Any person who has been issued a permit and has
agreed to fulfill all the terms of this section.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
utility, corporation or authority created pursuant to an act of the New
Jersey General Assembly. Whenever used in any section prescribing and
imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporation,
the officers thereof.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY — Any company subject to the jurisdiction
of and controlled by the New Jersey Public Utility Commission.
STREET — Includes a public street, public easement, public right-ofway,
public highway, public alley, public way or public road accepted or
maintained by the Township.
SURFACE — All area within the public right-of-way, including but not
limited to the paved area and the shoulder area.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Pequannock, County of Morris, State of
New Jersey.
B. In this section, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 160.06 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 160.06.020
001:390
In all cases where emergency openings are necessary, the Township Police
Department shall be notified prior to each opening.
§ 160.06.030. Additional work beyond that specified in permit.
No person to whom a permit has been granted shall perform any work
beyond that specified in the permit without approval by the Director for
additional work under the provisions of the permit. Any additional deposit
required shall be provided prior to commencement of the additional work.
§ 160.06.040. Commencement of work.
Work for which a permit has been issued shall commence within 30 days
after issuance of the permit therefor. If not so commenced, the permit shall
be automatically terminated unless the permittee applies to the Director
for an extension of time. A new application must be filed if an extension of
time is not requested within the thirty-day period after the issuance of the
original permit.
§ 160.06.050. Transferability of permits.
Permits are not transferable from one person to another and the work shall
not be made in any place other than the location specifically designated in
the permit.
§ 160.06.060. Expiration of permits; extensions.
Every permit shall expire within the time stated in the permit. If work is
not completed within the specified time, the applicant shall submit to the
Director, in writing, a request for an extension of time setting forth therein
the reasons for the requested extension. If, in the opinion of the Director,
such an extension is necessary and will not cause disruption to public safety,
the permittee may be granted additional time for the completion of the
work.
§ 160.06.070. Supervision of utility cuts; exemption from fee,
deposit and insurance requirements.
All street openings required by utilities owned and/or operated by the
Township shall be made and restored under the direction and supervision
of the Director. The permit fee, deposit and insurance requirements of this
section shall not be applicable to any openings made by the Township.
§ 160.06.080. Revocation of permit; time period to correct violation.
A. Any permit may be revoked by the Director after notice to the permittee
for:
(1) A violation of any condition of the permit or of any provision of this
section.
§ 160.06.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160.06.080
001:391
§ 160.06.090. Form and content of permit application.
(2) A violation of any provision of any other applicable law or
ordinance relating to the work.
(3) Existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or
creating a nuisance or endangering safety or property.
B. A permittee shall be granted a period of three days from the date of the
notice from the Director to correct the violation and to proceed with the
diligent prosecution of the work authorized by the permit before said
permit is revoked. Written notice shall consist of a certified letter to the
permittee from the Director briefly outlining the reasons for revoking
the permit. Revocation of any permit shall give the Township the right
to complete the work and restore the street to the proper condition as
outlined in this section. Any and all expenses incurred by the Township
shall be recovered from the deposit or bond that the permittee has
made or filed with the Township.
A. Application for a permit shall be made to the Director on the form
provided at least 48 hours in advance of any construction. No work shall
commence until the applicant has paid and provided all fees, deposits,
certificates and bonds required by this section. Also, the permit shall be
issued by the Director after the application has been made.
B. The application form shall correctly state:
(1) The name of the property owner (service work).
(2) The house number and street.
(3) The contractor's name, phone number and address.
(4) The type of work proposed.
(5) Material to be used, including pipe material and any structures.
(6) The purpose of the trench or excavation.
(7) The date work is to be started and the date work is to be completed.
(8) A list of equipment to be used.
C. In addition, the applicant shall furnish in triplicate, a plan showing the
work to be performed under said permit. Two copies of such plan shall
be returned to the applicant at the time the permit is granted. The plan
shall include:
(1) The size of the opening or limits of work to be performed.
(2) The depth of the opening.
(3) The location of work with respect to the nearest intersection.
§ 160.06.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 160.06.090
001:392
§ 160.06.100. Agreements and responsibilities of permittees.
Any person receiving a permit shall agree to the following:
§ 160.06.110. Application fees.
Any person submitting an application for a permit shall pay a permit fee of
$25 at the time of application. Public utility companies may, upon written
notice to the Director, elect to be billed monthly for such fees as they
accrue.
§ 160.06.120. Deposits.
(4) A plan of piping or other structures to be constructed [schematic
drawings are acceptable except for road openings longer than 150
feet].
D. Finally, the applicant agrees to save the Township, its officers,
employees and agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and
liabilities which may accrue by reason of any work performed under
said permit. The acceptance of any permit under this ordinance shall
constitute such an agreement by the applicant whether the same is
expressed or not.
A. Work will not interfere with proper drainage of the street.
B. The Pequannock Township Police Department will be contacted prior to
the commencement of the work for approval of traffic control
procedures, signs and other road safety precautions if the road is to be
closed for any length of time.
C. No work will be started until the Director has:
(1) Inspected the proposed work location.
(2) Approved the plan submitted with the application.
(3) Stamped the application as "approved."
D. Applicant will comply with all provisions of this section and other
Township ordinances.
E. Notify the Director:
(1) Prior to completion of temporary pavement replacement.
(2) Prior to completion of permanent pavement.
A. Computation of deposit.
(1) Upon receipt of a properly completed application, the Director
shall determine the amount of the deposit to be made by the
permittee prior to commencement of the work. The minimum
deposit shall be $200. Should the Director determine that the
§ 160.06.090 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160.06.120
001:393
deposit shall be more than the minimum, a schedule of charges and
projected cost will be provided to the applicant.
(2) The deposit shall be paid at the time the permit is received. The
amount of the deposit shall be used to reimburse the Township for
the cost of any work and/or materials furnished by the Township in
connection with the work authorized by the permit to cover all
necessary inspections, replacements and repairs of said work and
for any other purposes set forth in this section.
(3) The Township may elect to waive this requirement insofar as it
pertains to a public utility company if such company files with the
Township its corporate bond in a form satisfactory to the Township
Attorney conditioned upon the payment paid out of such a deposit.
In the event any public utility company elects to file such a bond,
the Township shall bill such company monthly for costs as they
accrue.
B. Form of deposit. The deposit may be either in the form of a certified
treasurer's or cashier's check or lawful money of the United States.
C. Insufficient deposit. If any deposit is less than sufficient to pay all costs
accrued by the Township, the permittee shall, upon written notification,
pay to the Township an amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee
fails or refuses to pay such deficiency within three days after being
notified the subject permit is automatically revoked. The Township may
institute an action to recover the deficiency in any court of competent
jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, no additional permits
shall be issued to such permittee.
D. Yearly deposits. Whenever any public utility, if it does not elect to file a
corporate bond as provided in Subsection A of this section, such public
utility may post one deposit in an amount and form as provided above
for the calendar year or part thereof to cover the cost of deposits for
any and all work.
E. Decision on costs. The Director shall determine the cost of any work
done or repairs or replacements made by him or under his direction
pursuant to the provisions of this section. Cost shall include direct
labor, equipment and material costs as incurred by the Township or
agent of the Township. Cost for inspections during temporary and final
pavement replacement shall be $25 per hour. In the event a permittee
disputes the amount charged by the Township for work or repairs the
Township Manager shall determine the amount due to the Township.
F. Refund of deposit. Upon notification by the permittee that all work
authorized by the permit has been completed, and after the Director
has approved final restoration of the opening, the Township shall refund
the permittee his deposit less all costs incurred by the Township in
connection with said permit. In no case shall the deposit be refunded
less than one year after temporary restoration.
§ 160.06.120 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 160.06.130
001:394
§ 160.06.130. Restrictions on street openings and excavations.
[Amended 10-29-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-29; 12-22-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-18]
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend beyond the center
line of the street before being backfilled and the surface of the street
temporarily restored.
B. All utilities shall be notified by the applicant prior to commencement or
work. The applicant is also responsible for calling the toll-free number
for utility locations (800-272-1000).
C. Pipe drains, pipe culverts, drainage basins, right-of-way monuments
and other facilities shall be properly protected from damage by the
permittee.
D. All spoils from an excavation shall be disposed of by the permittee. The
Township will not assume any responsibility for dump-site locations.
Spoils and other excavation material which cannot be used as backfill
must be disposed of in the proper manner by permittee. Any spoils or
other excavation material must be removed from the traveled roadway
prior to the end of the working day. In the event the spoils or other
excavation material is not removed, the Director shall cause such
removal and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee or
deducted from his deposit.
E. Every permittee shall place around the project such barricades, lights,
warning flags and danger signs as shall be approved by the Pequannock
Township Police Department for the protection of the public.
Barricading and signs shall be in accordance with the regulations set
forth in the United States Department of Transportation, Federal
Highway Administration, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
for Streets and Highways latest edition. The control of traffic shall
conform to the requirements of Chapter 177.
F. Except for service openings, the permittee shall notify or request the
Township to notify, at the expense of the permittee, all property owners
within 100 feet of any excavation. Property owners shall be notified at
least 48 hours in advance if access to private driveways cannot be
provided at any time during performance of the work outlined in the
permit. In no event shall access to driveways be restricted during
nonworking hours. Free access shall be provided at all times to fire
hydrants.
G. Work authorized by a permit shall be performed between the hours of
8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Monday through Friday. Work on heavily
travelled roads, as defined in § 177.24, shall be confined to the hours of
9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. unless approved otherwise as provided for in
§ 177.24. Work on Saturdays or work on weekends and holidays or an
earlier or later hour shall only be done with the written permission of
the Director and the Pequannock Township Police Chief for any work
which is not an emergency.
§ 160.06.130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160.06.130
001:395
§ 160.06.140. Backfilling and restoration.
H. In granting a permit the Director may attach such other conditions
thereto as may be reasonably necessary to prevent damage to public or
private property or to prevent the work from being conducted in an
unsafe manner or in a manner likely to create a nuisance. Such
conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Limitations on the period of the year which the work may be
performed.
(2) Restrictions as to the size and type of equipment.
(3) Requirements concerning trench sheeting, dewatering or blasting.
(4) Requirements as to dust control, street cleaning, the prevention of
noise and other results offensive or injurious to the neighborhood,
the general public, or any portion thereof.
(5) Regulations as to the use of streets in the course of the work.
I. No road openings shall be issued for a period of five years after the
completion of initial roadway construction or repaving except under
extraordinary circumstances with the approval of the Township
Council. However, road opening for utility connections may be
permitted, administratively, by the Township Engineer with the
following repair/restoration requirements:
(1) The trench repair shall be installed to a depth within five inches of
existing roadway grade and shall include quarry process back fill
compacted in one foot lifts. The pavement shall be replaced with
five inches of hot mix asphalt, in accordance with current New
Jersey Department of Transportation standards.
(2) The road must be allowed to settle a minimum of 30 days with a
maximum of 90 days, at which time the final pavement and all
seams shall be infrared treated to ensure the new pavement blends
thoroughly with the existing pavement. The timing of the infrared
treating operation must conform to the manufacturer's
recommendations.
A. All pavement cuts, openings and excavation shall be properly made,
backfilled and restored in accordance with § 160.05 of this chapter,
Street Construction Standards.
B. The restoration shall be performed in two stages when a cut has been
made in roadway paving.
(1) Temporary pavement replacement. On the same day that a road
opening is backfilled, the opening shall be restored on a temporary
basis as follows: The trench or opening shall be backfilled in layers
not to exceed six inches in thickness. The layers shall be compacted
with hand or mechanical tamping equipment. The temporary
§ 160.06.130 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 160.06.140
001:396
§ 160.06.150. Street list.
paving shall consist of at least six-inch-thick dense graded
aggregate subbase course if the subbase contains excessive
quantities of clay or organic material. The subbase course shall be
compacted with mechanical tamping equipment as outlined in the
street specifications. A bituminous stabilized base course Mix I-2
shall be applied no less than six inches in thickness and shall be
maintained even with the surface of the road.
(2) Permanent pavement replacement. After a period of six months
from date of temporary pavement replacement and no more than
one year following temporary pavement replacement, the
permittee shall make a permanent repair of the opening. The top
course shall be bituminous concrete surface course Mix I-5. The top
course shall extend six inches beyond the edge of the opening on all
sides and shall adhere to the existing pavement by using an
asphaltic tack material. The surface course shall be thoroughly
compacted according to the street specifications. If settlement of
the opening occurs after the permanent replacement, the Director
shall require the pavement to be removed and replaced with a fourinch
bituminous stabilized base course and a two-inch bituminous
concrete course. In any event, the deposit will not be refunded
prior to one year following temporary pavement replacement.
C. If paving surfaces adjacent to the street opening have been damaged or
where equipment used has caused damage to the street, the permittee
shall restore those areas also in the same manner as the road openings.
D. All openings and damaged areas shall be squared off with a saw cutter
prior to excavation. A jackhammer may be used for the opening if
approval is given by the Director. This shall be indicated on the permit
application. The Director shall make such inspections as he may deem
necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section.
E. The permittee shall notify the Director, in writing, prior to completion of
all work. Return of any amounts from the deposit shall constitute
approval of the restoration by the Director.
F. The Director may also issue a certificate of final inspection indicating
that the work authorized by the permit has been performed according
to the Township specifications. The final inspection may be made when
the permanent restoration is completed. However, the deposit shall be
refunded no sooner than one year following temporary pavement
replacement.
G. In no case shall any opening made by a permittee be considered in the
charge or care of the Township of any of its officers or employees and no
officer or employee is authorized in any way to take or assume any
jurisdiction over any such opening, except in the exercise of the police.
§ 160.06.140 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160.06.150
001:397
§ 160.06.160. Abandoned facilities.
§ 160.07. Numbering of Buildings.
§ 160.07.010. Adoption of house numbering map.
The system of numbering all buildings and lots of land in the Township is
as shown on a map or maps entitled "Housing Numbering Maps", copies of
which are on file with the Tax Assessor. The number shown thereon for each
building and lot is hereby assigned to that building or lot.
§ 160.07.020. Assignment of numbers.
Upon any subdivision or resubdivision of land in the Township resulting
in a lot or lots other than those delineated on the maps or maps, the Tax
Assessor shall assign a number to each lot resulting from the subdivision
or resubdivision, which shall be in proper numerical sequence in relation to
A. Every person owing, using, controlling, or having an interest in pipes,
conduits, ducts or other structures under the surface of any street used
for the purpose of supplying or conveying gas, electricity,
communication impulses, water or steam to or from the Township or to
or from its inhabitants or for any other purposes shall file with the
Director within 120 days after the adoption of this section a written
statement containing the names of the Township's streets wherein the
aforementioned facilities owned by such persons are located, and a
schematic plan indicating said facilities. This plan will not be used for
location information, only as a reference.
B. Within 90 days after the first day of January of each and every year,
such person shall forward to the Director an updated statement and
plan required in Subsection A above.
A. Whenever any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel or other structure located
under the surface of any street or the use thereof is abandoned, the
person owning, using, controlling or having an interest therein shall,
within 30 days after such abandonment, file with the Director a
statement in writing giving in detail the location of the structure so
abandoned.
B. Whenever there are manholes or tunnels associated with abandoned
underground facilities, such manholes or tunnels shall be filled in at a
time of abandonment and the Director shall be notified thereof in
writing.
C. When the Township plans to pave or improve streets in which there are
abandoned facilities, the owners of such facilities shall be required to
remove them if, in the opinion of the Director, their removal is in
conflict with work to be performed by the Township. If the owner shall
refuse to remove such facilities and the owner shall reimburse the
Township for such removal.
§ 160.06.150 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 160.07.020
001:398
the number of other lots fronting on the same street, and shall be recorded
the same upon the map or maps within 10 days of the filing of the approval
given for such subdivision or resubdivision of the land. No subdivision or
resubdivision, major or minor, of land requiring approval by the Planning
Board shall be approved by it, unless a number shall be assigned by the Tax
Assessor to each lot therein for the building erected or to be erected on it.
§ 160.07.030. Display of numbers.
The number so assigned to each building shall be displayed by the owner or
occupant on the front of the building, in numerals at least three inches in
height, at or near the front entrance to the building or premises, five feet
from the saddle of the main door, and so located as to be visible to persons
passing by the premises on the abutting street. House numbers shall be
procured and affixed at owner's expense. Common address buildings must
be marked A, B, C, etc.
§ 160.07.040. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Construction Official
or anyone in the Construction Office for the occupancy of any building
hereinafter erected or enlarged unless the provisions of the foregoing
section or sections shall have been complied with.
§ 160.07.050. Flag lots.
Where houses are built on flag lots or building is set back where numbers
cannot be read easily, the Fire Subcode Official can require house numbers
near the street within 10 feet of the driveway entrance.
§ 160.08. Encroachment, Obstruction, or Encumbrance in the Right
of Way.
§ 160.08.010. Definitions. [Amended 8-24-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-15]
For the purposes of this section, the following terms and phrases shall have
the meanings set forth in this section, unless a different meaning is clearly
indicated by the context:
ENCROACHMENT, OBSTRUCTION, or ENCUMBRANCE — Includes any
brush, hedge, shrubbery, tree, or other plant life and/or any land, rock,
fence, wall, or other structure or item situate in or over or intruding upon
or enclosing any Township right-of-way or portion thereof.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Includes all public streets, roads, avenues, highways,
lanes, alleys, public places, ways and easements of the Township, including
those dedicated but as yet unaccepted, for the full width thereof, whether or
not the same are now or may hereafter be actually in use for a lesser width
than the established width thereof.
§ 160.07.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160.08.020
001:399
§ 160.08.020. Use of the right-of-way. [Amended 8-24-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-15]
It shall be a violation of this section to place an encroachment, obstruction,
or encumbrance in the right-of-way which interferes with the public use or
impairs the public safety or welfare. Adjacent property owners or others
who place in the right-of-way an encroachment, obstruction or
encumbrance, which does not interfere with the public use or impair the
public safety or welfare, do so at their own their own risk. Under no
circumstances shall the Township be responsible to repair or replace
personal property placed in the right-of-way if damaged by snowplow or
other Township vehicle under any circumstances. A person placing an
encroachment, obstruction, or encumbrance in the right-of-way shall
indemnify the Township for any liability caused by the placement.
§ 160.08.030. Removal of encroachment, obstruction, or
encumbrance in the right-of-way. [Added 8-24-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-15]
A municipal officer or employer designated by the Township Manager to
enforce this section (hereinafter "enforcement official") shall be empowered
to declare any encroachment, obstruction or encumbrance in, on, over or
upon any Township right-of-way an interference with the public's use or an
impairment to the public safety or welfare of the Township or its inhabitants
and order the same to be abated by the removal of the encroachment,
obstruction or encumbrance in such manner and to such extent as they may
designate.
§ 160.08.040. Abatement. [Added 8-24-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-15]
Whenever the enforcement official shall declare any obstruction,
encroachment or encumbrance in, on, over or upon any Township right-ofway
an impairment or interference, they shall give written notice to the
owner or tenant of the lands in, on, over or in front of which any such
obstruction, encroachment, or encumbrance is located to abate it in the
manner set forth in such notice. The notice is to be mailed to the last known
address of the owner or tenant or left at the owner's or tenant's residence
with a member of his family above the age of 14 years.
§ 160.08.050. Failure to abate. [Added 8-24-2010 by Ord. No.
2010-15]
Should the aforesaid owner or tenant fail to abate within 30 days after
receiving the written notice and in the manner set forth therein, the
Township, through its agents, servants and employees, may abate and
charge the cost thereof against the premises in, on, over or in front of which
the encroachment, obstruction or encumbrance is located. The cost shall be
certified to the Mayor and Township Council, and if found correct they shall
cause the cost as shown to be charged against the lands, or in the event that
the Mayor and Council deem such cost to be excessive, they shall determine
§ 160.08.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 160.08.050
001:400
a reasonable amount thereof to be charged against the lands. The amount
so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added
to and become and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied
upon such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as other taxes,
and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same
manner as taxes.
§ 160.08.060. Violations and penalties. [Added 8-24-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-15]
Chapter 163
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
§ 163.01. General Provisions.
§ 163.01.010. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Pequannock Township
Land Subdivision Ordinance."
§ 163.01.020. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the Township of Pequannock in order
to promote the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of
the Township and the orderly growth and development, the conservation,
protection and proper use of land and adequate provision for circulation,
utilities and services.
§ 163.01.030. Approving agency.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered by the Planning Board
of the Township of Pequannock in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et
seq., except that this chapter shall be administered by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment in a case where an application before the Board of Adjustment
for a use variance shall also involve a subdivision as provided under this
chapter.
A. Any person who refuses or neglects, after written notice as above set
forth, to comply with the demands therein made with respect to the
abatement within 30 days after receiving the written notice shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty not to exceed a fine of $100,
and each and every day in which the person neglects to abate shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. The imposition and collection of any fine or penalty prescribed by this
section shall not bar the right of the Township to collect the cost of the
abatement as specified in this section, and the remedies shall be
cumulative.
§ 160.08.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.01.040
001:401
§ 163.01.040. Definitions.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, the following words and terms shall
be construed and defined as hereinafter set forth:
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Township Zoning Officer, for the
purposes of administering this chapter.
ALLEY — A street, either private or Township-owned, with a right-of-way
not exceeding 30 feet in width and used primarily for vehicular service to
properties fronting on local, secondary or major streets, either public or
private.
APPLICANT — An individual, firm, association, subdivider, syndicate,
corporation, partnership, trust, estate or other legal entity applying for a
subdivision.
APPLICATION — The completed application form and all accompanying
documents required by ordinance for approval of a subdivision plat in
accordance with this chapter. The Administrative Officer, acting under the
authority and direction of the appropriate Board, shall have a period of
45 days from the date of submission of the application forms and all
accompanying documents to determine whether the application is
complete. The time periods permitted for the Board to act determines the
application to be complete.
APPROVED FORMS — Forms required and supplied by the Planning Board
to be submitted with an application for each subdivision.
BLOCK — The area bounded by local, secondary or major streets, municipal
boundaries, rivers, railroads or other man-made or natural features,
sufficiently large enough to accommodate a lot or lots of the minimum size
required in the Zoning Ordinance8 and as further defined in this chapter.
BOARD — The Planning Board of Pequannock Township.
CIRCULATION — The provision for the movement of goods, people, water
and sewage or power by means of streets, highways, railways, waterways,
airways, pipes, conduits or other means, and including facilities for
transportation, transit and communication.
CLERK — The person designated as the Municipal Clerk in accordance with
the laws of the Township of Pequannock.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form, completed as specified
by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the Board, and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of the
application for development, including but not limited to the subdivision
plat.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street used primarily for ingress and egress to abutting
properties whose entrance and exit is the same.
8. Note: See Ch. 189, Zoning.
§ 163.01.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.01.040
001:402
DEVELOPER — An applicant commencing or continuing improvements
under this chapter or installing any improvements in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land required for the installation of
stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or those lands required along
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for
the flow of water therein.
ENGINEER — A licensed professional engineer of the State of New Jersey
designated by the Manager as the "Township Engineer."
EXHIBITS — Any letters, documents, reports, deeds, easements, findings,
affidavits, etc., required for submission of an application for approval.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Board on a plat meeting all
the requirements, conditions and engineering considerations required by
this chapter and the Board. A plat that receives "final approval" shall have
been prepared by a licensed professional engineer and a land surveyor in
compliance with all provisions of Chapter 141 of the Laws of 19609 and is
the map which the applicant must file with the appropriate county officials
within 90 days after "final approval" is granted.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision which is
presented to the Board for final approval in accordance with all provisions
of Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960* and this chapter, and which, if
approved, shall be filed with the proper county recording officer.
IMPROVEMENT PLAN — A map submitted with the preliminary plat,
showing lot and street design with topography, a typical lot layout, a utility
plan and a profile of roads and utilities.
LOT — The parcel or portion of land separate from other parcels or portions
by description, as on a subdivision or survey map, or by metes and bounds,
for the purpose of sale, lease or separate use. Any contiguous lands owned
by an applicant may be considered as a single "lot" for the purposes of this
chapter, pursuant to applicable statutory and case law.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — A composite of the mapped and written proposals
recommending the physical development of the municipality, which shall
have been duly adopted by the Planning Board.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — A subdivision resulting in not more than three
lots, including the remaining parcel, fronting upon an existing state, county
or municipal street (accepted and maintained by the Township) not
involving any new street or road or the extension of municipal facilities
not involving the extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which
is prorated pursuant to Township ordinances, not including any planned
residential development, not directly or indirectly creating or contributing
to any unusual drainage or access problems and not adversely affecting
9. Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.
§ 163.01.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.01.040
001:403
the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property and
not in conflict with any provision of the Master Plan, Official Map, Zoning
Ordinance10 or this chapter.
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS — Those improvements outside the lot lines of
the lot in question but within the property (of which the lot is a part) which
is the subject of a development application or the contiguous portion of a
street, easement or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS — Those improvements not located on the
property which is the subject of an application under this chapter nor on a
contiguous portion of a street, easement or right-of-way.
OFFICIAL MAP — The map adopted in accordance with the Official Map and
Building Permit Act.11
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, trust, estate,
partnership, corporation or legal entity having sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain
proceedings to subdivide the same under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
the Township in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements specified
elsewhere in this chapter be made before the Board considers a final plat,
provided that the Township shall require that 10% of the performance
guaranty be cash.
PLAT — A map of the subdivision.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map, clearly marked "preliminary
plat," indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision which is submitted
to the Board for consideration and tentative approval prior to submission
of the final plat. The "preliminary plat" must meet the requirements as
specified in this chapter.
SKETCH PLAT — A map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for
the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting the requirements
of § 163.03 of this chapter.
STREET — Any public way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a
street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, lane, thoroughfare, throughway,
parkway, viaduct, place or other way, which is an existing improved state,
county or municipal street accepted and maintained by the Township of
Pequannock shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or
approved by official action or a street or way on a plat duly filed and
recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior to the
appointment of a Planning Board and the grant to such Board of the power
to review plats. "Streets" shall include the land between the street lines,
whether improved or unimproved, and shall comprise pavement, shoulders,
gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and all other areas within the street lines.
For the purpose of this chapter, "streets" shall be classified as follows:
10.Note: See Ch. 189, Zoning.
11.Note: For current provisions, see now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
§ 163.01.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.01.040
001:404
SUBDIVISION —
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — A committee of the Planning Board,
appointed by the Chairman, with the approval of the Board, serving for
one year for the purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The number of members of such Committee shall
be determined by the Board in its bylaws.
TENTATIVE APPROVAL — The official action of the Board on a preliminary
plat meeting all the requirements, conditions and engineering
ARTERIAL STREETS — Those which are used primarily for fast or
heavy traffic.
A.
COLLECTOR STREETS — Those which carry traffic from minor streets
to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the
principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.
B.
MINOR STREETS — Those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
C.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREETS — Minor streets which are parallel to
and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access
to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
D.
DRIVEWAYS or AISLES — Minor ways which are used primarily for
vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise
abutting on a street.
E.
The division of a lot into two or more lots or other divisions of land
for sale or development. The following shall not be considered
"subdivisions" within the meaning of this chapter if no new streets are
created:
Divisions of land found by the Board to be for agricultural purposes
where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size.
(1)
(2) Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions.
Divisions of property upon court order, but not limited to judgments
of foreclosure.
(3)
Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument.
(4)
The conveyance of one or more adjacent lots owned by the same
person or persons and all of which are found and certified by
the Administrative Officer to conform to the requirements of the
municipal development regulations and are shown and designated
as separate lots on the Tax Maps.
(5)
A.
B. The term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
§ 163.01.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.01.040
001:405
considerations required by this chapter. "Tentative approval" shall confer
upon the subdivider certain rights as specified in this chapter.
§ 163.02. Approval Procedure.
§ 163.02.010. General procedure.
§ 163.02.020. Submission of sketch plan.
A. Any applicant wishing to subdivide or resubdivide land within the
Township of Pequannock, subject to the exceptions noted in the
definition of "subdivision" in Section 163.01.040, shall apply for and
obtain the approval of the Planning Board in accordance with the
following procedure. The applicant or his agent shall appear at all
meetings of the Planning Board whenever the application is being
considered. Failure to appear shall give the Planning Board the right to
postpone action on the application for that particular meeting or, when
reasonable, to deny the application. Failure to submit all required items
with the application shall cause the application to be automatically
tabled until all required items are submitted. If such failure persists,
the Planning Board shall have the right to deny application.
B. An applicant for subdivision shall submit a complete application,
including the application form, required fees and all information
required by Township ordinances, two weeks prior to the Board
meeting. An application shall be certified as complete immediately upon
meeting all requirements and shall be deemed complete as of the day it
is certified by the Administrative Officer. If the application is
incomplete, the Administrative Officer shall notify the applicant or
deficiencies, in writing, within 45 days of the submission of such
application. The time period for action shall commence upon
certification of completeness. Nothing in this chapter shall deny the
Board the right to require reasonable additional information specified
in the ordinance or any revision to the documents submitted. The
requirement of this additional information shall not affect the
completeness of the application.
C. At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall review a
conceptual plan of the developer. There shall be no fee for this review,
and neither the developer nor the Planning Board shall be bound by this
review.
A. Procedure. An applicant for the subdivision of land within the Township
of Pequannock shall submit to the Township Clerk two copies of an
application for classification and a fee of $5 and three copies of a sketch
plat at least two weeks prior to a regular meeting of the Planning
Board.
B. Classification. The Subdivision Committee shall classify the plat as a
major or minor subdivision by majority vote and forward all materials,
§ 163.01.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.02.020
001:406
§ 163.02.030. Minor subdivisions. [Amended 10-23-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-20]
including the Committee's comments and recommendations pertaining
to the subdivision, to the Planning Board.
C. Planning Board approval. The Planning Board, at its next regular
meeting, shall review the classification of the subdivision Committee
and approve or change the classification by majority vote.
A. Complete application. The following items and information as indicated
on the checklist must be submitted to the administrative officer before
an application can be deemed complete.
(1) Two complete application forms [once the application has been
deemed complete the applicant shall submit 18 additional copies of
the application].
(2) Two copies of the plat [an additional 18 copies will be required
once the application has been deemed complete].
(3) Payment of the administrative and escrow review deposits.
(4) Proof of payment of taxes signed by the Tax Collector.
(5) Names and addresses of:
(a) Holders of 10% or more stock in applicant and/or owner, if
either is a corporation; or
(b) Holders of 10% or more interest in applicant if partnership
(per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1).
(6) Health Department approval of septic systems where sanitary
sewers are not available.
(7) Completed floodplain development application (when required by
ordinance).
(8) Proof of submission of a completed application form for Morris
County Soil Conservation District, if applicable.
(9) Receipt of completed application form and required fees for Morris
County Planning Board when required.
(10) Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less
than one inch equal to 100 feet and shall be submitted on one of the
four following standard sheet sizes: 8 1/2 inches by 13 inches; 15
inches by 21 inches; 24 inches by 36 inches; or 30 inches by 42
inches.
§ 163.02.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.02.030
001:407
Once the application has been deemed complete the applicant
shall provide 18 copies of all materials related to the pending
application. In addition, the following information shall appear on
all plans in order to be deemed complete:
(1) A key map showing the entire tract, the zone in which the
subject property and all property within a 200-foot radius
of the subject property, including the Tax Map block and lot
numbers and owner's name. Said map to be drawn at a scale
of 1 inch equal to 100 feet.
(2) Title block in accordance with the rules governing title
blocks for professional engineers (N.J.S.A. 45:8-36):
(a) Name of the development, Pequannock Township,
Morris County.
(b) Name, title, address and license number of the
professional(s) who prepared the plat or plan.
(c) Scale (written).
(d) Date of original preparation and of each subsequent
revision thereof and a list of the specific revisions
entered on each sheet.
(e) Existing block and lot numbers as they appear on the
Township Tax Map.
(3)
(a) North arrow.
(b) Name, title, address and telephone number of the
applicant.
(c) Name, title, and address of the owner(s) of the record.
(d) Graphic scale.
(4) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his
properly authorized agent, or that the owner has given his
consent under an option agreement.
(5) Approval signature lines:
(a) Chairman.
(b) Secretary.
(6) Acreage to the nearest 1/100 of an acre and a computation of
the area of the tract to be disturbed.
(7) Identification of wetlands as per N.J. Freshwater Wetlands
Act (Affidavit of compliance required) or permit from Army
Corps of Engineers.
(8) Identification of the Flood Hazard Area as per FEMA maps
dated July 3, 1986 as revised or submission of a perfected
LOMA.
§ 163.02.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.02.030
001:408
(9) The location of all existing watercourses, easements, rightsof-
way, streets, roads, highways, freeways, railroads, rivers,
buildings, structures, or any other feature directly on the
tract or off-tract in and within 200 feet, if it is deemed that
such feature has an effect upon the use of subject property.
(10) The location and treatment of proposed entrances and exits
to the public right-of-way.
(11) Design for method of soil erosion and sediment control and
location of same.
(12) The location and details of sidewalks, walkways and all other
areas proposed to be devoted to pedestrian use.
(13) The location and details of all subsurface structures:
including storm sewers, sanitary sewers telephone,
electrical, gas, water, manholes, valve boxes, hydrants and
other appurtenances; giving top and invert elevations,
direction of flow, size of appurtenances, ownership, capacity,
pressure leads, materials, type, and projected routes. The
location of existing structures such as water and sewer
mains, utility structures, gas transmission lines and hightension
power lines on the tract and within 200 feet of its
boundaries.
(14) When sanitary sewers are not available, the plans must
indicate the location of the percolation test for each lot
proposed in the actual septic design.
(15) Stormwater. Topographical information, storm drainage
studies, and computations, in accordance with the
Residential Site Improvement Standards, on all storm and
surface water collections and disposal areas within or
adjacent to the proposed subdivision.
(16) Existing and proposed contours of the site at one-foot
intervals, unless slopes are greater than 20%, in which case
2-foot contours are permitted.
(17) The location and details of sidewalks, walkways, and other
areas proposed to be devoted to pedestrian use.
B. Upon receipt of comments from the Township Engineer, the Township
Planner, and/or the Morris County Planning Board, but in no case later
than 45 days from the date of a completed application, the Planning
Board shall approve, approve conditionally or deny the minor
subdivision.
(1) If approved, a notation to that effect shall be made on the plat or
deeds supplied by the applicant, and the plat or deeds shall be
signed by the Chairman of the Planning Board and Secretary. The
plat or deeds shall be returned to the applicant within one week
following the next regular meeting of the Board.
§ 163.02.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.02.030
001:409
§ 163.02.040. Major subdivisions.
(2) If conditionally approved or rejected, the reasons for conditional
approval or rejection shall be noted on one copy of the application
form and one copy of the plat and returned to the applicant within
10 days from the date of the next regular Board meeting.
C. If approved as a minor subdivision, a plat map drawn in compliance
with Chapter 141 of the Laws of the 1960,* a subdivision description or
a deed shall be filed with the county recording officer within 190 days
from the date of municipal approval. Failure to file within 190 days shall
void said subdivision approval. After filing with the county, copies shall
also be filed with the following:
(1) The Tax Assessor: one paper print.
(2) The Tax Collector: one paper print.
(3) The Township Engineer: one paper print.
D. Any lands, lots or parcels resulting from a minor subdivision may not be
resubmitted as a minor subdivision of land for a period of three years
from the date of initial approval as a minor subdivision. However, this
section shall not apply to an application for resubdivision or an
application which does not create any additional lots.
E. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions upon which
minor subdivision approval was granted shall not be changed for a
period of two years after the date of minor subdivision approval,
provided that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly filed
as provided in Subsection C of this section.
A. If classified as a major subdivision, the sketch plat shall be so noted and
returned to the applicant for compliance with the provisions of this
chapter dealing with major subdivisions.
B. Complete application. The following items and information as indicated
on the checklist must be submitted to the administrative office before
an application can be deemed complete.
(1) Two complete applications (once the application has been deemed
complete the applicant shall submit 18 additional copies of the
application).
(2) Two copies of the plat (an additional 18 copies will be required
once the application has been deemed complete).
(3) Payment of the administrative and escrow review deposits.
(4) Proof of payment of taxes signed by the Tax Collector.
(5) Names and addresses of:
§ 163.02.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.02.040
001:410
(a) Holders of 10% or more stock in applicant and/or owner, if
either is a corporation; or
(b) Holders of 10% or more interest in applicant if partnership
(per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1).
(6) Surface water management plan acceptable to the Township
Engineer.
(7) Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(8) Environmental impact study (when required by ordinance).
(9) Health Department approval of septic systems where sanitary
sewers are not available.
(10) Completed floodplain development application (when required by
ordinance).
(11) Proof of submission of a completed application form for Morris
County Soil Conservation District, if applicable.
(12) Receipt of completed application form and required fees for Morris
County Planning Board when required.
(13) Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less
than one inch equal to 100 feet and shall be submitted on one of the
two following standard sheet sizes: 24 inches by 36 inches or 30
inches by 42 inches.
Once the application has been deemed complete the applicant
must provide 18 additional copies of all materials submitted as
a part of the application to be heard. In addition, the following
information shall be provided on the appropriate medium:
(1) A key map showing the entire tract, the zone in which the
subject property and all property within a 200-foot radius
of the subject property, including the Tax Map block and lot
numbers and owner's name. Said map to be drawn at a scale
of 1 inch equal to 100 feet.
(2) Title block in accordance with the rules governing title
blocks for professional engineers (N.J.S.A. 45:8-36):
(a) Name of the development, Pequannock Township,
Morris County.
(b) Name, title, address and license number of the
professional(s) who prepared the plat or plan.
(c) Scale (written).
(d) Date of original preparation and of each subsequent
revision thereof and a list of the specific revisions
entered on each sheet.
§ 163.02.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.02.040
001:411
(e) Existing block and lot numbers as they appear on the
Township Tax Map.
(3)
(a) North arrow.
(b) Name, title, address and telephone number of the
applicant.
(c) Name, title, and address of the owner(s) of the record.
(d) Graphic scale.
(4) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his
properly authorized agent, or that the owner has given his
consent under an option agreement.
(5) Approval signature lines:
(a) Chairman.
(b) Secretary.
(6) Acreage to the nearest 1/100 of an acre and a computation of
the area of the tract to be disturbed.
(7) Identification of wetlands as per N.J. Freshwater Wetlands
Act (Affidavit of compliance required) or permit from Army
Corps of Engineers.
(8) Identification of the Flood Hazard Area as per FEMA maps
dated July 3, 1986 as revised or submission of a perfected
LOMA.
(9) The location of all existing watercourses, easements, rightsof-
way, streets, roads, highways, freeways, railroads, rivers,
buildings, structures, or any other feature directly on the
tract or off-tract in or within 500 feet, if it is deemed that
such feature has an effect upon the use of subject property.
(10) When sanitary sewers are not available, the plans must
indicate the location of the percolation test for each lot
proposed and the actual septic design.
(11) The location and treatment of proposed entrances and exits
to the public right-of-way, including the possible utilization of
traffic signals, channelization, acceleration and deceleration
lane, additional width, and any other device necessary to
traffic safety and/or convenience.
(12) The location and identification of proposed open spaces,
parks, recreation areas, or land to be dedicated to the
Township or other public body.
§ 163.02.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.02.040
001:412
(13) Design for method of soil erosion and sediment control and
location of same. Stormwater Topographical information and
storm drainage studies and computations acceptable to the
Township Engineer, on all storm or surface water collections
and disposal areas within or adjacent to the proposed
subdivision.
(14) The location, design, species, height and type of landscaping,
buffer areas, and screening devices.
(15) The location and details of sidewalks, walkways and all other
areas proposed to be devoted to pedestrian use.
(16) The location and details of all subsurface structures:
including storm sewers, sanitary sewers telephone,
electrical, gas, water, manholes, valve boxes, hydrants and
other appurtenances; giving top and invert elevations,
direction of flow, size of appurtenances, ownership, capacity,
pressure leads, materials, type, and projected routes. The
location of existing structures such as water and sewer
mains, utility structures, gas transmission lines and hightension
power lines on the tract and within 200 feet of its
boundaries.
(17) All existing (as per Township Tax Map) and proposed lot
lines, setbacks, and yard dimensions as proposed, together
with a table listing the required bulk areas for the zone,
the proposed bulk dimensions and clearly identifying all
variances requested.
(18) The entire property in question, even though only a portion
of said property is involved in the subdivision, provided
however where it is physically impossible to show the entire
tract on the required sheet, an area map drawn at an
appropriate scale is permitted.
(19) Existing and proposed contours of the site at 2-foot intervals,
unless slopes are greater than 10%, in which case 2-foot
contours are permitted.
(20) If service for utilities (telephone, electric, water, sewer, etc.)
is to be provided by an existing utility company, a letter must
be submitted from the company stating that service will.
(21) Plans, typical cross sections and construction details,
horizontal and vertical alignments of the center line of all
proposed streets and of all existing streets at the point of
intersection with the proposed street.
C. Documents required with the preliminary plat. The following
documents shall accompany the application for tentative approval:
(1) Two copies of affidavit of ownership.
(2) Two copies of a letter of intent stating:
§ 163.02.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.02.040
001:413
(a) The type of structure(s) to be erected.
(b) The nature of business if commercial or industrial.
(c) The approximate date of the start of construction.
(d) The priority of construction (point of location).
(e) The estimated sales or rental figures.
(f) The estimated number of lots on which final approval will be
requested for the first section.
(g) The approximate date of completion.
(3) Two copies of any protective covenants or deed restrictions
applying to the land being subdivided.
D. Distribution. When necessary, copies of the preliminary plat shall be
forwarded by the Secretary of the Planning Board, prior to the hearing,
to the following persons:
(1) The Fire Prevention Bureau: one copy.
(2) The Department of Public Works: one copy.
(3) The Board of Health: one copy.
(4) The Building Inspector: one copy.
(5) The Tax Assessor: one copy.
(6) The Township Planner: one copy.
(7) The Township Engineer: two copies.
(8) The Shade Tree Commission: two copies.
(9) One copy to be retained by the Planning Board.
(10) The Environmental Protection Commission: one copy.
E. Documents required prior to public hearing. Unless otherwise
provided, at least 10 days prior to the public hearing, the following
documents shall be presented to the Board.
(1) County Planning Board. A letter of approval of plat from the Morris
County Planning Board.
F. Time limitation. The Board shall act on the preliminary plat within 45
days after submission of a complete application consisting of all
necessary and required plans, letters, exhibits and data for subdivisions
of 10 or fewer lots and within 95 days for subdivisions of more than 10
lots or within such further time as may be mutually agreed upon. If the
Board disapproves a plat, the reasons for the disapproval shall be
communicated to the applicant and remedied prior to further
§ 163.02.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.02.040
001:414
§ 163.02.050. Improvements.
consideration. No action shall be taken until receipt of the county
review or until 30 days have elapsed from the date of referral to
the county. The above time may be extended with the consent of the
applicant.
G. Planning Board action. The Board shall approve, conditionally approve
or reject the application.
(1) Approval or conditional approval, provided that all conditions are
met, shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a
three-year period from the date of approval:
(a) That the general terms and conditions upon which tentative
approval was granted will not be changed, including use
requirements, layout and design of improvements, lot size and
dimensions.
(b) That said applicant may submit, on or before the expiration
date, the whole or part or parts of said plat for final approval.
(c) That the applicant may apply for and the Planning Board may
grant extensions on such tentative approval for additional
periods of at least one year, but not to exceed a total extension
of two years, provided that, if the design standards have been
revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
(2) In the case of a subdivision of an area of fifty (5) acres or more, the
Planning Board may grant the rights referred to in Subsection G(1)
above for such period of time longer than three years as shall be
determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable, taking into
consideration:
(a) The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval.
(b) Economic conditions.
(c) The comprehensiveness of the development.
A. Installation. Before consideration of a final subdivision plat, the
subdivider shall have installed all improvements required by Section
163.04 of this chapter under the supervision and inspection of the
Township Engineer. Under special circumstances, some improvements
may be specifically excluded by the Engineer. Such excluded
improvements may generally consist of only the following:
(1) Street surface course.
(2) Lot grading, topsoil distribution, seedings and driveways.
(3) Shade trees.
§ 163.02.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.02.050
001:415
(4) Monuments.
(5) Sidewalks.
B. Agreement.
(1) Prior to any construction, including land clearance or soil
disturbance, there shall be executed an agreement between the
developer and the Township incorporating all of the terms and
conditions of approval imposed by the Planning Board. Implicit in
every preliminary approval and part of such agreement in
connection with final approval shall be the agreement of the
developer to:
(a) Procure necessary drainage easements.
(b) Make such revisions in the drainage plan as may be reasonably
required before or during construction by the Township
Engineer in accordance with good engineering practices. All
drainage problems shall be resolved to the satisfaction of the
Township Engineer prior to the issuance of the final certificate
of occupancy in the subdivision.
(2) Said agreement shall also provide for the posting of a two-year
maintenance guaranty to take effect upon acceptance of completed
improvements by the governing body.
C. Occupancy permits; exceptions.
(1) An occupancy permit shall not be issued until the complete
installation of all underground utilities, including but not limited to
sanitary sewers, water, gas, storm drains, etc., and installation of
road subbase, road base, binder course and curbs in accordance
with the specifications of the Township, as certified in writing by
the Township Engineer, and a maintenance bond has been posted.
An occupancy permit shall not be issued until the completed road
has been installed pursuant to Township specifications and in
compliance with all Township ordinances and conditions of
subdivision approval applicable thereto, as certified in writing by
the Engineer and approved by the governing body, with, however,
the following exceptions.
(2) The Township Engineer may certify, in writing, that the best
interests of the Township require a delay for engineering reasons
before the subdivider or developer finishes the road. The Planning
Board and governing body shall approve the certification, and an
occupancy permit may be issued, provided that the following
conditions are met:
(a) That the Engineer certifies that proper road base and binder
course have been installed.
§ 163.02.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.02.050
001:416
§ 163.02.060. Final plat submission for major subdivisions.
(b) That the developer has deposited with the Clerk an amount of
money, determined by the Planning Board and approved by the
governing body, exclusive of prior deposits, as sufficient to
maintain the road and road base in a passable condition, free
from ruts, mud, potholes, obstructions, snow, etc. Maintenance
of the road shall be the responsibility of the developer.
(c) That the developer agrees, in writing, to complete the road
within 60 days' after written notice by the governing body upon
recommendation by the Engineer.
(d) That upon failure of the subdivider or developer to complete
the road within the time limit in accordance with the
specifications of the Township, then the Township shall
complete the road at the subdivider's or developer's expense.
A. Complete application. The following items and information as indicated
on the checklist must be submitted to the administrative officer before
an application can be deemed complete:
(1) Two complete application forms (once the application has been
deemed complete the applicant shall submit 18 additional copies of
the application).
(2) Two copies of the plat (an additional 18 copies will be required
once the application has been deemed complete).
(3) Payment of the administrative and escrow review deposits.
(4) Proof of payment of taxes signed by the Tax Collector.
(5) Names and addresses of:
(a) Holders of 10% or more stock in applicant and/or owner, if
either is a corporation; or
(b) Holders of 10% or more interest in applicant if partnership
(per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1).
(6) Is submission within three years of resolution of preliminary
approval?
(7) Have block and lot numbers been approved by the Township Tax
Assessor?
(8) Affidavit of no change of final plat from preliminary plat (or
affidavit with changes listed in detail) signed by the applicant's
engineer and the Township Engineer.
(9) Letter from Health Department or Utility Authority approving the
facilities for water and sewerage.
§ 163.02.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.02.060
001:417
(10) Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less
than one inch equals to 100 feet and shall be submitted on one of
the two following standard sheet sizes: 24 inches by 36 inches or 30
inches by 42 inches.
(11) Furnishing of tracings. A letter from the applicant agreeing to
furnish the items listed in Section 163.02.060(G) of the Pequannock
Township Code.
(12) Letter from the applicant agreeing to furnish six copies of as-builts
for site grading, topography, utility plan and profiles of roads, and
utilities as finally constructed or installed.
(13) Submittal of all deeds, free and clear of all encumbrances, for all
streets, public easements, drainage easements and other lands
dedicated to public use.
(14)Water supplier. A letter from the water supplier stating that the
water system, as proposed, is adequate for the development and all
future extensions thereof, and that the development and all future
extensions thereof can be assured of an adequate supply of potable
water.
(15) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his
properly authorized agent, or that the owner has given consent
under an option agreement.
In addition the following information must be contained in the
plans presented with the application in order for the application to
be deemed complete:
(1) Sewers; mains. Plans, profiles, and construction details of
storm and sanitary sewers and water mains approved by the
Township Engineer.
(2) Monuments. The location and description of all monuments.
(3) Cross sections and profiles of streets, curbs or gutters, catch
basins and storm sewers and all utilities proposed, showing
grades and approved by the Township Engineer.
(4) Identity. The date, name and location of the subdivision, the
name of the owner, a graphic and written scale.
(5) The tract boundary lines, the rights-of-ways, lines of streets,
street names, easements and other rights-of-way, land to be
reserved or dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other
site lines, with accurate dimensions, bearings, or deflection
angles of all curves and square feet of all lot areas of all lots
within the subdivision.
(6) Public use. The purpose of any easement or land reserved
or dedicated to public use shall be designated, and the
proposed use of a site other than residential shall be noted.
§ 163.02.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.02.060
001:418
(7) Setback lines. The minimum principal building setback lines
for all lots and other sites.
(8) Contours shall be at 2 foot intervals for slopes less than 10%
and may be at 5 feet for slopes greater than 10%.
(9) Streams. Plans, profiles and cross-sections of all streams,
ditches and watercourses.
B. Time limitation. The Planning Board shall act within 45 days of
submission of the plat or within such further time as may be mutually
agreed upon. The action of the Board shall be noted on the plat and
signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Board.
C. Failure to act. Failure of the Board to act within the allotted time or a
mutually agreed upon extension shall be deemed to be favorable
approval, and the Township Clerk shall issue a certificate to that effect
upon request of the applicant.
D. Distribution. Copies of the final plat shall be distributed, if necessary, by
the Board to the following for review and comment:
(1) The Shade Tree Commission: two copies.
(2) The Township Engineer: two copies.
(3) The Fire Prevention Bureau: one copy.
(4) The Environmental Protection Commission: one copy.
(5) The Board of Health: one copy.
(6) The Building Inspector: one copy.
(7) The Tax Assessor: one copy.
(8) Others as necessary.
E. Review. No action shall be taken until such time as the above officials
review said plat or 30 days has elapsed from date of referral.
F. Planning Board action.
(1) The Planning Board, after hearing, may approve or disapprove the
plat. If the Planning Board disapproves the plat, the findings and
reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in the minutes of the
Board, and the applicant shall be given a copy.
(2) If the Board requires any substantial amendment in the layout or
improvements proposed by the subdivider that have been the
subject of a hearing, an amended plat must be submitted and
proceeded upon as in the case of the original plat.
§ 163.02.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.02.060
001:419
§ 163.03. Plat Details.
§ 163.03.010. Sketch plats.
(3) If the amended plat is not submitted in accordance with Planning
Board bylaws, the applicant shall be required to resubmit a new
application and fees.
G. Filing. The final plat, after final approval, shall be filed by the
subdivider with the county recording officer within 90 days from the
date of such approval. If any final plat is not filed within that period, the
approval shall expire. For good cause shown, the Planning Board may
extend the time for the filing of the plat for an additional period not to
exceed 90 days. After filing with the county recording officer, copies
shall also be filed with the following:
(1) The Department of Public Works: one linen print.
(2) The Township Clerk: one linen print.
(3) The Planning Board: one paper print.
(4) The Tax Assessor: one paper print.
(5) The Tax Collector: one paper print.
(6) The water department: one paper print.*
A. All plats shall be based on current Tax Map information or some other
similarly accurate base at a scale not less than 50 feet to the inch and
shall show or include the following information. When the sketch plat
differs from the Tax Map, the Planning Board may require
substantiating evidence in the form of deeds, etc., to verify any
changes.
(1) Location. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in
relation to the entire tract.
(2) Structures; wooded areas. All existing structures and wooded areas
within the portion to be subdivided and within 200 feet thereof.
(3) Owners. The name of the owner, all adjoining property owners and
those across existing or proposed streets as disclosed by the most
recent records of the Municipal Tax Office.
(4) Identity. The Tax Map sheet, date of revision, block and lot
numbers; the identifying title of the subdivision and name of the
municipality, county and state.
(5) All existing or proposed streets, roads, easements, public rights-ofway,
streams, drainage ditches and natural watercourses in and
within 500 feet of the subdivision or, in the case of a minor
subdivision, 200 feet.
§ 163.02.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.03.010
001:420
§ 163.03.020. Final plat.
The final plat and all plans and profiles or improvements shall be filed with
the Secretary at least three weeks prior to the meeting of the Board when
the plat is to be considered. The plat shall be drawn by a licensed New
Jersey land surveyor on tracing cloth 24 inches by 36 inches, at a scale of
not less than one inch equaling 50 feet, in compliance with all the provisions
in Chapter 141 of the Laws of 1960 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), as the
same may be amended. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the
following:
(6) The original and proposed lot layout, lot dimensions and total area
of each lot.
(7) Utility and drainage information. In cases when there is a question
on the adequacy of drainage, sewage and utility facilities, the
Board may require maps showing utility connections and
topography, as well as percolation tests conducted at the expense
of the applicant.
(8) Other information.
(a) The names and addresses of the prospective purchaser.
(b) Any deed restriction imposed by the owner or seller, which
shall be so noted on the map.
(c) The old name, if submitted previously under a different title,
the date of original preparation and the date of the revision.
(d) The name, address and signature of the person responsible for
preparing the map.
A. Identity. The date, name and location of the subdivision, the name of the
owner, a graphic scale and a reference meridian.
B. Other contents. The tract boundary lines, the right-of-way lines of
streets, street names, easements and other rights-of-way, land to be
reserved or dedicated to public use, all lot lines and other site lines,
with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles and radii, arcs
and central angles of all curves and square foot area of all lots within
the subdivision.
C. Public use. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated
to public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of a site other
than residential shall be noted.
D. Block and lots. All block and lot numbers shall be approved by the
Engineer and shall be related to existing block and lot numbers as
shown on the Official Tax Map of the Township.
E. Setback lines. The minimum building setback lines of all lots and other
sites.
§ 163.03.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.03.020
001:421
§ 163.04. Improvements.
§ 163.04.010. Improvements required.
Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed
improvements required by the Planning Board. The Planning Board may
solicit local, county, state, federal, public or semipublic agencies and
knowledgeable individuals on what improvements shall be required.
Improvements recommended by other agencies may be required by the
Planning Board as a condition of final approval.
§ 163.04.020. Streets.
Streets are to be graded and constructed in accordance with the
construction standards and specifications of the Township.
§ 163.04.030. Street signs.
Street signs are to be of the same type and design as the street signs
currently in use and shall be installed with a concrete base in accordance
with applicable Township ordinances and state statutes in such manner that
the name of each intersecting street in clearly visible to approaching traffic.
F. Monuments. The location and description of all monuments.
G. Owners. The names of owners of adjoining properties and those across
any existing or proposed street.
H. Accuracy. Certification by the surveyors as to the accuracy of details of
the plat.
I. Consent of owner. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of
the land or that the owner has given consent under an option
agreement.
J. Approval. When approval of a plat is required by an officer or body,
whether municipal, county or state, approval shall be certified on the
plat.
K. Profiles. Cross-sections and profiles of streets, curbs or gutters, catch
basins and storm sewers and all utilities proposed, showing grades and
approved by the Engineer.
L. Contours. Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or
greater and at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
M. Sewers; mains. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and
water mains approved by the Township Engineer.
N. Streams. Plans, profiles and cross-sections of all streams, ditches and
watercourses.
§ 163.03.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.04.040
001:422
§ 163.04.040. Curbs and gutters.
Curbs and gutters are to be constructed in accordance with the
construction standards and specifications of the Township.
§ 163.04.050. Catch basins.
Catch basins are to be constructed in accordance with the construction
standards and specifications of the Township as approved by the Engineer
and located where directed by the Engineer.
§ 163.04.060. Temporary improvements.
During construction, the Township Engineer may require the installation or
construction of improvements to prevent or correct temporary conditions on
the site which could cause personal injury, damage to property or constitute
a health hazard. These conditions may result from erosion and landslide,
flooding, heavy construction traffic, creation of steep grades and pollution.
Improvements may include grading, plantings, retaining walls, culverts,
pipes, guard rails, temporary roads, berms, retention ponds or basins and
others appropriate to the specific condition. These may include actions
recommended by the Morris County Soil Conservation Commission.
§ 163.04.070. Sidewalks.
Sidewalks shall be required in all areas and shall, in all cases, be of
sufficient width to accommodate the maximum pedestrian traffic, but in
no case shall be less than eight feet in width in a business zone and four
feet in all other zones, and shall be constructed in accordance with the
construction standards and specifications of the Township.
§ 163.04.080. Streetlighting.
In all major subdivisions, streetlights shall be installed at street
intersections, curves and culs-de-sac and shall not exceed 300 feet apart
along one side of the street. All service connections shall be made
underground. The design and type of light shall be approved by the
Engineer before installation.
§ 163.04.090. Shade trees.
Where required by the Shade Tree Commission, not fewer than two new
shade trees shall be installed on each lot not closer than 25 feet from any
existing or proposed streetlight or street intersection and installed in the
front of the lot between the building and the street right-of-way area and
in a line with other trees planted on the same side of the same street
and shall be installed so as not to interfere with utilities, roadways, school
ways or sidewalks. Trees shall be nursery-grown stock not less than 2 1/2
inches in diameter, planted and staked in a manner approved by the Shade
Tree Commission. Trees shall be of the following species: sugar, maple,
willow oak, red oak, scarlet oak, pin oak, sweet gum, ginkgo (male only),
§ 163.04.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.04.090
001:423
Japanese pagoda tree, thornless sunburst honey locust, Norway maple,
Norway red and columnar maple. All trees not surviving after one growing
season shall be replaced by the developer. Other species may be proposed,
in writing, to the Commission for its approval. The Commission may require
the subdivider or developer, at his sole expense, to retain a qualified person
to report to the Shade Tree Commission as to what can be done to save
existing trees, etc.
§ 163.04.100. Topsoil protection.
No topsoil shall be removed from the subdivision site or used as spoil or
fill. In addition, topsoil removed during the course of construction shall
be redistributed in the subdivision so as to provide equal distribution of
cover to all areas of the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding and
planting. At least six inches of compacted topsoil shall be provided on all
portions of lots not occupied by buildings or walks.
§ 163.04.110. Earth removal.
No change shall be made in the elevation or contour of any lot or site by
the removal of earth to another lot or site other than a required minimal
amount as determined by the Engineer and Board. All changes in elevation
and contours approved by the Engineer and Board shall be shown on the
preliminary plat and master site grading plan.
§ 163.04.120. Monuments.
Monuments are to be of the size and shape required by Section 3 of Chapter
141 of the Laws of 196012 and shall be placed in accordance with the
requirements of said statute and the specifications of the Township.
§ 163.04.130. Culverts, storm drains, storm sewers and utilities.
Provision shall be made for culverts, stormwater drains, sanitary waste
disposal and utilities. All such installations shall be connected with an
adequate approved system where one exists and shall be adequate for
all present and future development of the subdivision and surrounding
areas and shall be made in accordance with construction and specification
standards of the Township and Morris County, where applicable, and as
approved by the Engineer. All stormwater drains shall have a minimum
inside diameter of 15 inches.
§ 163.04.140. Gas mains.
Gas mains are to be installed in accordance with the requirements of the
applicable ordinances of the Township and/or the gas supplier.
12.Note: See N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.11.
§ 163.04.090 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.04.150
001:424
§ 163.04.150. Sanitary sewers.
Where a public sanitary sewer system is accessible, each lot within a
subdivision area shall be provided with sewage disposal facilities by the
required extension of sewer mains and connections thereto. All such
installations of sewer mains shall be made in accordance with the
construction standards of the Township as approved by the Engineer and
the State Board of Health, where applicable.
§ 163.04.160. Private sewage disposal systems.
Where a public sanitary sewer system is not reasonably accessible, the
subdivider may be required to install sewer lines and a sanitary sewage
disposal plant at his own cost and expense and in accordance with the
specifications of the State Department of Health, and all such installations
shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Health, the State
Department of Health and the Township Engineer.
§ 163.04.170. Installation of sewer lines.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not reasonably accessible but is proposed
and a plan has been adopted by the Township and where installation of
sewer lines and a sanitary sewage disposal plant is not required, the
subdivider must install within the subdivision a complete sewer pipe
system, including provision for the connection thereto at each lot in
accordance with the Township's adopted plan, but, in lieu of constructing
the sanitary sewage disposal plant, the subdivider may install individual
sewage disposal systems, including attachments for public sewer lines,
for each lot at the time that improvements are erected thereon. All such
individual sewage disposal systems shall be constructed in accordance with
the construction standards of the Township as approved by the Engineer
and the local Board of Health.
§ 163.04.180. House service connection.
Where an individual sewage disposal system is approved for a residence
located on an existing street or proposed street, it shall further be required
that a house sewer service connection be extended to the lawn side of the
sidewalk and capped.
§ 163.04.190. Fire protection equipment.
Fire hydrants, fire alarm boxes, pumping stations and standpipes are to
be installed on water mains at intervals as directed by the Fire Prevention
Bureau in accordance with the standards of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters. All hydrants and alarm boxes shall be placed at or near
street intersections or at property lines in such a manner as approved by
the Board so as to least interfere with the use of roads and property. All
major subdivisions without fire hydrants or waterlines shall be required to
provide pumping stations and/or standpipes as required by the Board and
Fire Prevention Bureau.
§ 163.04.150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.04.200
001:425
§ 163.04.200. Water.
Provision shall be made to provide each lot with an adequate and
continuous supply of potable water in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the Township. Where a public water system is reasonably
accessible, all lots shall be connected thereto. In the event that such a
system is not reasonably accessible, individual wells shall be installed for
each lot. Where a public water system is not now reasonably accessible but
may be at some future date, the subdivider may be required to install within
the subdivision a complete water distribution system, including provisions
for connection to each lot. Until such time as the system is capable of
becoming operable, individual wells shall be installed. This shall include
the placing of water mains in standard locations to be determined by the
Department of Public Works. In addition, all systems shall be tested, at
the subdivider's expense, for pressure and bacterial count before being
approved.
§ 163.04.210. Guard rails.
Guard rails are to be installed where deemed necessary by the Engineer and
to his specifications.
§ 163.04.220. Erosion and landslide prevention.
Upon determination by the Engineer, an appropriate amount shall be
included in the guaranties to cover the cost and grading of banks and/or the
erection of retaining walls to prevent erosion and landslides.
§ 163.04.230. Excavation of rock.
An amount of money, to be determined by the Engineer, shall be included in
the guaranties to cover possible rock excavation.
§ 163.04.240. Damage to adjacent property.
An appropriate amount of money, to be determined by the Engineer, shall be
included in the guaranties to cover possible damages to adjacent land and
structures, including but not limited to fences, trees, uprooting of property,
monuments, etc.
§ 163.04.250. Borrow and fill.
An amount, to be determined by the Engineer, shall be included in the
guaranties to cover the cost of borrow and/or fill required to meet any
requirement established herein.
§ 163.04.260. Existing streams and watercourses.
An amount, to be determined by the Engineer, shall be included in the
guaranties to improve existing streams or watercourses where storm
§ 163.04.200 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.04.260
001:426
drainage flowing into the stream from a subdivision is likely, in the opinion
of the Engineer, to cause flooding problems.
§ 163.04.270. Private utilities.
All private utility improvements shall consist of those improvements
required by the applicable utility or federal or state law.
§ 163.04.280. Additional requirements.
An appropriate amount, to be determined by the Engineer, shall be included
in the guaranties as may be required by specific problems which are
peculiar to any particular development or which might arise during
construction.
§ 163.04.290. Site conditions.
§ 163.04.300. Off-site improvements.
The Planning Board may require a developer to improve all adjacent streets,
drainage ditches, streams, utilities or other improvements to those
Township standards adopted by ordinance.
§ 163.04.310. Off-tract improvements.
The Planning Board may require a developer to complete off-tract
improvements to the extent that the proposed development creates the
demand for the improvements. For streets and roads, this will be
determined by traffic flow; for drainage, it shall be determined by
anticipated runoff; and for other utilities, the requirement for off-tract
improvements shall be determined by anticipated flows. In the event that
any such off-tract improvement benefits properties of others as well as the
applicant, the Planning Board shall refer the matter to the Township Council
for the purpose of determining whether the off-tract improvement shall be
installed by local assessment or in some other manner which fairly allocates
the cost of improvements to the properties benefited thereby.
A. During construction, the site shall be maintained and left each day in a
safe and sanitary manner, and any condition which could lead to
personal injury or property damage shall be immediately corrected by
the subdivider upon an order by the Building Inspector or other
authorized personnel.
B. Developed areas shall be cleared of all stumps, litter, rubbish, brush,
weeds, dead and dying trees, roots and debris, and excess or scrap
building materials shall be removed or destroyed immediately upon the
request of and to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector and prior to
issuing an occupancy permit. None of the same shall be buried without
written permission of the Building Inspector. The burning of trash and
rubbish is prohibited.
§ 163.04.260 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.04.320
001:427
§ 163.04.320. Construction standards.
§ 163.04.330. Inspections.
All improvements shall be installed under the supervision and inspection of
the Engineer. At least 48 hours' notice shall be given to the Engineer prior
to the start of construction or placing of improvements. No underground
installation shall be covered until inspected and approved by the Engineer.
If, during installation of any of the required improvements, the subdivider
fails to meet specification requirements or to correct unacceptable work,
the subdivider shall be notified by the Township Planner, in writing, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, that the subdivider has failed to
comply with specifications or to correct unacceptable work properly, and
said notice shall set forth in detail what has not been properly installed. If,
within 10 days after certified date of receipt of such notice, the subdivider
has failed to perform in accordance with the notice, the Township Planner
shall then cause the notice of failure to comply to be served upon the
subdivider, and a copy shall be sent to the governing body and Planning
Board. The fee for engineering inspections during construction or
installation and during maintenance period shall be an amount sufficient to
cover all costs for inspections as determined by the Township Engineer.
§ 163.04.340. Grades.
All construction stakes and grades shall be set by a licensed land surveyor
in the employ of the subdivider, developer or contractor, and a duplicate
copy of the grade sheets made therefrom shall be filed with the Engineer
and the Department of Public Works.
§ 163.04.350. Performance guaranties.
A. The following construction standards and improvements are necessary
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the Township. It is
recognized, however, that, in peculiar situations, all of the
improvements listed below may not be appropriate or needed. These
items may then be waived in accordance with 163.06.040.
B. All standards and specifications of the Township as now or hereafter
adopted, if any, shall govern the design, construction and installation of
all the above improvements. Failure of the subdivider, developer or his
contractor or agent to conform to said specifications will be just cause
for the suspension of the work being performed.
C. In the event that the Township has not adopted standards for a specific
type of improvement, then generally accepted engineering standards as
set forth in engineering and construction manuals, as may be modified
by the Township Engineer for a specific situation, shall be used.
D. Gas, electric, telephone and similar utilities shall be installed in
accordance with applicable company, state and federal requirements.
§ 163.04.320 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.04.350
001:428
A. Performance guaranties generally. No final plat shall be approved by
the Board until the completion of all such required improvements has
been certified, in writing, to the Board by the Engineer, unless the
subdivider shall have filed with the Township a performance guaranty
sufficient to cover all costs of such improvements or uncompleted
portions thereof as specifically excluded from completion by the
Engineer and approved by the Planning Board and assuring the
installation of such uncompleted improvements on or before an agreed
date, not to exceed 18 months from the date of execution of the
performance guaranty, unless extended as provided in this article. An
additional amount, to be determined by the Township Engineer, shall be
included in the total amount of the performance guaranty to cover
legal, engineering and other costs in the event that the subdivider or
developer shall fail to complete the required improvements and the
municipality is required to install the improvements.
B. Items required prior to acceptance of performance guaranty:
(1) List. A list of the items to be covered and the cost of each.
(2) Letter from Engineer. A letter of approval of Subsection B(1) from
the Township Engineer.
(3) Conformance to Township ordinances. A letter from the Township
Engineer stating that all plans and specifications meet all
applicable Township ordinances.
C. Form and time of guaranty. The performance guaranty shall run for a
term not to exceed 18 months and shall be in the form of at least 10% of
the amount of the guaranty in cash or certified check, and the
remainder shall be a surety bond from a company and in a form
acceptable to the Township. Nothing in this section shall be construed
as preventing the applicant from posting the entire performance
guaranty in cash.
D. Extension of time and guaranty.
(1) Performance guaranties, with the consent of the principal, may be
extended by the governing body, after recommendation by the
Planning Board, by resolution, for one additional period not
exceeding 18 months.
(2) As a condition or as part of any extension, the amount of any
performance guaranty shall be increased or decreased, as the case
may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of installation
as determined as of the time of the passage of the resolution to
extend the time.
E. Township completion. If the required improvements shall not have been
installed in accordance with the required standards and specifications
of the Township within the time limit or extension thereof as described
in Subsections C and D above, the Township shall use said performance
§ 163.04.350 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.04.350
001:429
guaranties as have been deposited with the Township to assure the
completion of said improvements in accordance with the terms of this
chapter and any applicable agreement.
F. Action of governing body.
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required appurtenant utility
improvements and the connection of these to the public system, the
obligor shall notify the governing body, in writing, of the
completion or substantial completion of improvements by certified
mail in the case of the Municipal Clerk and shall send a copy to the
Municipal Engineer shall inspect all improvements for which notice
has been given and shall file a detailed report, in writing, indicating
approval, partial approval or rejection of the improvements as
approved or rejected.
(2) The governing body shall approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements on the basis of the Engineer's report and shall notify
the obligor, by certified mail, of the contents of the report and the
action of the governing body no later than 65 days from the receipt
of the notice of the completion of the improvements. Where partial
approval is granted, the obligor shall be released from all liability
pursuant to its performance guaranty, except for that portion
sufficient to secure provision of the improvements not yet
approved, provided that 30% of the amount of the performance
guaranty posted may be retained to insure completion of all
improvements. Failure of the governing body to send or provide
such notification to the obligor within 65 days shall be deemed to
constitute approval of the improvements, and the obligor shall be
released from any liability pursuant to the performance guaranty
for such improvements. No release of any performance guaranty
shall take place until the provisions of § 163.04.350G(9) of this
chapter are complied with.
G. Items required by governing body before releasing the performance
guaranty or any part thereof. Before releasing any guaranty or any
portion thereof, the following items shall be in the hands of the
governing body:
(1) Recommendation. A recommendation by the Board stating whether
or not said performance guaranty should be reduced or released. If
the Board fails to make such a recommendation within 45 days
after being so requested by the governing body, the Board shall be
deemed to have recommended releasing or reducing said
performance guaranty.
(2) As-built plans. An as-built plan and profiles of all utilities and roads
(black-and-white prints) in triplicate, plus tracing cloths, to be sent
to the Planning Board with a certification as to the actual
construction, the same to be approved by the Township Engineer.
One copy of each shall be sent to the Township Clerk, one copy of
§ 163.04.350 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.04.350
001:430
each shall be sent to the Township Engineer, and one copy of each
and the tracing cloths shall be retained by the Planning Board.
(3) Liens. A statement or affidavit, in duplicate, one copy to the
Planning Board, from the developer, that there are no liens or other
legal encumbrances on any of the improvements or utilities
proposed to be deeded to the Township.
(4) Approval of installation. A statement, in duplicate, one copy to the
Planning Board, from the Township Engineer, that all utilities and
improvements required by the Planning Board and all applicable
Township ordinances have been installed and completed in
accordance with applicable Township ordinances and have been
approved by him.
(5) Maintenance guaranty. A maintenance guaranty of 15%.
(6) Deeds. Deeds, free and clear of all encumbrances, for all streets,
public easements, drainage easements, other public improvements
and other lands dedicated to public use.
(7) Letter from Clerk. After the release of the guaranty or any part
thereof, a statement to that effect shall be sent to the Planning
Board by the Township Clerk, stating whether or not said release
was in full or in part. If the release was in part, said statement shall
set forth the amount of the reduction and a description of the roads
or other improvements approved by the Mayor and Council.
(8) Reimbursement for inspection. Prior to the release of the
performance guaranty or any portion thereof, the applicant shall
post with the Township the sum of $50 per lot, in cash or certified
check, to cover the cost of inspection related to the release of the
performance guaranty. Any portion of this sum not used by the
Township for such inspection services will be refunded to the
applicant within 90 days of the release of the performance
guaranty.
(9) Maintenance guaranty generally. A maintenance guaranty in the
amount of 15% of the total cost of the improvements, as installed,
shall be provided for a period of two years when the improvements
have been completed and accepted by the governing body. The
maintenance guaranty shall cover regular maintenance, such as
curb replacement and repair, cleaning out of catch basins,
resealing, patching or replacing portions of the road and any other
matters which would be necessary to restore any of the required
improvements into condition as when approved by the Township.
The guaranty may be a surety guaranty and shall provide for a
guaranty to replace all work performed and all materials furnished
which are found defective and to repair or replace any defects
thereof which may become apparent before the expiration of said
period. The governing body shall not release any maintenance
guaranty until the maintenance period expires and all deficiencies
§ 163.04.350 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.04.350
001:431
§ 163.05. Design Standards.
§ 163.05.010. General provisions.
§ 163.05.020. Streets and roads.
are repaired and then only if the Township Engineer certifies that
all improvements are in the same condition as when first accepted.
A. General. The subdivider shall observe the following requirements and
principles of land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or
portion thereof.
B. Development pattern. The subdivision plat shall conform to design
standards that will encourage the most appropriate development
pattern within the municipality.
C. Conformity to Master Plan and Official Map. Where either or both an
Official Map or Master Plan has or have been adopted, the subdivision
plat shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown thereon. The
streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks and
playgrounds shown on an officially approved Master Plan or Official
Map shall be considered in the approval of subdivision plats.
D. Further conformance. Where no Master Plan data or Official Map data
exist, streets and drainage rights-of-way shall be shown on the final plat
in accordance with the applicable statutes of New Jersey in such case
made and provided and shall be such as to lend themselves to the
harmonious development of the Township and enhance the public
welfare in accordance with the design standards in the following
sections of this section.
A. General. The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or
Official Map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of
existing streets and, where necessary in order to promote orderly flow
of traffic, safety and welfare of the public, shall be such as to provide for
future streets.
B. Right-of-way and pavement widths. The right-of-way and pavement
widths shall be measured from abutting lot line to abutting lot line and
curb face to curb face and shall not be less than the following:
(1) Other than internal roads.
Right-of-Way Pavement
Street Classification Feet Feet
Primary or arterial roads 80 46
Collector street 60 40
Local roads 50 34
§ 163.04.350 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.05.020
001:432
Right-of-Way Pavement
Street Classification Feet Feet
Cul-de-sac 50R 40R
(2) Internal roads. The right-of-way and pavement widths for internal
roads in multifamily, commercial and industrial developments and
zones shall be determined on an individual basis and shall, in all
cases, be of sufficient width and design to safely accommodate the
maximum traffic, parking, loading and access for emergency
vehicles and other vehicles that would service the development.
C. Widening existing streets. Subdivisions that include existing streets
which do not conform to pavement and/or right-of-way widths as shown
on the Master Plan or Official Map shall dedicate and improve, to
Township specifications, additional width along both sides of said road.
If the subdivision adjoins one side of an existing road which does not
meet standards, only 1/2 of the required extra width shall be dedicated
and improved to Township specifications. Where the governing body
certifies that the best interests of the Township require a postponement
of the installation or construction of a widened roadway, the developer
shall deposit with the Township the cost of the improvement in lieu of
actually constructing or installing the additional paving. Such costs
shall also include, where appropriate, curbs, drainage facilities,
sidewalks and extension of utilities. The requirement for improving the
additional right-of-way may be waived by the Planning Board in the case
of minor subdivisions when the Planning Board certifies that the
improvement is not necessary for the health, safety and general welfare
of the Township.
D. Grades. Arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4% grade. All
other streets shall not exceed 10%. No streets shall have a minimum
grade of less than 1/2 of 1%. In no case shall any street have a grade of
more than 3% within 50 feet of any intersection.
E. Intersections. Street intersections shall be laid out as nearly at right
angles as possible and in no case at any angle of less than 60°. The
block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a
curb having a center-line radius of not less than 35 feet.
F. Jogs. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
G. Reverse curves. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced
between reverse curves on all streets.
H. Connecting streets. When connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any one point by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they
shall be connected by a curve with a center-line radius of not less than
100 feet.
§ 163.05.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.05.020
001:433
§ 163.05.030. Blocks.
§ 163.05.040. Lots. [Amended 9-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-09]
I. Grade changes. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical
curves of sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper
sight distance.
J. Cul-de-sac. All culs-de-sac shall have a turnaround installed and shall
not be longer than 600 feet. The turnaround shall have a right-of-way
radius width of 50 feet and a paved radius width of not less than 40 feet.
When a cul-de-sac terminates at an adjoining property line and where it
is possible to extend the street at a future time, the turnaround right-ofway
shall be considered as temporary in nature, and provision shall be
made for future extension of the street and reversion of the excess
right-of-way to the adjoining property or properties. Wherever a
temporary or permanent turnaround is proposed on any street, the
front yard setback line shall be measured from the right-of-way line of
these turnarounds.
K. Names. Streets shall not have a name which will duplicate or so nearly
duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets. No street
shall change by more than 90° without a change in name. The
continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. All street
names shall be approved by the Planning Board.
A. General. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall
be such as to accommodate the size of the lot required in the area by
the Zoning Ordinance* and to provide adequately for sewage disposal,
convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic.
B. Size. Blocks shall not be less than 600 feet nor more than 1,200 feet in
length and not a lesser number of feet in width than at least two times
the minimum depth of a lot required in that zone to comply with the
Zoning Ordinance,* except where the Board and Board of Adjustment
may deem that the existing conditions or special plans warrant a
variation from such minimum requirements.
C. Commercial. Block sizes for commercial, business or industrial areas
shall be sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
D. Easements. Rights-of-way and easements within blocks in commercial,
business or industrial areas shall be of not less than 20 feet in width.
E. Internal walkways. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, internal pedestrian
walkways may be required in locations deemed necessary by the
Planning Board. Such walkways shall be fifteen foot rights-of-way with a
four foot paving and shall run from street to street. The type of paving
required is to be left to the discretion of the Planning Board.
§ 163.05.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.05.040
001:434
A. General. Lot dimensions, front, side and rear yards and total area in
square feet shall not be less than the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance* of the municipality.
B. Side lines. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to
streets and radial to curved streets.
C. Frontage. Each lot must be not less than that required in the Zoning
Ordinance.
D. Setbacks. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of
existing streets, lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all
setbacks shall be measured from such line.
E. Easements excluded. Easements for natural watercourses shall not be
deemed part of any servient lot for the purpose of complying with area,
frontage and yard requirements.
F. Substandard suitability. Where there is a question of the suitability of a
lot or lots for their intended use due to the factors such as flood
conditions, sewage disposal or similar circumstances, the Board may,
after adequate investigation, with professional assistance, if deemed
necessary, withhold approval of such lots.
G. Driveways. Driveways leading from garages, private or otherwise, to
streets shall not have a grade in excess of 10% and shall meet the street
or sidewalk where installed at grade and repaved with concrete or
asphalt material.
H. Lots on major streets. Lots fronting on collector or arterial roads shall,
at the discretion of the Planning Board, be serviced by a marginal
access road or reverse frontage or have turnarounds constructed on the
property.
I. Flag lots.
(1) Flag lots may be subdivided from property having an existing
single-family freestanding dwelling unit under the following
conditions:
(a) The front and rear of the property can be subdivided into
conforming lots.
(b) A private access strip 50 feet wide and not more than 500 feet
in length is provided.
(c) The access strip must be constructed to ensure safe access for
emergency and fire vehicles.
(d) A turnaround must be provided as part of the access strip.
(e) The waterline servicing the rear lot must be a minimum of one
inch in diameter.
§ 163.05.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.05.040
001:435
§ 163.05.050. Public use and service areas.
(f) Future applications to subdivide after flag lot subdivision has
been approved will be classified as a major subdivision.
(g) The minimum size of the flag lot shall be twice the minimum lot
size required in the zone in Zones R-9, R-11, R-15, and R-22. In
Zones R-45, and R-87, the minimum lot size shall be the same
as required for all lots.
(h) The principal structure shall be setback from all property lines
a minimum distance equal to the rear yard setback for flag lots
in the R-9, R-11, R-15, and R-22 zones, and a minimum of 50
feet in the R-45 and R-87 zones.
(2) If the access strip serves more than one dwelling, access to the rear
shall be by a standard municipal street and a cul-de-sac
turnaround.
A. Utility easements. In any major subdivision or where unusual
circumstances warrant, as determined by the Board, easements may be
required for utility installations. Such easements shall be at least 20
feet wide and located after consultation with the utility companies or
Township agencies concerned. Rear-lot provisions of electric and
telephone utilities shall be provided along the rear lot lines, and all
utility service shall be installed underground.
B. Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a
watercourse, drainage, channel or stream, there shall be provided a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way at least 20 feet wide on
each side of the watercourse, conforming substantially to the lines of
such watercourse, and such further width as will be adequate for the
purpose of disposing of stormwaters and for flood control. Such
easements shall be deeded to the Township prior to final subdivision.
C. Underground utilities. For all major subdivisions, the applicant shall
arrange with the serving utility for the underground installation of the
utilities' distribution supply lines and service connections in accordance
with the provisions of the applicable standard terms and conditions
incorporated as a part of its tariff as the same are then on file with the
State of New Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners. The
applicant shall submit to the Planning Board, prior to the granting of
final approval, a written instrument from each serving utility, which
shall evidence full compliance with the provisions of this subsection.
However, lots in such subdivisions which abut existing streets where
overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines have heretofore
been installed on any portion of the streets involved may be supplied
with electric and telephone service connections from the utilities'
overhead lines shall be installed underground.
§ 163.05.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.05.050
001:436
§ 163.05.060. Erosion and sediment control.
D. Traffic signs and control devices. These improvements, such as stop,
yield and one-way signs, etc., shall be designed and installed in
accordance with applicable federal, state and county regulations.
Recommendation as to their installation may be made by the Police
Department or other competent agency.
A. Minimum standards. Erosion and sedimentation control measures used
to control erosion and reduce sedimentation shall, as a minimum, meet
the standards and specifications of the United States Department of
Agriculture Soil Conservation Service, as presently or as may be
adopted for use by the appropriate soil conservation district. Natural
features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views, shall be preserved
whenever possible and changed only with the permission of the
Planning Board and the State Water Policy Commission, when
applicable.
B. Design principles. The following control measures shall be required for
an effective erosion and sediment control plan:
(1) Any stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development will be
done in such a way as to minimize erosion.
(2) Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep
cutfill operations to a minimum and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and best
handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
(3) Whenever feasible, natural vegetation should be retained and
protected and supplemented.
(4) The area and/or duration of exposure of disturbed soils shall be
kept to a practical minimum.
(5) Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
(6) Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
critical areas exposed during development.
(7) The permanent final vegetation and structure should be installed as
soon as practical in the development.
(8) Provisions should be made to effectively accommodate the
increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions
during and after development. Where necessary, the rate of water
runoff shall be mechanically retarded.
(9) Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until stabilization is
effected utilizing debris basins, desilting basins, sediment basins or
silt traps.
§ 163.05.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.05.060
001:437
(10)No more than 10 building permits will be issued at any one time to
a developer. Additional permits shall not be issued until all soil
exposure has been eliminated.
C. Grading. In order to provide more suitable sites for building and other
physical features, to improve surface drainage and to control erosion,
the following requirements shall be met:
(1) The yards of every structure shall be graded to secure proper
drainage away from buildings and dispose of it without ponding,
and all land within a development shall be graded to drain and
dispose of surface water without ponding, except if otherwise
approved by the Planning Board. A minimum slope of 2% away
from structures shall be required.
(2) All drainage provisions shall be of such design so as to collect onsite
runoff and carry surface waters to the nearest practical street,
storm drain or natural watercourse. Where drainage swales are
used to deliver surface waters away from buildings, the swales
shall be sodded or planted as required and shall be of such slope,
shape and size to conform to good engineering principles.
D. Excavations and fills.
(1) No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than
1 1/2 horizontal to one vertical (66%), except as approved by the
Engineer when handled under special conditions.
(2) No fill shall be placed which creates any exposed surface steeper in
slope than two horizontal to one vertical (50%), except as approved
by the Engineer when handled under special conditions.
(3) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from
damaging the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills.
(4) Retaining walls or cribbing shall be required where needed to
prevent the surface of excavations or fills from exceeding, at any
point, the maximum allowable slope.
(5) Excavations shall not be made so close to property lines as to
endanger adjoining property without supporting and protecting the
face of the excavation.
(6) No fill shall be made so as to cause settlement, sliding or erosion of
the soil.
(7) No fill shall be made or placed adjacent to the bank of a channel so
as to create bank failure or sliding.
E. Watercourses and erosion control. No developer shall block, impede the
flow of, alter or construct any structure or deposit any material or thing
or commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any
communal stream or watercourse without having obtained prior
§ 163.05.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.05.060
001:438
§ 163.06. Administration.
§ 163.06.010. Minimum requirements.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the Township.
§ 163.06.020. Criteria for Board action.
Any action taken by the Board under the terms of this chapter shall give
primary consideration to the matters mentioned in § 163.06.020 above and
to the welfare of the entire community.
§ 163.06.030. Variances.
If the applicant can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions
pertaining to his land, the literal enforcement of one or more of the
provisions of this chapter will create exceptional, practical difficulties or
will not adversely affect surrounding properties and will not impair the
intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance13, this chapter or any other
applicable Township ordinance, the Board may permit such a variance or
variances as may be reasonable, but no such variance shall waive the
requirement of any other Township ordinance or Official Map. An applicant
approval from the Township or the New Jersey Division of Water Policy
and Supply, whichever is applicable.
F. Easements. Adequate rights-of-way and/or easements shall be provided
for access of men and equipment during construction and afterwards
for maintenance.
G. Requirements. Each person, corporation or other entity which makes
any surface changes shall be required to:
(1) Collect on-site runoff and dispose of it to the point of discharge into
the common natural watercourse of the drainage area.
(2) Handle existing off-site runoff through his development, but size
any pipe he installs and size any easements and make necessary onsite
improvements for a fully developed area upstream.
(3) Pay the proportionate share of the total cost of off-site
improvements to the common natural watercourse based on a fully
developed drainage area.
(4) Provide and install, at his expense, in accordance with Township
specifications, all drainage and erosion control improvements,
temporary and permanent, as required by an erosion and sediment
control plan.*
13.Note: See Ch. 189, Zoning.
§ 163.05.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.06.030
001:439
seeking a variance shall apply therefor on forms to be promulgated by the
Planning Board. No variance shall be granted except after public hearing,
and applicant's notice of hearing served upon property owners pursuant
to this chapter shall include a statement that a variance is being sought,
setting forth the section or sections of this chapter sought to be varied and
the reasons why the applicant seeks said variance or variances. No variance
shall be granted without the affirmative vote of a majority of the Planning
Board.
§ 163.06.040. Exceptions.
The Planning Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary or minor
subdivision approval, shall have the power to grant such exceptions from
the requirements for subdivision approval as may be reasonable and within
the general purpose and intent of the provisions for subdivision review and
approval where the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of the
chapters are impracticable or will exact undue hardship. Exceptions shall
be granted only upon notice by the applicant to the property owners within
200 feet of the site in question in the manner prescribed by § 016.04.050
of the Pequannock Township Land Use Ordinance in conformance with
Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975.14
§ 163.06.050. Filing and availability of chapter.
Copies of this chapter shall be filed with the county recording officer, the
County Planning Board and the Township Clerk and shall be made available
to any persons desiring a copy upon the payment of a fee established by the
governing body.
§ 163.06.060. Appeals.
Appeals from any decision of the Board pursuant to this chapter shall be
made to a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 163.06.070. Certificates of approval.
Certificates of approval shall be issued by the Township Clerk in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.24.15
§ 163.07. Penalties.
§ 163.07.010. Violations and penalties.
A. If, before final approval has been obtained, any person transfers or sells
or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a
subdivision on which, by ordinance, the Board is required to act, such
person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred $200 or to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, and each parcel, plat or lot so
14.Note: For current provisions, see now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
15.Note: For current provisions, see now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
§ 163.06.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 163.07.010
001:440
§ 163.07.020. Civil actions.
In addition to the foregoing penalty in § 163.07.010 above, if the streets in
the subdivision are not such that a structure on said land in the subdivision
would meet the requirements for a building permit under Section et seq.
of the Official Map and Building Permit Act (1953), as amended, N.J.S.A.
40:55-1.30 et seq.,16 the Township may institute and may maintain a civil
action:
§ 163.07.030. Purchaser's lien.
In any such action brought under § 163.07.020 of this chapter, the
transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien upon the portion
of the land from which the subdivision was made which remains in the
possession of the subdivider or his assigns or successors to secure the
return of any deposit made or purchase price paid and also a reasonable
search fee, survey expense and title-closing expense, if any.
§ 163.07.040. Limitations.
Any such action brought under § 163.07.020 of this chapter must be
brought within two years after the date of recording of the instrument of
transfer, sale or conveyance of said land or within six years if unrecorded.
§ 163.07.050. Approval binding. [Added 7-25-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-18]
An approval of any subdivision by the appropriate approving authority
under the provisions of this chapter and any conditions thereof shall be
binding upon the developer/applicant and upon any subsequent heirs and/
or assigns. Said approval shall not be amended or altered in any manner
without prior approval from the appropriate approving authority. Failure to
disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation. A contract for sale
where title passes after a specified amount of money and/or time is
passed shall be construed as to require subdivision approval.
B. Any other violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable
by a fine not exceeding $200 or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day that a violation shall continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
A. For injunctive relief.
B. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract or sale if a certificate of approval has not been issued in
accordance with Section 24 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953, as
amended, N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.24.17
16.Note: For current provisions, see now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32 et seq.
17.Note: For current provisions, see now N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
§ 163.07.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 163.07.050
001:441
adhere to an approved subdivision plan or condition of approval contained
in a subdivision plan shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
Chapter 166
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 166.01. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
PORTABLE POOL — Any above-surface type of swimming pool constructed
of canvas, rubber, plastic or other material, not designed or intended to be
stationary or permanently fixed, but designed and intended to be removed
and stored, and not included in the definition of a "private swimming pool."
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any private swimming pool, whether
permanently constructed or of the portable type, having a depth of more
than 18 inches below the level of the surrounding land, or an above-surface
pool having a depth of more than 24 inches or having in each case a
surface area exceeding 100 square feet, designed, used and maintained for
swimming or bathing purposes by an individual for use of members of his
household and guests, and located on the applicant's land as an accessory
use to a residence, and shall include all buildings, structures, equipment
and appurtenances thereto.
WADING POOL — Any shallow pool not included in the definition of a
"private swimming pool."
§ 166.02. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all new and existing private pools, except where
otherwise indicated herein.
§ 166.03. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful to establish, construct or alter a private swimming pool
without first obtaining a permit therefor in the manner prescribed in this
chapter.
§ 166.04. Permit application.
Applications for a permit to construct a private swimming pool shall be
made in writing to the Construction Official, accompanied by three sets of
plans drawn to an acceptable scale, and three sets of specifications which
shall meet all requirements of this chapter, the Zoning Ordinance and the
Building and Plumbing Codes. The plans and specifications should include
the following:
A. The dimensions of the pool, with side and top elevations.
§ 163.07.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 166.04
001:442
§ 166.05. Approval of plans by Health Officer.
The Construction Official shall submit one set of plans, specifications or
other material submitted by the applicant to the Health Officer for approval
of disinfection, filtering and disposal of filter backwash water and pool
water.
§ 166.06. Fees.
All applications for swimming pool permits shall be accompanied by a fee,
which shall be based on the building permit fee schedule of the Township,
which charge shall be used to defray the cost of processing the application
and inspecting the site before and after issuance of the permit. Such fee
shall not be refundable. No fee shall be charged for a portable pool.
§ 166.07. Location restrictions. [Amended 11-27-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-21; 10-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-22; 6-23-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-10]
B. A plot plan showing property lines of the land upon which the proposed
pool is to be constructed, showing all existing houses and structures,
cesspools, tanks or subsurface sewer disposal systems, distance of the
pool from property lines and abutting streets.
C. A description of the method of disinfection, treatment, filtering and
disposal of pool water and filter backwash water.
D. The height and type of fence, walls or enclosures, as required by this
chapter.
A. No pool shall be constructed or installed:
(1) Nearer to the street line on which the premises front than a line 10
feet to the rear of the building line established by ordinance.
(2) Nearer than 10 feet to the rear property line.
(3) Nearer than 10 feet to any side property line.
(4) On a property served by an individual sewage disposal system
without first obtaining approval of the Health Officer, or his
designee. Said pool shall not be constructed in a manner that will
impair the proper operation or structural integrity of either the
sewage disposal system or swimming pool. In no instance shall any
pool be constructed over any component of an individual sewage
disposal system; nor, shall any above ground pool be closer than
five feet from any component of a disposal system; or, any inground
pool closer than 20 feet from a disposal field, 30 feet from a
seepage pit, 10 feet from a distribution box, and 10 feet from a
septic tank.
§ 166.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166.07
001:443
§ 166.08. Water supply.
No source of water other than that secured from the Township shall be used
for any pool unless such source shall have been and continue to be tested
and meets the Health Officer's approval.
§ 166.09. Inlets and outlets.
Private swimming pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding
makeup water as needed. There shall be no physical connection between
the water supply line and the pool system if the makeup water is added
directly to the pool. The outlet shall be at least six inches above the upper
rim of the pool.
§ 166.10. Disinfection, filtration, recirculation equipment.
All private swimming pools shall be constructed, installed and maintained
so as to provide equipment necessary for the chlorination or other
disinfection, filtration and recirculation of the pool water so as to comply
with approved bacteriological standards as may be promulgated by
regulations issued by the Health Officer of the Township and the Board of
Health of the state.
§ 166.11. Electrical equipment.
(5) In addition to any fencing otherwise required by New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code, screening at least six feet in height by
fence or planted materials shall be provided in each case where the
pool is within 15 feet of an adjacent property line.
(6) All pool equipment shall be located in the rear yard or side yard and
shall be no closer than 10 feet from the property line.
The above mentioned distances shall be measured from the inside wall of
the pool.
B. No private swimming, portable or wading pool shall be constructed or
installed on any lot which is not part of residential plat containing a
residential building. Pools and appurtenant equipment shall not be
permitted in a side yard between dwellings.
C. The provisions of this section shall not apply to swimming pools of a
permanent nature which have been constructed prior to the effective
date of this chapter.
A. No overhead current-carrying electrical conductors shall cross
swimming pools or be located within 10 feet of a swimming pool.
B. All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to swimming
pools which might become electrically alive as a result of contact with
broken overhead conductors or from any other cause shall be
effectively grounded.
§ 166.07 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 166.11
001:444
§ 166.12. Fencing.
§ 166.13. Maintenance.
All private swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition. All equipment shall be maintained in satisfactory operating
condition during the periods the pool is in use.
§ 166.14. Enforcement.
The Construction Official or his representative shall enforce the provisions
of this chapter. The Health Officer of the Township or his representative
shall enforce the requirements of 166.08, 166.09 and 166.10. Every private
swimming pool constructed or to be constructed in the Township shall at all
times comply with the requirements of the health or Township authorities
having jurisdiction on the premises, and any nuisance or hazard to health
which may exist or develop in or in consequence of or in connection with
any such swimming pool shall forthwith be abated and removed by the
person in possession of such pool upon receipt of notice from the
C. Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool shall be arranged and
shaded so as to reflect light away from the adjoining premises. No
unshielded lights shall be permitted.
D. Underwater lights are prohibited, unless they are of a low-voltage type.
E. All electrical equipment shall comply with the National Electric Code.
A. The Township Council expressly declares that private swimming pools
that are not properly fenced are detrimental to the health, welfare and
safety of the residents of the Township. Therefore, all private swimming
pools, now existing or hereafter constructed, installed, established or
maintained, shall be completely enclosed by a permanent fence or wall
enclosure of durable material four feet in height, and shall be
constructed so as to not have openings, meshed holes or gaps larger
than four inches in dimension, and shall reasonably prevent any person
from gaining access beneath any part of the fence. If a picket fence is
erected or maintained, the spaces between the pickets shall not be
excess of four inches. A dwelling house or accessory building may be
used as part of such enclosure. All fence openings or points of entry into
the pool area enclosure shall be equipped with gates. All gates shall be
equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices placed at the top of
the gate and made inaccessible to small children.
B. Above-the-surface pools with straight sides four feet or more in height
are excluded from the provisions of this section. Any access ladder or
steps used with any of the above-the-surface type swimming pools,
whether permanent or portable, shall be removed from the pool when
not in use. "Removal" shall be defined as not capable of being used to
enter the pool.
§ 166.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166.14
001:445
Construction Official, Health Officer or other person concerned with law
enforcement in the Township.
Chapter 167
PUBLIC RECREATIONAL BATHING
§ 167.01. Adoption of standards.
The Township Council of the Township of Pequannock hereby adopts in
its entirety the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:1A-7 et seq. and the provisions of
the New Jersey Administrative Code, 8NJAC6.1 through 8:26-8.9 and the
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 167.02. Title; permits; fees; violations.
The above section shall be Chapter 167 and entitled, "PUBLIC
RECREATIONAL BATHING", containing the following subsections:
Chapter 168
BODY ART PROCEDURES
A. There is hereby adopted, in its entirety, the provisions of N.J.S.A.
26:1A-7 et seq. and the provisions of the New Jersey Administrative
Code, 8NJAC6.1 through 8:26-8.9 and the amendments and
supplements thereto.
B. Approval by the Department of Health. No person shall operate a public
bathing place within the Township of Pequannock unless a license(s) to
operate same shall have been issued by the Department of Health. Said
license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the facility. Said
license shall not be transferable and shall expire on December 31st
following the date of issuance.
C. Fees. The fee for said license or license approval issued pursuant to this
section shall be established as follows:
1. Public bathing beach: $400.
2. Public hot tub or spa: $50.
3. Public swimming pool: $75.
4. Public wading pool: $50.
D. Denial or Suspension of License. The Department of Health shall have
the right, in addition to other penalties herein provided under existing
State Statutes and Regulations and the provisions of this chapter, to
deny, revoke or suspend a license for noncompliance.
§ 166.14 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 168.02
001:446
§ 168.02. Licensing requirements. [Amended 7-23-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-11]
§ 168.03. General provisions and operating procedures. [Amended
7-23-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-11]
Body Art Establishments shall comply with the provisions of the New Jersey
Administrative Code, Title 8, Chapter 27.
Chapter 169
TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
§ 169.01. Definitions. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-05]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operating an establishment where body art is performed without first
obtaining a license from the Township of Pequannock Board of Health
to engage in such business in accordance with the provisions hereof.
B. An application for an initial license shall be accompanied by a fee in the
amount of $200 for tattooing and permanent cosmetics and $100 for
Body Piercing. Any change of ownership shall require a new application
and license with payment of fees therefor. All applicants shall submit
plans for the establishments to the Township of Pequannock Board of
Health prior to initiation or construction.
C. The renewal license fee for engaging in the business of operating a
body art establishment within the Township of Pequannock shall be
$100 per year for tattooing and permanent cosmetics and $50 per year
for Body Piercing. All licenses shall expire on the last day of each
calendar year.
D. Temporary Body Art Establishments are prohibited within the Township
of Pequannock.
E. Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferable, nor
shall they be construed as authorizing the licensee or licensees to carry
on the business at any place other than that specified in the license
itself.
F. License issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the
Township Board of Health for any good or sufficient reason, provided
that due notice thereof shall be given to the licensee, and a hearing held
before the Board of Health, at which time an opportunity shall be
afforded the licensee to show cause why the license should not be
revoked.
§ 168.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169.01
001:447
TAXICAB — Any automobile or motor car engaged in the business of
carrying passengers for hire, which is held out, announced or advertised
to operate on and over the public streets or highways of the Township,
including limousines, and particularly, accept and discharges persons who
may offer themselves for transportation from place to place within or
without the Township.
TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE — The permission granted by the Township
to a person to drive a taxicab on the streets of the Township.
TAXICAB LICENSE — Permission granted by the Township to the owner of
a taxicab to operate that vehicle, or cause it to be operated as a taxicab in
the Township.
§ 169.02. License required. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-05]
No person shall operate a taxicab or engage in the taxicab business within
the Township without first obtaining a license from the Township Clerk. The
license shall expire December 31 of the year in which it was issued, unless
sooner suspended or revoked by the Township Manager.
§ 169.03. Types of Licenses.
§ 169.03.01. Driver's license. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-05]
The holder of a taxicab driver's license shall be entitled to operate within
the Township any taxicab whose owner has been licensed under this
chapter.
§ 169.03.02. Owner's license. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-05]
The holder of a taxicab owner's license shall be entitled to operate a taxicab
owned by him within the Township, provided that the person driving the cab
holds a valid taxicab driver's license.
§ 169.04. Licensing of Taxicab Owners.
§ 169.04.01. Application information. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord.
No. 2001-05]
Applications for licenses shall be made by the owner, lessee or bailee of
the vehicle in writing to the Township Clerk in a sworn application. The
application shall state:
A. Full name, including middle initial, of the applicant.
B. The permanent home address of the applicant.
C. Social Security Number of the applicant.
§ 169.01 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 169.04.01
001:448
§ 169.04.02. License fee. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-05]
A separate license application shall be filed and a separate license fee shall
be paid for each vehicle. The annual license fee per vehicle shall be $40.
§ 169.04.03. Issuance of license; contents; display. [Amended
4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-05]
Taxicab owner's licenses shall be granted by the Township Council and a
license certificate shall be issued by the Clerk. The certificate shall contain:
§ 169.05. Taxicab Driver's License.
§ 169.05.01. Applications. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-05]
Applications for a taxicab driver's license shall be made to the Township
Clerk. The forms and information required shall be established by the
Township Clerk. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $15 for
the initial license period.
D. If owner, a description of all vehicles, including the VIN and New Jersey
Motor Vehicle Registration No. for each vehicle.
E. For a driver of any taxicab or limousine, the New Jersey Driver's
License number and date of expiration.
F. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the
nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
G. The location where any vehicle for which licensing is being sought
under the terms of this Ordinance is to be parked when not in
operation. The applicant shall provide a copy of the relevant zoning
permit or other verification of zoning compliance from the municipality
where the vehicle is stored.
H. The name of the liability insurance carrier, who shall give advance
notice of cancellation, and the policy number. A certificate of insurance
in such amounts as the Township Clerk may require shall be provided
with the completed application.
A. The name of the applicant.
B. The official state license plate number of the taxicab.
C. The applicant's place of business or taxi stand.
D. A statement that in case of any complaint the Chief of Police shall be
notified.
The certificate shall be affixed to a conspicuous part of the interior of the
taxicab and shall be open to the view of all passengers.
§ 169.04.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 169.05.02
001:449
§ 169.05.02. Issuance of license; contents. [Amended 4-24-2001 by
Ord. No. 2001-05]
Upon approval of the application, the Township Clerk shall immediately
issue the applicant a taxicab driver's license. The license shall contain
a licensee's name and address, physical description, signature and
photograph.
§ 169.05.03. Term of license; fees. [Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-05]
An initial license to drive a taxicab shall be valid for the remainder of
the calendar year in which it is issued. A taxicab driver's license may
be renewed annually, unless it has been revoked or suspended, upon the
payment of a fee of $20.
§ 169.06. Township Council to make rules and regulations.
[Amended 4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-05]
The Township Council shall, from time to time, make rules and regulations
for the operation of taxicabs.
§ 169.07. Revocation or suspension of licenses. [Amended
4-24-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-05]
The Township Manager may, after due notice and hearing, suspend or
revoke the license of any person who violates any provision of this chapter,
or who violates any of the rules or regulations adopted by the Township
Council pursuant to Section 169.06.
Chapter 173
(RESERVED)
Chapter 175
SECONDHAND PRECIOUS METALS, GEMS, AND JEWELRY
DEALERS
§ 175.01. Definitions. [Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-31]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEALER — Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity, whether
permanent or itinerant, who on one or more occasions (through any means)
buys or sells secondhand gold, silver, precious metals, gems or jewelry,
and includes anyone advertising the purchase or sale of any of the
aforementioned items.
§ 169.05.02 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 175.01
001:450
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business conducted intermittently within the
Township of Pequannock or at varying locations.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
PERMANENT-BASED BUSINESS — Any business conducted on a yearround
basis and housed in a single structure, such as a store or residence.
§ 175.02. Issuance of license. [Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-31; amended 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-9]
Each dealer conducting business within the jurisdiction of the Township of
Pequannock shall first register with the Chief of Police, who shall fingerprint
the applicant and institute such an investigation of the applicant's moral
character and business responsibility as he deems necessary for the
protection of the public welfare. In the event that the dealer is a business
entity other than a sole proprietorship, the officers in a corporation or the
partners in a partnership (or limited partnership) shall be deemed to be the
applicant(s) who shall be fingerprinted and investigated in accordance with
this section. Upon completion of the investigation, the Chief of Police shall
either issue or deny the license based upon the results of his investigation.
Upon the issuance of the license, the applicant shall be given a copy of
Chapter 175. Applicant shall submit a one-time fee of $30 in the form of
a cashier's check, certified check, or money order made payable to the
Division of State Police-S.B.I.
§ 175.03. License fees; nontransferability. [Added 11-25-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-31]
§ 175.04. Records to be maintained. [Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-31]
Each dealer shall maintain a complete record of each purchase and sale,
including the amount paid, description of the item and any identifying
numbers or engravings. The dealer shall also obtain a photocopy of the
driver's license number and a state of issuance for the person from whom
the items were purchased, received or sold as well as photocopy of the
jewelry. This information is to be documented on the "Secondhand Jewelry
Transaction Receipt" form supplied by the Pequannock Police Department.
These records shall be subject to the inspection of any authorized police
officer of the Township of Pequannock. The records required to be
maintained shall be kept confidential by the dealer and shall be released
only to appropriate law enforcement personnel.
A. Upon issuance of license, the fee shall be based as provided in Chapter
79.
B. A license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall not be
transferable and shall terminate on December 31st of the year in which
said license is issued.
§ 175.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175.05
001:451
§ 175.05. Description to be delivered to Chief of Police. [Added
11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-31; amended 5-26-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-9]
Each dealer doing business in the Township of Pequannock shall deliver
within three days to the Chief of Police the description of all items
purchased.
§ 175.06. Disposal within five days of purchase prohibited. [Added
11-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-31]
No dealer shall sell, melt or change the form of or dispose of any articles
purchased or received within five days of the date of said purchase, and all
such items shall be made available for at least five days to any authorized
police officer requesting such items.
§ 175.07. Restrictions on transactions. [Added 11-25-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-31]
Each dealer must require identification of the person with whom he is
transacting business, and no transaction may be made with any minor, as
herein defined, nor with any individual who is in an intoxicated state and/or
is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics or hallucinogenic or
habit-producing drugs.
§ 175.08. Revocation of license. [Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-31]
A. Licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Chief of Police after a hearing upon notice to the applicant for any of
the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of purchasing secondhand precious
metals, gems and jewelry.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conviction of any crime or disorderly persons offense involving
moral turpitude.
(5) Conducting the business of soliciting or canvassing in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace
or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public.
§ 175.05 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 175.09
001:452
§ 175.09. Violations and penalties. [Added 11-25-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-31]
Violations of this ordinance shall be subject to penalties provided for in
Chapter 178.
Chapter 177
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 177.01. Definitions.
§ 177.02. Authorization for the closing of any street.
§ 177.03. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are held to be invalid for any reason,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
A. Words and phrases. Whenever any words and phrases are used in this
chapter, the meanings respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of
Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply
to such words and phrases used herein.
B. Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this
chapter, they shall mean either eastern Standard Time or eastern
daylight Savings Time as may be in current use.
A. The Township Manager or, in the event of his absence, disability or
inability to act, then the Chief of Police of the municipality, is hereby
authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any street or
portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or days during
specified hours on any day or days whenever he finds that such closing
is necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare.
B. Any regulation promulgated by the Township Manager or Chief of
Police and in accordance with Section "A" above shall provide for the
posting of proper warning signs of such closing on any street or portion
thereof during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
C. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $55.
D. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
§ 175.09 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.04
001:453
§ 177.04. Tow-away.
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 177.05. Penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this Ordinance or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $55 or
imprisoned for a term not exceeding 15 days or Community Service for a
term not exceeding 15 days.
§ 177.06. Effect of ordinance.
If any parts of this Ordinance are for any reason held to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
Ordinance.18
§ 177.07. Repeal.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Pequannock are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed,
except that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or
punishment of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any
ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this ordinance.
§ 177.08. Parking.
Regulations not exclusive. The provisions of this chapter imposing a time
limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other or
more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles as set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138 or any other New Jersey
statute or as hereinafter provided.
§ 177.09. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary emergency no-parking
signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking
police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of said emergency no-parking signs when weather conditions,
accidents, fires or public celebrations dictate or require the avoidance
18.Note: This ordinance shall take effect after approval by the Commissioner of
Transportation 20 days after passage and publication as prescribed by law. Approved by
the Department of Transportation on December 14, 1989; revised May 1995; approved by
the Department of Transportation on October 26, 1995.
§ 177.04 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.09
001:454
§ 177.10. Temporary parking prohibition for snow plowing and
removal. [Amended 11-27-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-25]
§ 177.12. Off street parking prohibited in certain locations.
of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free flow of
traffic. Notification that the emergency no-parking signs are being or
will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle
which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
B. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
A. Prohibition on parking when roads are snow covered. No vehicles shall
be parked on any street, highway, or portion thereof within the
Township whenever snow or ice has fallen and the accumulation is such
that the Township determines that roads must be treated. This
prohibition shall remain in effect until the streets have been plowed to
the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
It shall be a violation of this chapter to park a vehicle in violation of this
section.
B. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and
any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
may result from such removal, before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
C. Signs shall be placed at appropriate locations indicating that parking is
prohibited throughout the Township when roads are snow or ice
covered.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46 the following are prohibited in any areas
which are open to the public and to which the public is invited:
1. Parking any motor vehicle within any area which is adjacent to any
building or structure.
2. Parking any motor vehicle in such a way as to impede ingress or
egress to any parking area.
3. Parking any motor vehicle in any area other than in a designated
parking area, outside of or straddling the lines in the parking area.
4. Parking any motor vehicle in any area parking or otherwise which
is open to the public after the building for which the parking is
provided has closed for the night. This provision is intended to be
operative between the hours of sunset and sunrise and is not
intended to include any motor vehicle which is lawfully parked on
the premises by license or permit of the Township.
§ 177.09 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.12
001:455
§ 177.13. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets. [Amended 12-14-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Sunset Road North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. when school
is in session
Roome Avenue to
South Sunset
Lane
Sunset Road South 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. when school
is in session
Washburn Road
to South Sunset
Lane
South Sunset
Lane
Both sides 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. when school
is in session
West Parkway to
Sunset Road
§ 177.14. Parking time limited on certain streets.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
5. Motor vehicle parking is prohibited on all fire company property
which has been posted with the following designated sign: No
Parking - Fire Emergency Only; Unauthorized Vehicles will be
Towed.
B. This section shall be enforced by the Township Police Department and a
complaint may be signed on information and belief.
C. Violations of this section may be punished by a fine not exceeding $500
or by imprisonment for a period of not exceeding 90 days, or both and
towing charges and impounding fees for impounding shall not exceed
$15 per day in addition to the penalty provided for elsewhere. Any
unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section shall
be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation
of traffic; any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle.
The owner shall pay the reasonable cost of the removal and storage
which may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
§ 177.12 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.14
001:456
Name of Street Sides Time Limit Location
Evans Place Both sides 1 Hour Entire length
Jackson Avenue Both sides 30 minutes From Newark
Pompton
Turnpike to the
Railroad tracks,
except where
parking is
prohibited
Manor Avenue Both sides 30 minutes Newark Pompton
Turnpike to 150
feet westerly
therefrom
Newark Pompton Both sides 1 hour Route 23 south to
the Wayne
Township line,
except Turnpike
where parking is
prohibited
Newark Pompton West 30 minutes From Manor
Avenue to Poplar
Avenue Turnpike
Sherman Avenue South 30 minutes From Newark
Pompton
Turnpike to 150
feet west
therefrom
§ 177.15. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain streets. [Amended 9-22-1998 by Ord. No. 98-20; 2-23-1999
by Ord. No. 99-02; 12-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-27; 11-26-2002 by
Ord. No. 2002-18; 2-25-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-01; 9-27-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-20; 12-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-30]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Alexander
Avenue
North All hours Between Route
23 and the
railroad tracks
Alexander
Avenue
South All hours From the railroad
tracks to a point
800 feet east of
the railroad track
§ 177.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.15
001:457
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Alexander
Avenue
North All hours Easterly curbline
of Newark
Pompton
Turnpike. to a
point 80 feet
Easterly
therefrom
Alexander
Avenue
South All hours Easterly curbline
of Newark
Pompton
Turnpike. to a
point 70 feet
easterly
therefrom
Boulevard Both sides All hours From the
prolongation of
the westerly
curbline of Route
23 southbound to
a point 125 feet
westerly thereof
Boulevard East All hours From a point 220
feet north of the
northerly
curbline of
Jacksonville Road
to a point 70 feet
south of the
southerly
curbline of
Jacksonville Road
Boulevard East 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 4:00
p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
From a point 70
feet south of the
southerly
curbline of
Jacksonville Road
to a point 200
feet south of said
curbline
§ 177.15 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.15
001:458
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Boulevard West All hours From a point 70
feet north of the
northerly
curbline of
Jacksonville Road
to a point 50 feet
south of the
southerly
curbline of
Jacksonville Road
Boulevard West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 4:00
p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
From a point 70
feet north to the
northerly
curbline of
Jacksonville Road
to a point 220
feet north of said
curbline.
Boulevard West 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and 4:00
p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
From a point 50
feet south of the
southerly
curbline of
Jacksonville Road
to a point 200
feet south of said
curbline.
Boulevard East All hours From the
northern curbline
of Sunset Road
east to a point
(Northern Leg)
185 feet north
thereof.
Boulevard West All hours From the
northern curbline
of Sunset Road
west to a point
(Northern Leg)
200 feet north
therefrom.
§ 177.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.15
001:459
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Boulevard East All hours From the
southern curbline
of Sunset Road
east to a point
(Southern Leg)
190 feet
southerly
therefrom.
Boulevard West All hours From the
southern curbline
of Sunset Road
west to a point
(Southern Leg)
170 feet
southerly
therefrom.
Carlson Place Both Sides All Hours From Route 23
easterly to the
existing gate of
the Equestrian
Center
Elizabeth Avenue Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. when school
is in session
From easterly
curbline of the
Boulevard
extending
easterly 300 feet.
Evans Place East All hours From the
northern curbline
of Jackson
Avenue,
extending
northward 165
feet
Jacksonville Road North All hours From a point 50
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of Terhune
Avenue to a point
40 feet east of
the curbline of
Fourth Street
§ 177.15 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.15
001:460
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Jacksonville Road South All hours From a point 50
feet west of the
westerly curbline
of Terhune
Avenue to a point
40 feet east of
the easterly
curbline of
Fourth Street
Jefferson Street South All hours From the Newark
Pompton
Turnpike to the
westerly side of
New Street
Lincoln Park
Road
Both sides All hours Beginning at the
intersection with
Newark Pompton
Turnpike South
to the Lincoln
Park Borough
line.
Meyer Place Both sides 2:30 p.m. - 3:30
p.m. when school
is in session
Entire length
Newark Pompton Both sides All hours From the
northerly
curbline of Park
Avenue north to a
point Turnpike
50 feet north of
the northerly
curbline of
Virginia Avenue
Newark Pompton West All hours From a point 230
feet south of
Jacksonville
Road. north to
Turnpike the
southerly line of
Della Avenue
§ 177.15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.15
001:461
Name of Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Newark-Pompton North All hours Between existing
railroad tracks
extending to the
north Turnpike
property line of
Lot 10 Block 331.
Newark-Pompton South All hours Between
southern curbline
of Edwards
Avenue to the
Turnpike
northern curbline
of Oak Street.
Sunset Road East All hours From the easterly
curbline of the
Boulevard to a
point 130 feet
easterly
therefrom. Both
Sides.
Sunset Road West - North All hours From the
westerly curbline
of the Boulevard
to a point 120
feet westerly
therefrom.
Sunset Road West - South All hours From the
westerly curbline
of the Boulevard
to a point 115
feet westerly
therefrom.
§ 177.16. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
[Amended 2-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-02; 2-27-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-2]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described.
Name of Street Sides Location
Atwood Avenue West Aqueduct Avenue to
Burt Avenue
Beech Street South 275 feet west of Newark
Pompton Tpk
§ 177.15 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.16
001:462
Name of Street Sides Location
Burt Avenue South From Leeland Avenue to
Atwood Avenue
Marvin Road East Side From the Alexander
Avenue intersection
extending northward to
a point 150 feet
therefrom
Sunset Road West - North From South Sunset La.
to West End Avenue
Newark Pompton
Turnpike
East Jackson Avenue to
Grove Street
Newark Pompton
Turnpike
East Sunset Road to Grove
Street
Newark Pompton
Turnpike
West Poplar Avenue to
Franklin Avenue
Oak Avenue South Newark Pompton
Turnpike to Lincoln
Park Road
Washington Street Both sides Newark Pompton
Turnpike to Washington
Park entrance
West Parkway West From a point 200 feet
north of the northerly
curbline of Sunset Road
to a point 435 feet south
of the southerly curbline
of Brooklawn Drive.
West Parkway East From the South Sunset
Lane intersection
extending northward to
a point 155 feet
therefrom
West Parkway East From a point 165 feet
south of Sunset Road
intersection to a point
165 feet north
therefrom
§ 177.17. Parking and traffic controls in semipublic places.
Where a written request has been received from the owners, all provisions
of Subtitle I of Title 39 of the New Jersey Revised Statutes, including but
not limited to all the traffic controls contained therein, are hereby made
applicable to the properties listed below and made part of this chapter. The
§ 177.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.17
001:463
letter of request and plot plans are on file in the office of the Township Clerk
and are hereby made part of this chapter.
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signs and markings
shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall subsequently maintain such signs and pavement markings in
good condition at no cost or expense to the Township. The owner shall be
responsible for the repair and restoration or replacement of same.
Location Approval Date
The Chatfield Glens 9-2-1992
The Plains Plaza Shopping Center 11-18-1993
The Glens at Pompton Plains 10-25-1995
§ 177.18. Routes for trucks over tons.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as Route for Vehicles Over four Tons. All trucks
having a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in
excess of four tons shall be excluded from all streets, except from those
streets listed which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles will
be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pickup and delivery of
materials.
Name of Street Location
Alexander Avenue Entire length
Boulevard Entire length
Jackson Avenue Entire length
Jacksonville Road Entire length
Lincoln Park Road Entire length
Newark Pompton Turnpike From Route 23 south to the Passaic
County line
Oak Avenue From Newark Pompton Turnpike to
Lincoln Park Road
§ 177.19. Through streets. [Amended 2-22-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-05; 11-27-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-22; 5-28-2002 by Ord. No.
2002-3]
Pursuant to provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of streets
described are hereby designated as through streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the through
street, except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
§ 177.17 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.19
001:464
Name of Street Location
Alexander Avenue Between Route 23 south and Newark Pompton
Turnpike
Ackerson Avenue Between Boulevard and Mandeville Avenue
Banta Avenue Between Boulevard and Newark Pompton
Turnpike
Caroline Avenue Between Boulevard and Newark Pompton
Turnpike
Della Avenue Between Boulevard and Newark Pompton
Turnpike
Duncan Avenue From Boulevard to West Parkway
Edward Avenue Between Boulevard and Newark Pompton
Turnpike
Garden Place Between Route 23 south and Elm Road
Greenwood Avenue Between Newark Pompton Turnpike and its
northerly terminus
Hopper Avenue a. Between Boulevard and
Newark Pompton
Turnpike,
b. Between Boulevard and
West End Avenue
Mandeville Avenue a. Between West Parkway
and Boulevard,
b. Between Boulevard and
Lincoln Park Road
Mountain Avenue a. From Newark Pompton
Turnpike to Boulevard,
b. From Boulevard to West
Parkway,
c. From West Parkway to
its westerly terminus
Pequannock Avenue Between Newark Pompton Turnpike and Route
23 south
Riverside Drive Newark Pompton Turnpike to its westerly
terminus
Sunset Road From Jacksonville Road to West Parkway (a yield
sign shall be installed on Munson Drive)
Sunset Road From Newark-Pompton Turnpike to the
Boulevard
§ 177.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.19
001:465
Name of Street Location
Sunset Road From Sunset Road - Munson Drive to Jacksonville
Road
Sunset Road From West Parkway to and including its
intersection with Van Allen Place
Munson Drive
Sunset Road From the Boulevard to West Parkway
South Sunset Lane
Sunset Road From Mountain Avenue to South Sunset Lane -
Sunset Road
West End Avenue The intersection of West End Avenue - Sunset
Road and Sunset Road is designated as a Stop-
Yield intersection. A Stop sign shall be installed
on the eastbound approach of Sunset Road at
West End Avenue - Sunset Road controlling left
turn movement from east on Sunset Road to
north on West End Avenue. A Yield sign shall be
installed on the eastbound approach of Sunset
Road at West End Avenue - Sunset Road
controlling right turn movement from east on
Sunset Road to south on Sunset Road
Village Road-Brookside
Avenue
From Jackson Avenue to the southerly
intersection of Village Road and Brookside
Avenue
Village Road/Romondt
Road
From the northerly intersection of Village Road-
Brookside Avenue to Brookside Avenue (The
intersection of Village Road-Romondt Road and
Village Road is designated as a yield intersection.
A yield sign shall be installed on the easterly
approach of Village Road facing westbound
traffic)
West Franklin Avenue Between Boulevard and Lincoln Park Road
West Parkway a. From Route 23 to
Mountain Avenue. The
intersection of West
Parkway and Mountain
Avenue is designated as
a multi-way stop
intersection; stop signs
shall be installed on all
approaches
b. From Mountain Avenue
to Jacksonville Road,
§ 177.19 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.19
001:466
Name of Street Location
c. From Jacksonville Road
to the Township of
Pequannock - Borough
of Lincoln Park
Corporate line
§ 177.20. Stop intersections. [Amended 4-28-1998 by Ord. No. 98-8]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Name of Street Stop Sign Location
Atwood Avenue and Burt Avenue
(Both intersections)
Burt Avenue
Beverly Road and Garrow Avenue Garrow Avenue
Beverly Road and Marlin Avenue Marlin Avenue
Birch Road and Davis Avenue Davis Avenue
Davis Avenue and Libby Avenue Libby Avenue
Davis Avenue and Whitebirch
Avenue
Whitebirch Avenue
East Franklin and Hilton Street Hilton Street
East Franklin and Richards Street Richards Street
Evelyn Place and Roome Avenue Roome Avenue
Evelyn Place and Sanders Place Evelyn Place
Frances Road/Henry Street and
Schuyler Avenue
Schuyler Avenue
Franklin Avenue and Centre Street Centre Street
Greenview Drive and Benjamin
Place
Benjamin Place
Greenview Drive and Reynolds Road
(Northerly intersection)
Reynolds Road
Jefferson Street and Adam Street Adam Street
Jefferson Street and New Street New Street
Jocelyn Place and Sanders Place Sanders Place
Kinney Place and Andrews Place Andrews Place
Ladd Street and Hickory Road Hickory Road
Nichols Road and Washburn Road Washburn Road
Oak Avenue and First Street First Street
§ 177.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.20
001:467
Name of Street Stop Sign Location
Oak Avenue and Second Street/
Stuhr Place
Second Street/Stuhr Place
Reynolds Road and Greenview Drive
(Southerly intersection)
Greenview Drive
Roome Avenue and Van Saun Place Van Saun Place
Slingerland Avenue and Frances
Road
Frances Road
Van Dyk Place and Wren Place Wren Place
Van Ness Avenue and Evelyn Place Evelyn Place
Van Ness Avenue and Jocelyn Place Jocelyn Place
Van Ness Avenue and Van Saun
Place
Van Saun Place
Washburn Road and Harmon Place Harmon Place
Washburn Road and Kinney Place Kinney Place
Winding Way and Greendale Avenue
(Northerly intersection)
Greendale Avenue
Winding Way and Greendale Avenue
(Southerly intersection)
Winding Way
§ 177.20.1. Multi-way stop intersections. [Added 2-22-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-05]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:-4-140, the intersections herein
described are designated multi-way stop intersections. Stop signs shall be
installed as provided herein.
Name of Intersection Stop Sign Location
West Parkway and Mountain Avenue All Approaches
§ 177.21. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Name of Street(s) Yield Sign Location
Greenview Drive and Baxter Place Baxter Place
Reynolds Road and Baxter Place Baxter Place
Reynolds Road and Benjamin Place Benjamin Place
§ 177.20 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.22
001:468
§ 177.22. Traffic control signals (for information only).
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersections of
those streets described.
§ 177.23. Speed limits.
Speed limits are hereby established upon the following streets or parts
thereof:
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Ackerson Avenue Zone
1
25 Duncan Avenue To Ann
Place
Ackerson Avenue Zone
2
30 Ann Place to Boulevard
Alexander Avenue (per
statute)
35 Newark Pompton
Turnpike to State
Highway Route 23
Greenwood Avenue 30 Newark Pompton
Turnpike to its northerly
terminus
Hopper Avenue 30 Newark Pompton
Turnpike to West End
Avenue
A. The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle I
of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, and shall conform to
the design and shall be maintained in operation as authorized by the
Department of Transportation of the State of New Jersey.
(1) Boulevard and Jacksonville Road - Approval date: 12-14-1989.
(2) Boulevard and Sunset Road - Approval date: 12-14-1989.
(3) Newark Pompton Turnpike and Alexander Avenue - Approval date:
12-14-1989.
(4) Newark Pompton Turnpike and Jackson Avenue - Approval date:
12-14-1989.
(5) Newark Pompton Turnpike and Jacksonville Road - Approval date:
12-14-1989.
(6) Newark Pompton Turnpike and Sunset Road - Approval date:
10-25-1989.
(7) West Parkway and Jacksonville Road - Approval date: 12-23-1993.
§ 177.22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.23
001:469
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Jefferson Street 30 Newark Pompton
Turnpike to Greenwood
Avenue
Madison Street 30 Greenwood Avenue to
Pequannock Avenue
Mandeville Avenue 30 Lincoln Park Road to
West Parkway
Mountain Avenue Zone
1
20 From the westerly
terminus thereof to 250
feet west of Meade
Place
Mountain Avenue Zone
2
25 250 west of Meade
Place to West End
Avenue
Mountain Avenue Zone
3
30 West End Avenue to
Newark Pompton
Turnpike
Pequannock Avenue 30 Newark Pompton
Turnpike to Route 23
Poplar Avenue 30 Newark Pompton
Turnpike to Boulevard
Roosevelt Avenue 30 Greenwood Avenue to
Pequannock Avenue
Sunset Road Zone 1 35 Jacksonville Road to a
point 200 feet east of
Forest Drive
Sunset Road Zone 2 30 200 feet east of Forest
Drive to South Sunset
Lane
§ 177.23 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.23
001:470
Name of Street
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
Sunset Road Zone 3 35 South Sunset La. to
Newark Pompton
Turnpike, except 25
MPH school speed limit
in the Pequannock High
School area in Zone 3,
when the presence of
children is clearly
visible from the
roadway or while
children are going to or
leaving school during
opening or closing
hours
West End Avenue Zone
1
30 Between Sunset Road
and Hopper Avenue
West End Avenue Zone
2
25 Between Hopper
Avenue and Mountain
Avenue
West Parkway Zone 1
per statute
35 From the Southerly
Township line to Sunset
Road with a 25 MPH
speed limit in the
Pequannock Township
High School zone
during recess or while
children are going to or
leaving school, during
the opening or closing
hours
West Parkway Zone 2
per statute
35 Sunset Road to Route
#23 Ramp L with a 25
MPH limit in the
Chancellor Academy
school area, when the
presence of children is
clearly visible from the
roadway or while
children are going to or
leaving school during
opening or closing
hours
West Franklin Avenue 30 Lincoln Park Road to
Boulevard
§ 177.23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.24
001:471
§ 177.24. Traffic controls for street and highway construction and
maintenance operations.
A. The Council hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic control
occur when traffic must be moved through or around road or street
construction, maintenance operations and utility work above or below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the
normal flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become
dangerous when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the
public health, safety, peace, and welfare, it is necessary to establish
controls and regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement
of traffic through construction and maintenance zones and to provide
safety for the work forces performing these operations. The Township
of Pequannock in the County of Morris, State of New Jersey, does
hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
1988 Edition, hereafter known as "M.U.T.C.D.", except as hereby
supplemented and amended, as it controls and regulates whenever
construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs the
normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor, or utility which fails to
comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D. while performing such work is
in violation of this section.
B. Preconstruction meeting. It shall be the responsibility of the person or
contractor, or in the case of a public utility wishing to conduct work on,
under or above the roadway, to contact the Traffic Bureau of the
Pequannock Township Police Department in order to arrange a
preconstruction meeting to submit plans for the safe movement of
traffic during such period of construction or work. Any person,
contractor, or utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the
start of such work or whose plans are not approved by the Traffic
Bureau of the Pequannock Township Police Department is in violation of
this section. Public utilities conducting routine maintenance work need
not comply with the preconstruction meeting requirement.
C. Emergency contact telephone numbers. The person, contractor or
utility shall provide the Traffic Bureau with at least two emergency
contact phone numbers to be called in case of emergency problems at
the construction or maintenance site prior to the start of any work. If,
for any reason, emergency contacts cannot be reached or if the
emergency contact person does not respond to a call from the Police
Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Township may
respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for
such emergency services by the Township shall be charged to the
person, contractor or utility responsible for such condition.
D. Heavily traveled roads. The Township of Pequannock Police Department
Traffic Bureau shall maintain a list of all roads determined to be heavily
traveled for the purpose of this chapter. Such determination shall be
made by the Police Department, Traffic Bureau, and shall be binding.
Said list may be amended from time to time as conditions warrant to
include roads which become heavily traveled due to temporary
§ 177.24 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.24
001:472
conditions or events. This list shall be available for inspection during
normal business hours, and a copy shall be provided upon request of
any party.
E. Time limits. There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or
utility work under, on or above any heavily traveled roadway in the
Township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. This time limit
may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. by
the officer in charge of the Traffic Bureau of the Pequannock Township
Police Department. If it is determined by the officer in charge of the
Traffic Bureau that the construction or maintenance operations prior to
9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. on any roadway would substantially delay
traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be
permitted only between 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
F. Road closings and detours. Road closings and/or traffic detours shall
not be permitted unless approved by the Pequannock Police Traffic
Bureau.
G. Traffic directors. Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or
maintenance sites when determined by the Pequannock Township
Police Traffic Bureau that same is necessary to provide for the safety
and expeditious movement of traffic. Traffic directors shall be qualified
personnel as determined by the Chief of Police.
H. Stop-work order. The Traffic Bureau of the Pequannock Township Police
Department shall have the authority to stop work, including the
removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within the street
right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations and/or other related work,
in order to abate any nuisance, traffic delay and/or safety hazard or for
any violation of this section.
I. Emergency repair work. In case of emergency repair work where
construction maintenance operations or emergency utility work must
be performed that will obstruct, interfere or detour traffic on any
roadway in the Township, the person, contractor or utility performing
such operation shall notify the Pequannock Police Department of such
emergency operation. The person, contractor or utility shall disclose
the nature of the emergency, location, and hours of operation. All
emergency construction and maintenance operations shall be
performed with full regard to safety and to keep traffic interference to
an absolute minimum. During such emergency repair work, the person,
contractor or utility shall comply with the provisions of the M.U.T.C.D.
while performing such emergency repair work.
J. Violations and penalties. Any person, contractor or utility who commits
a violation of this section shall, upon conviction thereof for a first
offense, pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500 and/or be
imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90 days; for a
second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250
and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding 90
§ 177.24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.24
001:473
§ 177.25. Parking of trucks weighing in excess of 10 tons
prohibited.
§ 177.25.01. Parking of vehicles in excess of 10 tons prohibited.
[Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-11; amended 4-22-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-11]
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or omnibus having
registered gross weights in excess of twenty thousand pounds (10 Tons)
upon any street at any time.
§ 177.25.02. Overnight parking of certain vehicles prohibited.
[Added 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-11; amended 11-27-2012 by
Ord. No. 2012-25]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park the following described vehicles
upon any Township or county street, located within the Township of
Pequannock between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any day.
days; and for a third or subsequent conviction pay a fine of not less than
$500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not exceeding
90 days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
A. Any commercial vehicle having a gross weight of 7,200 pounds or more
and/or a maximum length of 19 feet, including vans registered with
commercial plates, vans for commercial purposes, contracting
equipment, vehicles registered as livery vehicles, taxis or any other
business intended vehicle for transportation of passengers for a fee.
Township of Pequannock emergency vehicles are excluded.
B. All recreation vehicles having a gross weight of 5,200 pounds and/or a
maximum length of 15 feet, including, but not limited to, motor homes,
all-terrain vehicles, campers, boat trailers, utility trailers, landscaping
trailers or any other type of trailer requiring a New Jersey Motor
Vehicle Commission registration plate, whether such registration plates
are considered under Motor Vehicle Commission regulations to be
commercial or private plates.
C. Any vehicles having more than four wheels exclusive of a spare wheel
intended to be used as a spare tire.
D. Any attached trailer or unattached trailer regardless of the status of the
registration of the vehicle said trailer is attached to.
E. The provisions of this subsection are not intended to prohibit vehicles
parking on any Township or county street, located within the Township
of Pequannock between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. that are
registered as a private passenger vehicle but not limited and used for
personal transportation only, including vehicles commonly referred to
§ 177.24 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.25.02
001:474
§ 177.26. One-way streets. [Amended 2-24-2004 by Ord. No.
2004-02]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street
Permitted
Parking On
Direction of
Travel Location
Sunset Road North Side Westbound Between West
Parkway and
Sunset/West End
Avenue
§ 177.27. Turn prohibitions. [Amended 4-30-1999 by Ord. No. 99-5;
11-2-1999 by Ord. No. 99-22]
No person shall make a maneuver at any location listed and only in the
manner described.
Name of Intersection Prohibited Turn Prohibited Movement
Greendale Avenue and
First Fidelity Bank
entrance
Left Eastbound on Greendale
Avenue to bank
entrance
Hilton Street and
Newark-Pompton
Turnpike
Left Southbound on Hilton
Street to eastbound on
Newark-Pompton
Turnpike.
Jackson Avenue and
Sunoco Gas Station
Left Northbound from
driveway to westbound
on Jackson Avenue
as sport utility vehicles, family vans, rear open bed pickup trucks and
utility vans.
F. There shall be no prohibition in this subsection on the parking of any
vehicles for the purpose of installing, maintaining or performing public
utility services.
G. Whenever certain hours are named in this subsection, they shall mean
either eastern standard time or eastern daylight savings time, as may
be in current use by the Township.
H. The owner of any vehicle described herein who shall violate or fail to
comply with any provisions of this subsection, upon conviction thereof,
shall be assessed a fine of $55 for the first offense and $200 for each
subsequent offense.
§ 177.25.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.27
001:475
Name of Intersection Prohibited Turn Prohibited Movement
Oak Street and
Newark-Pompton
Turnpike
Left Eastbound on Oak
Street to northbound on
Newark-Pompton
Turnpike.
Pequannock Valley
Middle School
Driveways (north and
south)
Left from 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m. (when
school is in session)
Eastbound on the
Pequannock Township
Middle School Driveway
(north and south) to
Northbound on Newark-
Pompton Turnpike
Pequannock Valley
Library Driveway
Left from 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m. (when
school is in session)
Eastbound on the
Pequannock Township
Library Driveway (north
and south) to
Northbound on Newark-
Pompton Turnpike
§ 177.28. No turn on red.
§ 177.29. Loading zone.
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No Person
shall park a vehicle in said location during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
(Reserved)
§ 177.30. Bus stop. [Amended 4-24-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-13;
10-28-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-29]
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy said locations between the hours indicated.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 the following described locations are
designated as bus stops:
A. No Person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location
listed:
1. From Jacksonville Road eastbound to Boulevard southbound.
2. From Jacksonville Road westbound to Boulevard northbound.
A. County Road.
1. Pompton Turnpike, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
§ 177.27 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.30
001:476
a. New Read Street (near side). Beginning at the southerly
curbline of New Read Street and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom.
b. New Street (far side). Beginning at the northerly curbline of
New Street and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
c. Alexander Avenue (near side). Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Alexander Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom.
d. Meyer Place (near side). Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Meyer Place and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
e. Wilrue Parkway-Meyer Place (mid-block). Beginning 307 feet
from the southerly curbline of Wilrue Parkway and extending
135 feet southerly therefrom.
f. Grove Street (near side). Beginning at the southerly curbline of
Grove Street and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
g. Ramapo Road (near side). Beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Ramapo Road and extending 105 feet
southerly therefrom.
h. Fairview Avenue (near side). Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Fairview Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom.
i. Prospect Avenue (near side). Beginning at the southerly
curbline of Prospect Avenue and extending 105 feet southerly
therefrom.
j. Jackson Avenue. Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Jackson Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
2. Pompton Turnpike, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
a. Ramapo Road (far side). Beginning at the northerly curbline of
Ramapo Road and extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
b. Prospect Avenue (near side). Beginning at the northerly
curbline of Prospect Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
c. Wilrue Parkway-Meyer Place (mid-block). Beginning 211 feet
south of the southerly curbline of Wilrue Parkway and
extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
d. Meyer Place (far side). Beginning at the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Meyer Place and extending 100 feet
southerly therefrom.
§ 177.30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.30
001:477
§ 177.31. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
(Reserved)
§ 177.32. Mid-block crosswalks.
The following Mid-Block Crosswalks shall be established and maintained at
the following locations.
Name of Street Location
Newark Pompton Turnpike Beginning at a point 352 feet south
of the prolongation of the southerly
curbline of Wilrue Parkway and
extending 12 feet southerly
therefrom
§ 177.33. Handicapped parking.
Design and Location of spaces.
e. Alexander Avenue (far side). Beginning at the prolongation of
the southerly curbline of Alexander Avenue and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom.
f. New Street (near side). Beginning at the prolongation of the
northerly curbline of New Read Street and extending 105 feet
northerly therefrom.
g. New Read Street (far side). Beginning at the prolongation of
the southerly curbline of New Read Street and extending 100
feet southerly therefrom.
h. Marlin Avenue and Greenwood Road (mid-block). Beginning
205 feet north of the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Marlin Avenue and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
i. Jackson Avenue. Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Jackson Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
j. Polpar Avenue. Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Poplar Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
A. Handicapped parking spaces shall be not less than 12 feet wide and not
less than 20 feet long in parking yards and not less than 22 feet long on
streets.
§ 177.30 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 177.33
001:478
B. Handicapped parking spaces shall be so located so as to allow room for
individuals in wheelchairs or individuals on braces, canes, or crutches
to get in and out either side of an automobile.
1. Handicapped Parking on Street. In accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following on street locations are
designated as handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces are for use
by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.
Name of Street No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
2. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and Board of
Education Property. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:4-197, the following off street Municipal Parking Yards and
Board of Education Property are designed as Handicapped parking
areas. Such places are for use by persons who have been issued
special identification cards, plates or placards by the Division of
Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of
Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
3. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the Public. In
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following
off-street parking yards are designated as handicapped parking
areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have been issued
special identification cards, plates or placards by the Division of
Motor Vehicles or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police.
No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
4. Handicapped Parking on all Other Private Property. In accordance
with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 or 39:5A-1, the following
off-street parking yards are designated as handicapped parking
areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have been issued
special identification cards, plates or placards by the Division of
Motor Vehicles, or temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police.
No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 177.33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177.33
001:479
§ 177.34. Low speed vehicles. [Added 7-25-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-16]
Chapter 178
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
§ 178.01. General penalty.
5. The owners of the premises referred to in Subsections 177-33B, 3
and 4, shall provide and install signs and pavement markings for
each parking space reserved for use by handicapped persons,
which signing and markings shall be in accordance with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The cost of
procurement and installation of the signs and pavement markings
shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The owner
shall, subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or
expense to the Township. The owner shall be responsible for the
repair and restoration or replacement of same.
A. Definitions. Unless specifically provided, the following words and terms
shall be construed and defined as follows:
LOW SPEED VEHICLE — A motor vehicle, (1) that is four-wheeled; (2)
whose speed attainable in 1.6 km (1 mile) is more than 32 kilometers
per hour (20 miles per hour) and not more than 40 kilometers per hour
(25 miles per hour) on a paved level surface; and (3) whose GVWR is
less than 1,134 kilograms (2,500 pounds.)
B. Prohibition on the use of low speed vehicles on municipal streets and
roads. It shall be a violation of this Chapter to operate a low speed
vehicle upon any public road or highway under the jurisdiction of the
Township of Pequannock.
A. For a violation of a provision of the Code or any supplement or addition
thereto for which no specific penalty is provided, the offender shall be
subject to imprisonment in the county jail for any term not exceeding 90
days or by a fine not exceeding $1,000, or by a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days.
B. Any person who is convicted of violating an ordinance within one year
of the date of a previous violation of the same ordinance and who was
fined for the previous violation, shall be sentenced by the Court to an
additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the
Court upon a person for repeated offense shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of the
ordinance, but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for
the violation of the ordinance.
§ 177.33 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 178.01
001:480
Chapter 182
WATER
§ 182.01. General Provisions.
§ 182.01.010. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
APPROVED — Approved by the Public Works Director.
FIXED RATES — The rates or prices to be charged for the use of water
based upon the uses or utilities in use and not measured by a water meter.
MAIN — Any pipe, other than a supply pipe or service pipe, used for
conveying water or distributing it in the Township.
METER RATES — The rates or prices to be charged for the quantity of water
consumed, as measured by a water meter, or estimated where no water
meter is used.
OWNER — Any person actually owning any property or premises supplied
or prospectively to be supplied with the Township water or his duly
authorized agent. In the absence of instructions from the owner or his agent
to the contrary, the occupant of any property or premises will be held to be
the agent of the owner, in so far as his relation to the water department may
be concerned with respect to water uses.
PREMISES — A dwelling unit occupied by one family only, together with the
land connected therewith and such outbuildings as are used exclusively in
connection therewith, or a singular room or building occupied for business
or other purposes by one person, organization, association, firm or
corporation.
SERVICE PIPE — The pipe extending from the curb stop into privately
owned land for supplying the premises with water.
SUPPLY PIPE — A pipe tapped into the main and extended thence to and
including the curb stop or valve on the curbline of the street.
C. The Court before which any person is convicted of violating any
ordinance of the municipality shall have the power to impose any fine,
term of imprisonment, or period of community service no less than the
minimum and not exceeding the maximum.
D. Any person convicted of a violation of a municipal ordinance may, in the
discretion of the Court in which he was convicted, and in default of the
payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in the County jail
for a term not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community
service for a period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 178.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182.01.020
001:481
§ 182.01.020. Township control of mains, pipes, meters and other
equipment.
All water mains, service and supply pipes, water meters and corporation
and curb stops of the Water Department are under the exclusive control of
the Township and its authorized agents or representatives. No other person
shall disturb, tap, change, obstruct access to or interfere with them in any
way.
§ 182.01.030. Jurisdiction of water department; liability for
damages.
The Water Department's jurisdiction and responsibility ends at the curb
stop, and the Water department will, in no case, be liable for damages
caused by water running from open or faulty fixtures, or from broken or
damaged pipes beyond the Water Department's curb stop.
§ 182.01.040. Minimum depth of underground pipes and fixtures.
All water pipes and fixtures shall be placed at least four feet underground
to ensure against freezing.
§ 182.01.050. Application for water service; liability for costs due to
erroneous information.
Where water is desired, application shall be made to the water department
on a proper application signed by the owner of the premises on forms
furnished by the Water Department, which application shall specify the size
of service connection desired, the property to be served, the legal owner
thereof and the purpose for which the water is to be used. The information
supplied by the applicant on such application shall be considered as
authoritative and final. If any error in such information shall cause the
service connection to be installed of a wrong size or at a wrong location, the
cost of all changes required shall be borne by the applicant.
§ 182.01.060. Number of service connections per customer limited;
use for other properties prohibited.
No more than one service connection shall be installed for a customer,
except under special conditions. A service connection shall not be used to
supply adjoining property of a different owner or to supply property of the
same owner across a street or alley.
§ 182.01.070. Temporary service.
A temporary service connection will be installed at the expense of the
customer upon receipt of a deposit covering the estimated cost of such
connection. If the cost for making such connection is less than the amount
deposited, the difference will be refunded, and if more, the difference will
be billed.
§ 182.01.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 182.01.080
001:482
§ 182.01.080. Continuation of water contracts.
All agreements covering water supply shall continue in force from year
to year, unless notice in writing is given to either party to terminate the
contract.
§ 182.01.090. Use of water for unauthorized purposes; liability for
amount of water used.
§ 182.01.100. Curb stops; responsibility for pipes and fixtures
beyond curb stop.
§ 182.01.110. Tapping mains and running service lines to be done
by the department; liability for costs.
The tapping of a water main shall be done and the corporation stop and
couplings, the service lines from main to curb, curb stop and coupling and
curb box shall be furnished and placed by the Water Department or its agent
at the expense of the owner at a cost to be fixed by the Township.
§ 182.01.120. Street opening permit.
Application for permission to open a Township street for the purpose of
making a water connection shall be made in accordance with Chapter 160.
Application for permission to open a County or State street shall be made to
the appropriate agency.
§ 182.01.130. Charges for water service installation. [Amended
8-12-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-23; 5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-11]
The following charges shall be made for installation of water service:
A. No water may be used for any purpose or upon any premises not stated
or described in the application for water service.
B. The owner shall be liable for the amount of water used in conformity
with the schedule or rates of the Water Department.
A. Every service connection installed by the Water Department shall be
equipped with a curb stop near the curbline for the exclusive use of the
Water Department in controlling the water supply through the service
connection pipe. If the curb stop is damaged by the customer's use to an
extent requiring replacement, such replacement shall be at the
customer's expense.
B. All pipes or fixtures extending or lying beyond the curb stop shall be
installed and maintained by the owner of the property under the
supervision of the Plumbing Subcode Official.
A. Main to curb stop.
§ 182.01.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182.01.130
001:483
§ 182.01.140. Arrangements of pipes at meter.
The connections at a water meter shall be arranged so that the Water
Department will not be required to do any pipe fitting, but will merely have
to connect the meter by means of unions. Pipe connections shall be placed
so that the meter and unions can be installed by the Water Department.
§ 182.01.150. Access to meters and appliances.
The Water Department shall have the right of access to the owner's
premises at reasonable times for the purposes of reading meters or
inspecting appliances used in connection with the supply of water service,
or for the removal of its property at the time service is to be terminated. The
customer should not permit access to the water meter and other appliances
of the Water Department except by authorized employees of the Water
Department.
(1) Three by four inch service from main to curb stop: $650 per
installation, plus $25 per square yard for pavement restoration.
(2) One inch service from main to curb stop: $650 per installation, plus
$25 per square yard for pavement restoration.
(3) One and 1/2 inch, two, three, and four inch service from main to
curb stop: $650 per installation, plus $25 per square yard for
pavement restoration.
(4) Charges from main to curb stop shall be for the materials and
services furnished in accordance with 182.01.110.
B. Meter, yoke and turn-on.
(1) Three-fourth-inch meter, yoke and turn-on: $278.
(2) One-inch meter, connections and turn-on: $282.
(3) One-and-one-half-inch meter, flanges and turn-on: $520.
(4) Two-inch meter, flanges and turn-on: $618.
(5) Three-inch meter, flanges and turn-on: $1,032.
(6) Four-inch meter, flanges and turn-on: $1,175.
C. Additional charges. An additional charge may be made for the removal
or replacement of pavement or frozen ground. Applicants shall be
advised of such additional charge and the amount thereof before the
work of installation is begun. The restoration of lawns, driveways and
other appurtenances shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
§ 182.01.130 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 182.01.160
001:484
§ 182.01.160. Notification of defective service.
In case of defective water service, customers should not interfere with
the apparatus belonging to the Water Department, but should immediately
notify the proper officers to have the defect remedied.
§ 182.01.170. Excessive or unnecessary use of water.
Excessive or unnecessary use or waste of water, whether caused by
carelessness or by defective or leaky plumbing or fixtures, is prohibited,
even where the service is metered. When this rule has been violated, the
Water Department may turn off the water at any time.
§ 182.01.180. Turning on of water after discontinuance.
When the water has been turned off by the Water Department for any
reason, no person shall turn it on again without permission of the Water
Department. When this section is violated, the water may be turned off at
the curb stop, in which case the owner shall, before it is again turned on,
pay in advance the charge of the Water Department therefor.
§ 182.01.190. Grounds for discontinuance of service; renewal of
service.
§ 182.01.200. Provisions deemed part of contracts; acceptance of
conditions required.
A. Water service may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:
(1) For the use of water for any other property or purpose than that
described in the application for service.
(2) For the willful waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes,
fixtures or otherwise.
(3) For failure to maintain, in good order, connections, service lines or
fixtures owned by the applicant.
(4) For molesting any service pipe, meter, curb stop or seal or any
other appliance of the Water Department.
(5) In case of vacancy of premises.
(6) For nonpayment for water service or any other charges accruing
under the application.
(7) For refusal of reasonable access to property for purpose of
inspecting or for reading, caring for or removing meters.
B. Service will be renewed under a proper application when the conditions
under which such service was discontinued are corrected, and upon the
payment of all proper charges provided in the schedule of rates and
charges of the Water Department, due from the applicant.
§ 182.01.160 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182.01.200
001:485
§ 182.01.210. Disconnection of water prohibited.
No owner connected to the water system shall disconnect from said system.
§ 182.02. Water Charges.
§ 182.02.010. Beginning and ending of water charges.
Water charges begin when the meter is installed and continue until written
notice has been given of the change of ownership. When such change of
ownership takes place, the new owner must sign a new application.
§ 182.02.020. Rates generally. [Amended 3-24-1998 by Ord. No.
98-06; 4-27-1999 by Ord. No. 99-7; 2-22-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-02;
3-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-05; 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-18;
11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-25; 3-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-09]
The following rates are hereby established for consumption of water from
Township water mains:
A. The provisions of this section and any other ordinances, rules,
regulations and water rates adopted by the Township Council shall be
considered a part of the contract with each person supplied with water
through the water system of the Township, any such person taking
water shall be considered to express his assent thereto and be bound
thereby. All permits for the use of water shall be granted upon the
express condition that if for any cause the supply of water should fail,
be restricted, regulated or discontinued, the Township shall not be held
responsible for any damages which shall be claimed of the Township for
any such causes.
B. All applications for service connection of water shall be required to
accept such conditions of pressure and service as are provided by the
distributing system at the location of the proposed service connection
and to hold the Water Department harmless for any damages arising
out of low pressure or high pressure conditions or interruption of
service.
A. Consumption Rates per Thousand Gallons.
Year
First 30,000 Gallons
per Quarter
Over 30,000 Gallons
per Quarter
2011 $3.50 $4.20
2012 $4 $4.80
B. Account Service Charge. In addition to the Consumption Billing, each
water customer shall be billed a quarterly meter charge as follows: $5.
C. Charges for Multi-Unit Buildings Supplied through a Single Meter.
Multi-unit Buildings serviced by a single meter will be subject to the
§ 182.01.200 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 182.02.020
001:486
§ 182.02.030. Rates for contractors using water.
same rates established in Section A. The threshold for charging the
higher tiered rate shall be calculated by multiplying the number of
individual units through the meter by 30,000 gallons. The higher tiered
rate shall be charged for consumption in excess of the calculated
amount.
Water accounts that service multi-unit buildings through a single meter
will be charged an Account Service Charge calculated to be the number
of units served through the meter multiplied by the Account Service
Charge established in Section B.
D. New Connection. All new water connections shall be charged a
connection fee of $1,246 per dwelling unit. For each successive year the
connection fee shall be recalculated as follows. All prior costs for
principal and interest on debt plus direct capital expenditures as of
December 31, of the previous year divided by the total single-family
dwelling units plus the total equivalent single-family dwelling units for
commercial, apartment, condominium and not-for profit users as of
December 31. This shall be calculated annually by the Chief Financial
Officer of the Township no later than March 31 of the succeeding year.
In addition, any off site capital expenses not required by existing users
but necessary for the supply of water service to the new users shall be
added to the connection fee identified above. The capacity/connection
fee will be levied and collected at the time the building permit is issued.
E. Bulk Water/Wholesale Water Rate to other Municipal Utilities. The
following rate schedule is hereby established for the bulk sale of water
to other municipally owned water utilities and bulk commercial
customers who consume in excess of 3,000,000 gallons per month. Bulk
water delivered under this paragraph shall be billed monthly. The rate
is per thousand gallons.
Year
First 5,000,000
Gallons Per Month
Over 5,000,000
Gallons Per Month
2009 $3.70 $3.80
2010 $4 $4.40
2011 $4.40 $4.80
A. All contractors using water for building and construction repair work
shall apply for a temporary construction connection. The contractor will
be furnished a meter by the Water Department which shall be attached
to a service pipe or fire hydrant and rates shall be charged to conform
to the meter rates established by 182.02.020, but the minimum charge
in all cases shall be as follows:
§ 182.02.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182.02.030
001:487
§ 182.02.040. Special rates. [Amended 7-28-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-18; 10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-24]
§ 182.02.050. Designation of yearly and quarterly periods.
For the purpose of making and collecting charges for Township water used
by the consumer, the calendar year shall be subdivided and designated as
follows: The year period shall begin on January 1 and end on December 31;
the quarterly periods shall begin on the first day of January, April, July and
October, respectively, and shall extend to the beginning of the succeeding
quarterly period.
§ 182.02.060. Schedule for reading of meters.
Under ordinary conditions, continuous service water meters shall be read
on or about the first day of the beginning of a new quarter. Water meters
installed for miscellaneous service may be read at the discretion of the
Water Department.
Use Minimum Charge
Private house $12
Factory $75
Hotel $40
School $75
Tavern $40
Garage $12
Store $12
B. A $100 deposit for the temporary meter and appurtenant connections
shall be paid by the contractor and shall be refunded after removal of
the temporary connection.
C. There shall be a charge of $15 for the turning on and off of water on any
premises.
A. Swimming pools may be filled from fire hydrants upon application to the
Water Department by the owner. Hoses and a meter will be supplied by
the Water Department and fire hydrants shall only be operated by Water
Department personnel. A fee of $80 shall be charged.
B. The Township Council may, by resolution, set the charge for all other
water rates of a special nature.
C. No charge will be issued for Municipally owned Recreation Facilities.
Water used by Municipally owned recreation Facilities connected to the
water system through a metered connection shall be recorded, but not
billed.
§ 182.02.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 182.02.070
001:488
§ 182.02.070. Establishment of districts for reading of meters.
The Township Council may, by resolution, establish meter reading districts
or changes in the yearly and quarterly periods to provide for the progressive
reading, billing and collecting of water charges.
§ 182.02.080. Designation of premises for delivery of bills; failure
to receive bills.
Unless the applicant for water service specifies otherwise, the bills will be
mailed or delivered to the premises where water service if furnished. If the
applicant so desires, the Water Department will mail or deliver the bills
to the business or home address of the applicant or his agent. Failure to
receive bills or notices is no excuse for nonpayment of water bills.
§ 182.02.090. Due-date for payment of charges; charges to become
lien; late payment penalty; discontinuance of service. [Amended
10-27-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-24]
§ 182.02.100. Charges to be for all water registered by meter.
Where water is supplied at meter rates, all the water registered by the
meter will be charged for and no deduction will be made for leaks.
§ 182.02.110. Disputes as to water charges and bills. [Added
8-22-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-17]
A. Charges for water supplied at meter rates for any quarterly period or
fractional part thereof will be dated on the last day of such period or on
the day when the water is turned off and are due and payable on the day
when dated.
B. All charges for water are a lien upon the premises or property on
account of which the charge is incurred until paid and satisfied. Such
charges shall be paid within 30 days after the date of bill.
C. If not so paid, interest from the expiration of such period of 30 days, at
the rate of 8%, will be added and collected with such charge, and the
water may be turned off from such premises if not paid.
A. The Water Department shall not discontinue water service for
nonpayment of bills in cases where a charge is in dispute, provided the
undisputed charges and bills are paid in an amount at least equal to the
average of the last four previous quarters of billed charges and a formal
request is made to the Water Department for an investigation of
disputed charge. Once a formal dispute is filed, and the average
payment is made, all collection activity on the disputed charge shall
cease until such time as the dispute is resolved. When a dispute as to a
charge is resolved, the Water Department shall provide seven days'
written notice by certified mail before water service is discontinued for
nonpayment of charges and/or bills. Any charge for water service that is
§ 182.02.070 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182.02.110
001:489
§ 182.03. Water Meters.
§ 182.03.010. Meters to be furnished and installed by Township.
The Water Department shall furnish and install for each customer supplied
with water a suitable water meter and such appurtenances as are
customarily furnished in order to connect the customer's equipment.
§ 182.03.020. Maintenance, liability for damage.
Water meters shall be maintained by the Water Department so far as
ordinary wear and tear are concerned, but damages due to freezing or
external causes shall be paid for by the customer.
not disputed within a nine-month period after being billed shall not be
subject to dispute and shall be considered accurate and valid.
B. A dispute to a charge for water provided is perfected when a customer
files with the Water Department a completed dispute form, which shall
be provided by the Water Department upon request. Once a completed
dispute form is filed, the Water Department shall retain a copy of the
form and transmit the original to the Township Chief Financial Officer,
and the Water Department shall cease all collections regarding the
disputed charge pending resolution of dispute.
C. Within 20 days of a dispute being filed regarding a charge for water,
and upon five days' notice to the customer filing a dispute, the Township
Chief Financial Officer shall hold a hearing as to the disputed charge. At
the hearing the customer may present evidence as to why they disputed
the charge is erroneous and/or inaccurate, however, metered charges
are presumed accurate unless evidence is presented that more likely
than not demonstrates the meter generating the charges to be
dysfunctional or inaccurate in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 182, Section 3, Subsection 60.
D. If upon hearing the Township Chief Financial Officer finds that it is
more likely than not that the disputed charge was erroneous or
inaccurate, not as the result of tampering, the Township Chief Financial
Officer shall be empowered to amend the charge as necessary to
accomplish a fair and reasonable outcome as provided by Chapter 182,
Section 3, Subsection 70. However, if upon hearing the Township Chief
Financial Officer does not find that is it more likely than not that the
disputed charge was erroneous or inaccurate, the customer shall be so
advised and required to satisfy any outstanding unpaid charge for
continued water service.
E. Any unpaid charge for water that is either undisputed or found to be
accurate shall be deemed a municipal lien on the property incurring the
debt and shall run with the land in accordance with law.
§ 182.02.110 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 182.03.030
001:490
§ 182.03.030. Charge for reinstallation.
The charge for the reinstallation or changing of a water meter, when
removed because damaged in any way, due to negligence of the customer,
shall be in accordance with the existing rates as adopted by the Township
Council.
§ 182.03.040. Location.
Water meters shall be conveniently located at a point approved by the Water
Department so as to control the entire supply. A proper place and protection
for the meter shall be provided by the applicant. All meters placed in
buildings shall be located in the cellar or first floor, as near as possible to
the point of entrance of the service, in a clean, dry, safe place, not subject
to great variation in temperature, located so as to be easily accessible for
installation or disconnection and for reading, and of a type suitable for the
purpose and location.
§ 182.03.050. Stop or gate valve and waste stop required.
A stop or gate valve shall be placed on the service line on the street side of
the water meter and a stop and waste stop on the other side of the water
meter.
§ 182.03.060. Testing of meter for accuracy; fee; procedure upon
determination of faulty meter. [Amended 8-22-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-17]
The Water Department shall test the accuracy of water meter on any
premises within 10 days upon written request of any customer. Any person
requesting such a test shall pay $30 in advance to cover the cost of the
test, however, such costs shall be refunded if the meter shall be found to be
inaccurate not as a result of tampering. If a meter is found to be inaccurate
in accordance with Chapter 182, Section 3, Subsection 80 but no dispute
has been filed, the bill for water charges of the current quarter shall be
adjusted by the Water Department in such a manner as will be fair pursuant
to Chapter 182, Section 3, Subsection 70, unless there is evidence that the
meter has been tampered with.
§ 182.03.070. Determination of quantity of water consumed.
Where water is furnished by a water meter, the quantity recorded by it shall
be taken to be the amount passing the meter, except where the meter has
been found to be registering inaccurately or has ceased to register. In such
cases, the quantity may be determined by the average registration of the
meter when in order, or by such fair and reasonable method as shall be
based upon the best information obtainable.
§ 182.03.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182.03.080
001:491
§ 182.03.080. Meter testing equipment. [Added 8-22-2006 by Ord.
No. 2006-17]
The Water Department shall maintain suitable and adequate facilities for
testing water meters. No equipment shall be used in testing water meters
unless it has been examined, calibrated and sealed by the New Jersey Office
of Weights and Measures at least once every five years and evidence of
such examination, calibration and sealing shall be fixed to the equipment. A
water meter shall be considered correct if, flowing water at both immediate
and full flow capacities, as set forth in the American Water Works
Association M-6 Manual, it shows an error not greater than 1 1/2%. A report
of the results of a test on any meter shall be transmitted to the customer,
the Water Department, and the Township Chief Financial Officer and shall
be certified by the individual conducting such a test. Any meter found to be
inaccurate not as the result of tampering shall be replaced without charge
to the customer.
§ 182.04. Water Shortage Emergencies.
§ 182.04.010. Proclamation of shortage; restrictions.
Whenever the Mayor or a majority of the members of the Township Council
determines that a water shortage emergency exists, the Mayor or the
Township Manager may, for protection of health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens and residents of the Township, proclaim the existence of such
water shortage emergency and prescribe regulations to:
A. Prohibit filling of swimming pools with water obtained from sources
other than privately owned wells.
B. Prohibit washing of automobiles by individuals with water other than
privately owned wells.
C. Prohibit watering of lawns with water other than from privately owned
wells.
D. Prohibit washing of streets, driveways or sidewalks.
E. Prohibit serving of water in public and private restaurants, clubs or
eating places, unless specifically requested by the individual.
F. Prohibit the use of water from the Township supply for any purpose not
necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
G. Allocate and prorate the available water supplies.
H. Reduce consumption by users.
I. Prevent waste for the period of such emergency.
§ 182.03.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 182.04.020
001:492
§ 182.04.020. Effect of proclamation.
The proclamation of an emergency pursuant to 182.04.010 shall be
conclusive of the fact of the existence of such emergency, and shall be
binding upon all persons and users upon the filing of the same in the office
of the Township Clerk and the publication thereof at least once in the
official newspaper circulating in the Township. The regulations set forth
in the proclamation and any subsequent regulations made and published
as aforesaid, upon filing thereof in the office of the Township Clerk, shall
be deemed to have the force and effect of regulations adopted under the
authority of this section, the same as if specifically incorporated and set
forth herein. Every owner, lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or
premises connected with the Township water supply and every user thereof
under any contract, ordinance or statute shall, upon the proclamation and
promulgation of the regulations as aforesaid, become bound thereby and
by the provisions of this section, and shall conform thereto and comply
therewith in the use of water and the maintenance of the water service
connections and equipment for the purposes thereof.
§ 182.04.030. Notice to Township departments to conserve water.
Upon the making of a proclamation of emergency under this section, the
Township Manager shall forthwith give written notice to the appropriate
departments of the Township to refrain from all street and gutter flushing,
hydrant flushing, fire hose testing and other similar practices, except as
such practices are deemed necessary in the interest of public health or
safety, until such emergency is declared no longer to exist.
§ 182.04.040. Duty of owners, occupants and other users to prevent
waste.
A. Every owner of any building and premises connected with the Township
water supply shall:
(1) Maintain or cause to be maintained the water service pipes,
fixtures and connections in good order and repair, in order to
ensure that there shall be no waste of water.
(2) Forthwith make, or cause to be made, necessary repairs to prevent
the waste of water.
B. Every lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises
connected with the Township water supply shall:
(1) Immediately notify the owner or his agent of any defective water
service pipes, fixtures or connections, whereby water is being
wasted.
(2) Immediately notify the Township Water Department or Police
Department of any waste occurring by reason of defective water
service pipes, fixtures or connections.
§ 182.04.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182.04.040
001:493
§ 182.05. Construction Standards for Water Utility Distribution
System.
§ 182.05.010. Applicability; jurisdiction and supervision; conformity
required.
§ 182.05.020. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Township of Pequannock Board of Health and
the Township Health Department.
COUNCIL — The Township Council of the Township of Pequannock.
DEVELOPER — Any contractor, person, firm, association or corporation
designing or required to extend, construct or relocate an addition to the
water distribution system or connect thereto.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Works appointed by the Township
Manager, who may also be the Engineer.
ENGINEER — The licensed engineer appointed by the Township Manager,
who may also be the licensed operator for the water utility's distribution
system.
INSPECTOR — The duly designated person assigned by the Director to
inspect construction and testing.
C. Every owner and user of water shall, during the period of a water
emergency, be chargeable with notice of any waste of water due to
defective water service pipes, fixtures or connections, and of the
regulations promulgated under the proclamation. It shall be the duty of
the owner to forthwith make or cause to be made repairs necessary to
prevent such waste.
A. The standards outlined herein are applicable to developers, builders,
contractors and any other persons receiving approval to expand,
construct or relocate the Township Water Department's water
distribution facilities. Standards for the development of additional
water supplies and any necessary construction of water storage
facilities will be issued at the time of application therefor.
B. Any work relating to the extension, construction, relocation of the
Township water utility shall be under the jurisdiction and supervision of
the Township Water Department.
C. In addition to the standards outlined herein, all plans and construction
work shall be in conformance with the New Jersey Administrative Code
for Public Community Water Systems: Distribution and Storage, N.J.A.C.
17:10-11.7 to 7:10-12.36.
§ 182.04.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 182.05.020
001:494
OWNER — Any person, persons, firm, corporation or association actually
owning any property or premises or his or their duly authorized agent which
is or can be supplied with water service.
PLANNING BOARD — The Township of Pequannock Planning Board.
PLANS — The documents produced by the developer for extension,
construction or relocation of water distribution facilities. "Plans" shall be
signed and sealed by an engineer licensed in the State of New Jersey and
completed and approved prior to construction.
SERVICE AREA — The area serviced by new, extended or relocated water
supply facilities.
STANDARD DETAILS — The details provided by the Water Department
referred to as standard in this section.
STREET — Any and all street, avenues, highways, roads and right-of-way
owned by the Township or other governmental agencies.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Pequannock, whose principal offices are
located at 530 Turnpike, Pompton Plains, New Jersey.
WATER DEPARTMENT — The division of the Pequannock Township
Department of Public Works responsible for construction, engineering and
maintenance of the Township water utility.
§ 182.05.030. Preconstruction requirements.
A. Design data. The following are design data requirements:
(1) A determination of water demands in the areas to be serviced.
(2) Fire-protection requirements.
(3) A determination of the elevation differences throughout the service
area and the static head conditions. Assess the various options
available for pumping (or gravity flow) and fire protection and any
storage requirements in relation to head conditions.
(4) A determination of pipe size for new service requirements.
B. Submissions. In addition to the requirements of the Planning and
Zoning Boards, three sets of plans shall be submitted to the Water
Department. Plans shall include a minimum one-inch-equals-fifty-feetscale
plan drawing showing locations, profiles, details and material
lists, including diameters, depths, makes and model numbers.
C. Site conditions. Prior to submission, the various site conditions shall be
considered in the design plan: soil type, including bearing strength and
corrosivity, location of all underground utilities, pipe bedding
requirements and traffic control during construction.
D. Approvals. When the extension, construction or relocation of the water
utility distribution system is proposed in connection with a major
subdivision application, the Planning Board or Zoning Board may not
§ 182.05.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182.05.030
001:495
§ 182.05.040. Standards for distribution system.
grant final subdivision approval until the plans are approved by the
Engineer and by the Water Department. When the extension,
construction, or relocation of the water utility distribution system is
proposed in connection with a site plan application the construction
Official may not grant a certificate of occupancy until the system is
accepted by the Water Department.
E. As-built drawings. After acceptance by the Water Department, and
within 90 days thereafter, the Developer shall submit an as-built plan,
profile and details of the installed water system including all
information shown on the approved plans. Also, ties shall be made and
shown on the plans for every valve and curb service box. One Mylar and
three prints shall be submitted to the Engineer for approval. As-built
drawings shall be certified by a professional engineer licensed in the
State of New Jersey.
A. Pipe material.
(1) All water supply lines installed in Township rights-of-way having a
diameter of four inches or larger shall be ductile iron pipe (D.I.P.)
Class 52. Ductile iron pipe shall be centrifugally cast in metal or
sand-lined molds with mechanical joints or push-on joints and shall
be certified to be in full conformance with AWWA Specification
C151-76 or latest revision thereof.
(2) Each piece of pipe and fitting shall be plainly marked at the factory
with class number and letter and weight. All pipe and fittings shall
be tar-coated in accordance with AWWA standards.
(3) All ductile iron pipe shall be cement-lined and factory-seal-coated
in accordance with AWWA C104- 74 or latest revision thereof.
B. Pipe installation.
(1) All pipe shall be laid in conformance with AWWA C600, Installation
of Gray and Ductile Cast Iron Mains and Appurtenances.
(2) All water pipes and fixtures shall be placed at least four feet
underground as measured from the top of the pipe or fitting.
(3) Whenever practicable, water supply lines shall be laid in a loop
system and dead ends minimized.
(4) Minimum pipe size for water supply lines in Township right-of-way
shall be eight inches, or as directed by the Engineer.
C. Thrust restraint.
(1) Maximum joint deflections shall not exceed those listed in AWWA
Standard C600-77, Tables 5 and 7 for push-on joints and
mechanical joints respectively.
§ 182.05.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 182.05.040
001:496
(2) Trench bottoms shall be uniform and continuous as possible. Holes
shall be provided for the pipe couplings so that the couplings are
not supporting the pipe in the trench.
(3) Concrete thrust blocks shall be placed for reaction backing at all
fittings used for changes of direction, at reducers, at dead ends, at
valves and at each pipe joint on curves. Rodded anchorage shall be
installed at all upward thrusts and where required by the Water
Department.
(4) All thrusts restraints shall be designed to withstand pipe line test
pressure of 150 pounds per square inch. Thrust block area shall be
dependent upon pipe diameter, bearing capacity of the soil and
type of fitting or bend.
(5) Thrust blocks shall be installed in accordance with the standard
details and shall be shown on the plans. No concrete shall be
placed over fitting bells or couplings.
(6) The following table may be used to estimate the safe bearing
capacity of soils. A schedule of minimum thrust block dimensions is
included with the standard details.
Safe Bearing Load of Soils
Soil Pounds Per Square Foot
Muck, peat and similar 0
Soft clay 1,000
Sand 2,000
Sand and gravel 3,000
Sand and gravel cemented with
clay
4,000
Hard shale 10,000
D. Fittings.
(1) Fittings include all bends, tees, tie rods, clamps, reducers, plugs,
sleeves and specials required for the water main construction.
(2) All fittings shall be mechanical joints and shall meet AWWA
standards for a maximum working pressure of 250 pounds per
square inch. Fittings shall be new ductile iron or gray cast-iron
material and shall be cement-lined and tar-coated in accordance
with AWWA C104-74. Fitting joints shall conform to AWWA
C110-77 or latest revision thereof. Compact fitting shall be
considered for approval by the Engineer and shall be in
conformance with all applicable terms and provisions of AWWA
C152 and C111.
§ 182.05.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182.05.040
001:497
(3) All horizontal and vertical bends greater than 5° shall be properly
harnessed with concrete thrust blocks as shown on the detailed
drawings and/or steel tie rods as approved by the Water
Department prior to installation. Tie rods, when required, shall be
3/4 inch galvanized steel rod with malleable iron couplings and
coated with a heavy coat of bitumastic paint immediately after
assembly. A tie rod schedule is included with the standard detail.
(4) Mechanical joint pipe sleeves shall be as manufactured by Dresser
Manufacturing Division of Dresser Industries of Bradford,
Pennsylvania, Style 38 with a minimum working pressure of 200
pounds per square inch. All couplings shall be factory-printed and
coated twice with Kopper's No. 50 bitumastic paint.
E. Gate valves and boxes.
(1) Location.
(a) For sectionalizing areas of water main service, a minimum of
two gate valves shall be placed at every intersection of
pipelines.
(b) All water main taps shall include a gate valve.
(c) A gate valve shall be placed at the end of all dead end lines
upstream from the plug end.
(d) Additional gate valves shall be installed at every fire hydrant
and as directed by the Water Department.
(2) Type:
(a) All gates valves shall comply with AWWA Standard C500-71 or
latest revision thereof in every respect.
(b) All gate valves shall have mechanical joint ends. Bell
dimensions shall conform to AWWA C111.
(c) All gate valves shall be as manufactured by the Mueller
Company No. A2380-20, AWWA type or approval equal.
(3) Gate valves shall conform to AWWA Standard No. C500-71 or latest
revision thereof. Supplementary requirements to this standard are
listed below.
Gate Valves: 6-inch through 12-inch AWWA Standard No. C500-71
Sec. 1-Scope.
This specification covers water valves in sizes 6-inch, 8-inch,
10-inch and 12-inch. Valves are to be as manufactured by the
Mueller Company No. A2380-20, AWWA type, nonrising stem,
having mechanical joints. Valves shall be open by turning counterclockwise.
§ 182.05.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 182.05.040
001:498
Sec. 7-Bodies and Bonnets.
Gate valves shall be high strength cast-iron bodies and bonnets in
accordance with ASTM A126.
Sec. 9.3-Valve Ends.
Valve ends shall be mechanical joints.
Sec. 10-Gates and Rings.
Gate rings shall be rolled or pressed into grooves machined in the
discs. Valve gates shall be Grade 1 bronze. Gate rings shall be
Grade V bronze.
Sec. 12-Wedging Devices.
The gate shall be wedged against the seat at 4 separate points
near the outside edge of the gates.
Sec. 15-Stems and Stem Nuts.
The threads of stems and stem nuts shall be Acme. Threads shall
be self-cleaning.
Sec. 16-17-Stem Seal, Packing.
All gate valves shall have O-ring seals. 1 O-ring shall be located
below the thrust collar of the stem and another located above the
thrust collar. The space between the O-rings and around the thrust
collar shall be filled with a lubricant to provide the lubricating the
thrust collar and O-rings each time the valve is operated.
F. Dry barrel fire hydrants.
(1) Location. Fire hydrants shall be located at all dead-end lines and
spaced at least every 600 feet on straight runs of water supply lines
and as directed by the Water Department.
(2) Type. Hydrants shall conform to AWWA Standard Np. C502-73 or
latest revision thereof. In addition, the following specifications
shall apply:
Dry-Barrel Fire Hydrants AWWA Standard No. C502-73
Sec. 1-General.
Hydrants shall be manufactured by the Mueller Company and
shall be the Centurion fire hydrant-AWWA, which is the standard
hydrant for the Township.
A. General Classification:
a.1. Hydrants shall be dry barrel, post type with
compression-type main valve closing with the pressure.
a.2. Hydrants shall have a replaceable safety stem coupling
and a replaceable safety flange at the ground line to
prevent or minimize traffic damage.
B. Detail Specifications:
§ 182.05.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182.05.040
001:499
b.1. Hydrants shall have a 4-1/2 inch main valve.
b.2. The inlet connection shall be 6 inch mechanical joint,
dimensions shall comply with AWWA C111 and ANSI
A21.11 Standards.
b.3. Working pressure shall be 200 pounds per square inch
and the pressure shall be 400 pounds per square inch.
b.4. The dry top bonnet shall have a factory lubricated
bonnet assembly.
b.5. The upper operating shall be bronze encased and have
an O-ring stem seal.
b.6. The nozzles shall be threaded and locked in place with
a stainless steel screw.
b.7. The safety stem coupling shall be below the lower
barrel flange surface to prevent it being held open by
vehicle wheel after traffic damage.
b.8. Bronze seat ring shall thread into a bronze drain ring
having 2 drain holes to provide an all bronze drainway.
b.9. The double drain valve shall operate automatically to
force flush the drainway each time the hydrant is
opened or closed. No toggles, springs or adjustable
mechanism will be allowed.
b.10. The main valve opening shall be controlled by a lug in
the bottom of the shoe.
b.11. The design of the shoe and upper valve plate shall
permit maximum flow by reducing friction loss to a
minimum.
b.12. Nozzles: 3-way, 2-1/2 inch nose nozzles and 1 pumper
nozzle all with national standard hose threads.
Certification of these specifications must be available to the
Township.
Sec. 7. Air Release and Surge Control.
Air-release valves shall be located at high points along watersupply
pipelines to purge air pockets which may form at these high
points. Air-release valves shall be installed in a valve vault and
located below the frost line which is assumed to be 4 feet. Valves
shall be ventilated and shall provide for drainage of water.
At locations where a sudden change in water velocity may occur
(booster stations, check valves, etc.) a pressure release valve shall
be provided to relieve the surge pressures.
Sec. 8. Stream Crossings.
§ 182.05.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 182.05.040
001:500
Whenever water supply lines are to cross a stream or river below
the bed, they shall be adequately sleeved and/or encased in no
less than 1/2 foot of reinforced concrete within the reaches of the
stream banks. Minimum depth of encasement below the stream
banks shall be 3 feet. Water lines crossing streams on culverts
or bridges shall be thoroughly insulated and protected with steel
sleeves.
Sec. 9. Wet Taps.
All wet taps into existing water supply lines shall be made by a
contractor approved by the Water Department. Tapping sleeves
shall be cast-iron or ductile iron mechanical joint Mueller H615
or H616, depending on the outside diameter of the pipe being
tapped. Sleeves shall have a minimum working pressure of 200
pounds per square inch.
All sleeves and valves shall be set perfectly level along the center
lines of the pipe tap. Valves, fittings and pipes shall conform to the
applicable standards outlined herein.
Sec. 10. Sanitary Protection.
Chambers or pits containing valves or meters or other
appurtenances shall be adequately drained. Drains shall not be
connected directly to any storm sewer or sanitary sewer.
Any air relief or vent pipes from chambers or beds must extend
at least 1-foot above ground and be equipped with a down-facing
elbow and insect screen. Physical connections other than the
double-check valve assembly or reduced pressure zone back-flow
preventer assembly are not permitted.
While installing new water pipes, pipelines shall not be laid in
water or where they can be flooded with water in the laying
process.
Underground drains from hydrants and valve chambers shall not
be connected directly to sewers or storm sewers.
In accordance with state regulations, water lines should be laid at
an elevation above that of nearby sewers with joints no closer than
that 10 feet from the sewer pipe center line. If this is not possible,
water pipe shall be sleeved or encased in concrete with watertight
tested joints. Where water lines cross sewer lines, water lines shall
be laid above the sewer lines with vertical separation of not less
than 18 inches. Hydrostatic pressure tests shall be performed to
determine if there is any leakage.
New water supply lines shall be disinfected by 1 of the procedures
outlined herein before being placed into service. The absence
of contamination shall be demonstrated by bacteriological
examination before new lines and appurtenances are placed into
service or accepted by the Water Department. This examination
shall be certified by the Health Department.
§ 182.05.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 182.05.040
001:501
Sec. 11. Disinfection.
Before new water lines are placed into service or accepted by
the Water Department, they must be flushed and disinfected with
chlorine solutions. During construction, precautions shall be taken
to avoid unnecessary contamination. Disinfection is accomplished
by 1 of the following methods. All are described in the American
Water Works Association Standard on Water Main Disinfection,
AWWA C601, latest revision: continuous feed method, slug
method, tablet method. In all cases, disinfection procedures shall
be performed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:10-11, Subchapter 11,
Standards for Construction of Public Community Water Systems,
Part 11.13 Disinfection.
Sec. 12. Testing.
Before water lines are placed into service or accepted by the
Water Department, they shall be hydrostatically pressure tested.
The test shall be witnessed by the Engineer. The pressure test
shall be performed between valved sections of water lines and
shall be submitted to a pressure of 150 pounds per square inch for
a duration of 4 hours.
Each valve section of pipe shall be slowly filled with water and
the specified test pressure shall be applied by means of a pump
connected to the pipe in a manner satisfactory to the Engineer.
The pump, pipe connection, gauges, and all necessary apparatus
shall be furnished by the Developer. Before applying the specified
test pressure all air shall be expelled from the pipe. If hydrants or
air reliefs are not available at high places, the necessary taps shall
be made at points of highest elevation before the test is made and
the plugs inserted after the test has been completed.
A leakage test shall be conducted after the pressure test has been
satisfactorily completed. The duration of each leakage test shall
be 2 hours, and during the test, the main shall be subject to a
pressure of 150 pounds per square inch and not permitted to fall
below 145 pounds per square inch.
Leakage is defined as the quantity of water to be supplied into the
newly laid pipe, or any section thereof, necessary to maintain the
specified leakage test pressure after the pipe has been filled with
water and the air expelled.
The maximum allowable leakage for the pipe shall be determined
by the formula:
L = NDP
___
3,700
§ 182.05.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 182.05.040
001:502
§ 182.06. Service connections.
§ 182.07. Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Prevention.
Chapter 183
PUBLIC NON-COMMUNITY AND NON-PUBLIC WATER
SYSTEMS
§ 183.01. Adoption of standards.
Pursuant to the New Jersey Statutes Annotated 58:11-23 et seq. including
58:11-36 and 13:B-3 and the amendments and supplements thereto, there
is adopted Chapter 7:10-12.1 through 7:10-12.42 of the New Jersey
Administrative Code and the supplements and additions thereto.
§ 183.02. Permit required.
No person or corporation shall locate, construct, or alter any public noncommunity
or non-public water systems without the prior approval of the
Health Department.
in which L equals the allowable leakage in gallons per hour; N is
the number of joints in the length of the pipeline tested; D is the
nominal diameter of the pipe, in inches; and P is the average test
pressure during the leakage test, in pounds per square inch.
A. All service connections 2 inches or less in diameter shall be made using
a corporation stop at the water main, Mueller Company No. H15000 or
approved equal, heavy duty Type K copper service pipe between the
new main and the curb box. Curb stop shall be Mueller Company
H15214 or approved equal.
B. Corporation stops shall be installed using a double strap service clamp,
Mueller Catalog No. H10533, or approved equal.
C. The curb valve box shall be cast-iron extension type with one piece lid,
Mueller Catalog No. H10314. Copper service pipe shall be arched prior
to backfilling to compensate for any trench settlement.
D. The curb valve shall be set in a gravel base to facilitate back drainage.
Minimum cover is 4 feet above copper service pipe.
E. All water meters shall be supplied and installed by the Water
Department.
A. The Health Department shall examine all applications for permits, and
approve or deny in whole or in part the application, within 20 business
days. If the application is denied in whole or in part, the Health
Department shall set forth the reason therefor in writing. If the Health
Department fails to grant in whole or in part or deny an application
§ 182.05.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 183.02
001:503
§ 183.03. Fee established.
There shall be a fee established as follows:
within 20 days, such failure shall be deemed a denial of the application
for the purposes of an Appeal as provided by law, unless such period of
time has been extended with the consent of the applicant.
B. Suspension of Permit. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the
authorized work is not commenced within nine months after the
issuance of the permit. The Health Department may consider an
extension beyond the one-year period, on written application,
explaining the reason for the delay. Said extension, if granted, shall not
exceed three months commencing from the original date of termination.
C. Approved plans. The Department of Health shall stamp or endorse in
writing the approved plans. One set of approved plans shall be retained
by the Department of Health and the other set shall be kept on the
construction site open to inspection to the Health Department or its
authorized representative at all reasonable times.
D. Revocation of Permits. The Health Department may revoke a permit or
approval issued under the provision of this code in case of any false
statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or in the plans
on which the permit or approval was based.
E. Posting of Permit. A true copy of the permit shall be kept on the site of
operations open to inspection at all times until the work is completed.
F. Notice of start. At least twenty-four-hour notice of start of work under a
water system permit shall be given to the Health Department.
G. Conditions of Permit. The issuance of the water system permit shall be
conditioned upon the following:
1. The payment of appropriate fees;
2. That work will conform to the approved application, plans and
specifications for which the permit has been issued, including prior
approvals and any amendments thereto;
3. That the permit is a license to proceed with the work and shall not
be construed as authority to violate, cancel or amend any of the
provisions of the regulations;
4. That the owner, his agent, contractor or other employees will assist
the enforcing agency in its inspection work, if requested.
A. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate,
construct, or alter a public non-community or non-public water system,
$75.
§ 183.02 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 183.03
001:504
§ 183.04. Certificate of approval.
New public non-community or non-public water systems shall not be placed
in operation, nor shall new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be
sold or occupied which must rely on such a system for potable water, until
the Health Department shall have issued a certificate indicating that such
water system has been located and constructed in compliance with the
terms of the permit issued and the requirements of the code adopted by this
chapter. Issuance of such certificate shall be required for alterations to an
existing public non-community or non-public water system.
§ 183.05. Nuisance defined.
No person shall own or operate a public non-community or non-public water
system which is designed, constructed, operated, or maintained in a manner
that will not provide potable water as defined in this chapter.
§ 183.06. Right to stop work.
The Board of Health in which a violation occurs shall have the right to
order all further work in and about any water supply system, which is being
erected or installed in violation of this act, to be stopped forthwith, except
such work as shall be necessary to remedy such violation, and, thereafter
to continue such work without any violation of any of the provisions of this
Ordinance, and after the issuance of any such order and the service of
a copy thereof upon any person connected with or working in and about
the erection or installation of any such water supply system, or any part
thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except as aforesaid and any
person or corporation who, after having been served with a copy of such
an order, shall do any work or cause or permit any work to be done in or
about the same, except such as is hereinbefore provided, shall be liable to
a penalty of $200 to be collected and enforced by summary proceedings for
the collection of penalties pursuant to the "Penalty Enforcement Law."
Chapter 185
WRECKERS
§ 185.01. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be called as the "Township of
Pequannock Wrecker Ordinance."
B. For each reinspection of a public non-community or non-public water
system or part thereof, caused by the failure of the permittee to locate,
construct, or alter the same in accordance with the terms of the permit
issued or the terms of the code adopted by this chapter, an inspection
fee of $15 shall be charged.
§ 183.03 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185.02
001:505
§ 185.02. Definitions.
Whenever used in this chapter, unless a different meaning clearly appears
from the context, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CRUISING — The driving of a wrecker along any Township street for the
purpose of soliciting business in the Township.
OWNED — Owned, rented or leased.
PERSON — Any individual, sole proprietorship, firm, partnership,
association, corporation or other organization, and the singular or plural,
masculine, feminine or neuter thereof, unless the contrary is clearly
expressed.
WRECKER — A vehicle used for the purpose of towing, transporting or
otherwise removing any and all kinds of vehicles which are disabled.
§ 185.03. Permit required to participate in police towing rotation.
No person, firm or corporation shall participate in the police towing rotation
within the Township without first obtaining the necessary permit as
hereinafter provided from the Clerk of the Township.
§ 185.04. Expiration of licenses.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued to expire and shall
expire on the 31st day of December, next succeeding the date of issuance,
unless sooner suspended or revoked by the Chief of Police as hereinafter
provided.
§ 185.05. Fees; term of license; renewal.
§ 185.06. Application for wrecker license. [Amended 2-24-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-02]
Applications for licenses issued hereunder shall be made upon blank forms
prepared and made available by the Chief of Police and shall state under
oath:
A. The fee for a license issued under this chapter shall be $125, paid on
receipt of the license.
B. The license shall remain valid from January 1 to December 31 of each
year or part thereof.
C. It may be renewed annually by the operator paying a fee of $125,
provided that the operator continues to comply with all terms and
conditions of this chapter.
A. The name, home address and proposed or actual business address of
the applicant, and whether he is owner, lessee or bailee.
§ 185.02 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 185.06
001:506
§ 185.07. Investigation of applicant.
Within seven days after receipt of an application as herein provided, the
Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant
and of his proposed business operation to be licensed. The Chief of Police
may delegate the inspection of the wrecker to an independent person,
who may or not be engaged in business in the Township, who shall be
qualified by experience and training to make such inspection and who shall
report to the Chief of Police whether the wrecker is in a thoroughly safe
and sanitary condition. Within 14 days after completion of the inspection
and investigation, the Chief of Police shall either approve or deny the
application.
§ 185.08. Standards for approval by Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall approve an application when he finds that the
following requirements have been met:
B. Description of wrecker for which the license is desired, including year,
make, model, type, serial number of body and motor capacity and the
length of time for which the wrecker has been in use as a wrecker.
C. That the applicant has available space within the Township of
Pequannock for properly accommodating and protecting all disabled
motor vehicles to be towed or otherwise removed from the place where
they are disabled, and that the disabled vehicles will not be stored or
allowed to remain on public property or Township owned streets or on
any property without the consent of the owner. The applicant shall be
required to obtain and provide written confirmation from the Township
Zoning Officer that the use of the proposed space for towing storage is
permitted under the Township Zoning Ordinance.
D. Such other information which the Chief of Police shall deem necessary
or proper to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and to determine
whether there has been compliance with the terms thereof.
A. That the wrecker to be licensed is in a thoroughly safe and sanitary
condition.
B. That the requirement of this chapter and all other governing laws,
statutes and ordinances have been met.
C. That the wrecker has been properly licensed and equipped in
compliance with Title 39 of the Revised Statutes (Motor Vehicle and
Traffic Regulations). No wrecker shall be licensed as a wrecker which is
using dealer license plates.
D. That the insurance policies or certificates of insurance as required
herein have been procured and supplied.
E. That the wrecker to be approved, on inspection, meets the minimum
standard for wrecker or tow trucks.
§ 185.06 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185.09
001:507
§ 185.09. Minimum standards for wreckers and tow trucks.
The following shall serve as minimum standards for wreckers:
§ 185.10. Insurance.
A. A wrecker shall be able to handle all makes of passenger cars and small
trucks, such as pickup and small panel trucks up to 1 1/2 tons, and must
have or be equipped with the following:
(1) All wreckers shall be minimum of 3/4 ton according to the
manufacturer's specifications.
(2) A power takeoff-controlled winch with a minimum cable thickness
of 3/8 inch or equivalent.
(3) Gross weight equal to the vehicles to be towed, with a minimum of
5,500 pounds.
(4) A 3/4-inch safety chain. The lift chain and the safety chain are not
to be attached in any form or manner to the same part of the
wrecker.
(5) Front and rear flashing hazard lights.
(6) A 360° rotating amber beacon light mounted over the cab or
approved light bar.
B. All lights shall be of such candle power in the intensity as to be visible 1/
4 mile away.
C. All towing company drivers will carry their business cards and must
give it to the owner/driver of the vehicle to be towed.
D. All companies will have the company name, address and phone number
permanently affixed (in letters and numbers, a minimum of three
inches) on both sides of the wrecker prior to said wrecker being used on
any Township rotation calls.
E. The wrecker is equipped with a portable car dolly and sufficient
equipment to clean up the debris on the roadway. The operator must
clean away the accident debris at the scene.
A. No wrecker shall be licensed hereunder nor shall any licensed wrecker
be operated within the Township unless there shall be deposited with
the Township Clerk the following insurance policies or certificates of
insurance:
(1) Auto garage keeper's policy. Auto garage keeper's legal liability
policy covering fire, theft, and explosion on the minimum amount of
$25,000 and collision coverage subject to $100 deductible, with
each accident deemed a separate claim.
§ 185.09 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 185.10
001:508
§ 185.11. Identification card.
The Chief of Police shall issue to the person owning an approved wrecker
a card, in such form as may be set by the Chief of Police, which shall be
at all times displayed on the passenger side of the rear window of each
wrecker. The card shall bear the name of the owner, rate of charges, and a
notice that in case of any complaint, the complainant may notify the Chief
of Police, giving the license number of the wrecker. The card shall also have
the signature of the Chief of Police and the date of inspection of the wrecker.
§ 185.12. Powers and duties of Chief of Police.
(2) Garage liability policy. A garage liability policy covering the
operation of the applicant's equipment or vehicles for any bodily
injury or property damage. This policy shall be in the amount of
$100,000/$300,000.
B. Each policy required must contain an endorsement providing 10 days'
notice to the Township in the event of any material change or
cancellation for any cause.
C. In the event that the policy is changed so as to fail to conform to the
above requirements, or if any policy of any approved wrecker is
cancelled for any reason, the Chief of Police shall notify the person
responsible for the policy within 10 days after the notice is received and
before the date of cancellation. If the policy or certificate is not
corrected, reinstated or replaced within the required time, the Chief of
Police shall immediately suspend the wrecker permit.
D. The Township of Pequannock must be named as an additional insured
under the liability portion of the insurance coverage.
E. Indemnification and liability.
(1) The licensee shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township for
liability from any and all obligations, liabilities, judgments, claims
and demands, for personal injuries, including wrongful death, as
well as all claims for damages to property which may arise out of
this agreement and the work performed hereunder, provided that
the same results from the negligent actions or omissions of the
licensee.
(2) The licensee further agrees to save and hold harmless the
Township and to defend at its own cost and expense any such
claims or lawsuits instituted by third parties against the Township,
provided that the same results from the negligent actions or
omissions of the licensee.
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish reasonable rules
and regulations for the inspection and operation of wreckers and for the
design, construction, maintenance and conditions for the safe conduct
of a wrecker service business, in accordance with the standards
§ 185.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185.12
001:509
§ 185.13. Service rates. [Amended 6-27-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-16;
1-23-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-01; 7-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-13]
outlined in this chapter. The Police Department shall maintain due
vigilance over all wreckers to see that they are kept in a safe condition
for transporting and hauling disabled vehicles and shall have the right
at all times to inspect all licensed wreckers.
B. If at any time the Chief of Police shall find the equipment inadequate or
unsafe, he shall have the power to demand immediate correction, and if
not corrected to the satisfaction of the Chief, he shall have the power to
revoke or suspend the permit and schedule a hearing depending upon
the nature and the circumstances of the violation. The Chief of Police is
also hereby authorized and empowered to establish from time to time
such additional rules and regulations, not inconsistent herewith, as may
be reasonable and necessary in carrying out the provisions of this
chapter.
C. An appeal of the Police Chief's ruling shall be filed with the Township
Manager within 10 calendar days of the Chief's decision. A hearing may
be held within 30 calendar days of the filing, with a ruling forthcoming
from the Manager within 20 calendar days of the final hearing.
D. The Chief of Police shall keep a record of names of all persons owning
or operating wreckers approved under this regulation, together with
the license number and description of the wreckers and the date and
complete record of inspection made of them.
A. The following is the fee schedule for basic automobile towing services
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49.
Monday - Sunday (Includes weekends, nights and holidays)
Accident or non-accident
Passenger vehicle and motorcycle
towing
$150 (includes in town mileage)
Trucks 5 tons GVW and over $280 per hour (includes in town
mileage)
Mopeds, ATV's etc. $80 (flat rate)
Police vehicle tow $50 (flat rate)
B. The following is the fee schedule for services for all types of vehicles
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49 (twenty-four-hour day)
Outside storage fees in secure facility
Passenger vehicle storage $45 per day (24-hour)
Storage for all vehicles over 5
tons GVW
$55 (24-hour)
Recovery and cleanup fees
§ 185.12 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 185.13
001:510
§ 185.14. Conditions for issuing wrecker permit; conduct of owners
and operators.
A wrecker permit hereunder shall be issued subject to the following
conditions:
Basic winching $150 per hour
Overturned; upright or off-road
winching
$250 per hour
Axle pull/drive shaft $50 flat rate
Hook-up air $25 flat rate
Basic roadside clean up $50 per hour
Absorbent $25 per bag
Additional personnel after driver $75 per hour
Administration fee for vehicles
involved in MVA
$45
A. No person owning or operating a wrecker shall engage in cruising.
B. No person shall solicit, demand or receive from any person any
commission or fee except the proper fee for transporting the disabled
vehicle in accordance with 185.13.
C. No person shall solicit or attempt to divert prospective patrons of
another wrecker nor shall he solicit or divert prospective patrons of a
given garage in the Township to another garage.
D. No person shall pay any gratuity, tip or emolument to any third person
not involved in the accident or to any police officer for any information
as to the location of any accident or for soliciting the employment of the
operator's services, nor give any gratuities, fees or other compensation
or gifts to any members of the Police Department.
E. No wrecker which happens to be passing by is permitted to solicit
business from any of the drivers involved in the accident. Any wrecker
at the scene may be used by the investigator to clear the scene if traffic
conditions preclude waiting for the authorized wrecker; however, this
may not authorize them to tow the vehicles from the scene.
F. Wreckers shall respond within 15 to 20 minutes under normal
conditions.
G. The owner or operator shall clean all debris at the scene emanating
from the accident.
H. The owner or operator shall maintain a ledger of all towing or wrecking
jobs handled, the name of the owner or operator, if known, the charges
made for the service and the date and amount of payment.
§ 185.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185.15
001:511
§ 185.15. Scope.
Except as to the prohibition against cruising, the provisions of this chapter
are applicable to the engaging of wreckers by the Police Department of the
Township of Pequannock.
§ 185.16. Right of owner to call wrecker of his choice.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the owner, agent or lessee of a vehicle
which is disabled from calling a wrecker of his choice to remove his vehicle.
§ 185.17. Power of Police Department to require removal of
vehicles.
The Police Department shall have the power to require wreckers to remove
vehicles where:
§ 185.18. Rotating call list. [Amended 6-26-2007 by Ord. No.
2007-21]
A. There is obstruction of public right-of-way or private property.
B. A vehicle has been vandalized or presents a fire or safety hazard or an
attractive nuisance.
C. An abandoned vehicle bears no discernible registration or identification
data.
D. An abandoned vehicle that is not licensed or operable.
E. A vehicle that is violating any emergency no-parking provisions.
F. Any other condition where permitted or required by law.
A. A licensee performing towing service for the Township of Pequannock
or called by a police officer shall perform on a rotating basis. No
Licensee shall sub-contract with another Licensee, for covering the
Licensee's assigned towing responsibilities. When a Licensee is unable
to provide towing service, in the case of a disabled wrecker or a second
call, the next Licensee shall be given the assignment, and so on. When
possible a second call shall be given to the next licensee in rotation.
When the owner or driver of a disabled vehicle indicates a choice of a
specific licensee, that licensee shall be called and no wrecker shall be
assigned from the rotating list. No licensee shall respond to the scene of
an accident except upon notification by the police officer in charge in
Police headquarters or upon request of the driver or owner of a disabled
vehicle.
B. All Licensees shall be responsible for coverage of at minimum 85% of
their assigned wrecker requests during their assigned time. Any
Licensee that does not provide minimum coverage for any two week
assignment, within their one year registration, shall be notified in
§ 185.15 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 185.18
001:512
§ 185.19. Limitation on number of licenses issued.
It is hereby determined under the lawful exercise of the police power of the
Township that public convenience and necessity require that the number of
wreckers to be licensed within the Township shall be limited to five because
of the limited area of the Township.
§ 185.20. Penalties. [Added 6-26-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-21]
Any Licensee found to have violated any of the rules in Chapter 185 shall
be subject to removal as a Licensee and their permit to provide wrecker
service shall be revoked by the Chief of Police after his investigation into
the violations is conducted.
Chapter 189
ZONING
§ 189.01. General Provisions.
§ 189.01.010. Establishment; purposes.
writing and shall be removed from their assigned rotation, and a
replacement shall be made.
C. Whenever a Licensee is unable to provide towing service based on a
disabled wrecker, the Licensee shall notify the Police Department,
which shall notify the next Licensee in rotation, to cover, until the
Licensee's wrecker is repaired and placed back in rotation. Any
Licensee whose wrecker is disabled for an extended duration (two week
assigned period) shall notify the Police Department of their intent to
continue wrecker service, or removal from rotation.
D. Such additional rules and regulations regarding the rotation of
wreckers as may be hereafter promulgated by the Chief of Police shall
take effect immediately after service of a copy thereof to all permit
holders for wreckers in the Township. Service on a licensee may be
made by sending by ordinary mail a copy of the additional rules and
regulations to said licensee's business address.
A. There is hereby established a comprehensive zone plan for the
Township of Pequannock, which plan is set forth in the text and map
that constitute this chapter. Said chapter is adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-62.
B. Specifically, the purposes of this chapter are as follows:
(1) To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade
disasters.
(2) To provide adequate light, air and open space.
§ 185.18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.01.010
001:513
§ 189.01.020. Community development objectives.
The following list of community development objectives forms the basis
upon which the Pequannock Township Master Plan and this chapter are
formulated:
(3) To ensure that the development of Pequannock Township does not
conflict with the development and general welfare of neighboring
municipalities, the county and the state as a whole.
(4) To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities
and concentrations that will contribute to the well-being of
persons, neighborhoods, communities and regions and the
preservation of the environment.
(5) To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of
agricultural, residential, recreational, commercial and industrial
uses and open spaces, both public and private, according to their
respective environmental requirements in order to meet the needs
of Township residents and the region of which the Township is a
part.
(6) To promote a desirable visual environment through creative
development techniques and good civic design and arrangements.
(7) To promote the conservation of open space and valuable natural
resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the
environment through improper use of land.
A. To preserve and protect the high quality residential environment in the
Township.
B. To provide commercial areas adequate to serve the needs of Township
residents and residents of the surrounding area.
C. While recognizing the essentially single-family character of Pequannock
Township, to provide a greater variety of housing types than currently
exists within the Township.
D. To preserve existing farmland areas which do much to give the
Township its existing character and which provide community functions
of water retention, flood control, open space and provision of fresh
food, produce and other garden products.
E. To preserve existing historic sites and historic structures which create
ties to the Township's, region's and nation's past and provide bench
marks of the quality of environment which typifies the present and
future of the Township.
F. To provide for protection of flood-prone areas through control of
development.
§ 189.01.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.01.020
001:514
§ 189.01.030. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held
to be the minimum standards for public health, safety, morals and general
welfare. Where the provisions of this chapter impose greater restrictions
than those of any other law, ordinance, statute or regulation, the provisions
of this chapter shall be controlling. Where the provisions of any other
law, ordinance, statute or regulation impose greater restrictions than this
chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or regulation shall be
controlling. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul
any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, provided
that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of a
building or premises or requires larger open spaces, this chapter shall
control.
§ 189.01.040. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Pequannock Township
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 189.01.050. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 9-22-1998 by
Ord. No. 98-09; 10-24-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-24; 10-25-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-21; 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-2; 1-26-2010 by Ord.
No. 2010-5; 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13; 9-8-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-14]
G. To provide for adequate open space and recreation facilities to meet the
needs of Township residents and to protect environmentally sensitive
lands through their protection as public or private open space.
H. To provide for adequate location and numbers of public and quasipublic
community facilities and services, including houses of worship,
clubs and lodges, schools, libraries and governmental offices and
buildings.
I. To ensure that all future development is consistent with standards for
environmental preservation and energy conservation.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular
includes the plural; and "person" includes an association, partnership
and corporation as well as an individual; the word "shall" is always
mandatory; and the term "occupied or used," as applied to any building,
shall be construed to be followed by the words "or intended, arranged
or designed to be occupied or used."
B. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases
shall be construed throughout this chapter to have the meanings herein
indicated.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — A building or use subordinate in
area, extent and purpose to the principal building or use on a lot
§ 189.01.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.01.050
001:515
and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal
building.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Zoning Officer or personnel as
identified by ordinance.
ADULT BOOK AND/OR GIFT STORE — An establishment having as
a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in trade gifts, devices,
books, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas,
as hereafter defined, or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such material.
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building
with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for showing material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, as hereafter defined, for observations by patrons
therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building with a
capacity of 50 or more persons used for showing material distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
hereafter defined, for observations by patrons therein.
AMUSEMENT PARLOR OR ARCADE — Any place or premises where
any machine or device is located, the primary purpose of which is to
make said machines available to the public. If more than 10% of the
floor area devoted to the public is utilized for machines or there are
more than eight machines, whichever is more restrictive, the use or
premises shall be considered an "amusement parlor."
BASEMENT (CELLAR) — The portion of a building that is partly below
the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building.
BIG BOX RETAIL — Large industrial style buildings of over 75,000
square feet used for wholesale and retail purposes with interior space
greater than 1 1/2 stories to allow for the palletizing and vertical bulk
stacking of merchandise.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A dwelling in which rooms without cooking
facilities may be leased to persons, principally nontransients.
BUILDING — Any temporary or permanent structure having a roof
supported by columns, piers, or walls and intended for the shelter,
housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment,
goods or materials of any kind. Building shall also be any unroofed
platform. Building shall also include receiving and transmitting radio,
television and other communications equipment antennas, except for
such antennas installed on the roof of a building and extending no more
than 15 feet above the highest level of the roof of such building.
§ 189.01.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.01.050
001:516
BUILDING, TEMPORARY — Any structure which is not intended to be
used for more than four consecutive months of any calendar year and
which is completely disassembled subsequent to each period of use.
CANTILEVERING (RESIDENTIAL) — To allow for modest
improvements of homes in the community without negatively impacting
flooding or proportionality, a home may be cantilevered no more than
two feet over the foundation. Such cantilever may occur on only two
sides and must be opposite sides. Such a cantilever shall not be
included in building coverage. The area of the cantilever in excess
of the permitted two feet on two parallel sides shall be included and
counted as part of the building coverage.
CLINIC — Place used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick,
ailing, infirm or injured persons and those who are in need of
psychiatric counseling or medical, dental or surgical attention, but who
are not provided with board or room or kept overnight on the premises.
CLUB or LODGE — A corporation, association or group of persons
formed for social, educational or recreational purposes, not for profit.
COMMUNITY CENTER — Any building or buildings and the lot upon
which they are located which is publicly owned or operated to serve
the community in which it is located. Such a use may include indoor
and outdoor recreational facilities, public meeting rooms, libraries and
rooms for the dispensing of counseling, guidance or clinical services,
but may not include residential uses.
COMPLETE APPLICATION — An application form, completed as
specified by ordinance and the rules and regulations of the Board, and
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of the
application for development, including but not limited to a site plan.
COURT, INNER — An open space enclosed on all sides by exterior walls
of a building.
COURT, OUTER — An open space enclosed on three sides by exterior
walls of a building. Its length shall be measured as the horizontal
distance between the exit opening on a street or yard and the end
opposite such street or yard.
COVERAGE BY IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — The portion of a lot
covered by all buildings, asphalt or concrete paving, paver stone, tile or
block, sidewalks, swimming pool, porches and exterior stairs or other
impervious surfaces which prevent water absorption to the ground.
COVERAGE, BUILDING — The area covered by all buildings on a lot,
expressed as a percentage of the total lot area.
DECK — An outdoor unroofed platform supported by columns, piers or
walls or other supports that allow water to flow through and into the
ground below.
§ 189.01.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.01.050
001:517
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT — Premises constructed to dispense
services to motorists without having to leave the vehicle and providing
curb and/or window counter service.
DRIVE-IN/DRIVE THROUGH RESTAURANT — A building or portion
thereof where food or beverages are sold in a form ready for
consumption and where a portion of the consumption takes place
outside the building, as for example a motor vehicle on site.
DWELLING — A structure or portion of a structure on a lot which is
arranged or used or intended to be used for one or more individuals
living together as a single housekeeping unit. Every dwelling unit shall
have, at a minimum, cooking, living, sanitary and sleeping facilities.
DWELLING, DETACHED — A building designed for and occupied by a
single household which has no party walls in common with any other
structure.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof containing
three or more dwelling units, including condominium or cooperative
ownership.
DWELLING, PATIO HOME — A single-family dwelling unit arranged on
a lot of at least the minimum required size and dimension with no side
yard on one side of the dwelling and in which the entire rear yard is
fenced, walled or otherwise screened.
DWELLING, SEMIDETACHED — A one-family dwelling separated by a
party wall from another contiguous dwelling.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE — A one-family dwelling which has two
party walls in common with contiguous buildings or one party wall in
the case of the end building of a group of "townhouse dwellings."
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED — A structure on one lot which
contains two separate and complete dwellings with common or
separate entrances.
ELEEMOSYNARY USE — Use by a charitable nonprofit organization.
ENGINEER — The duly appointed Engineer of the Township of
Pequannock.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — An establishment whose principal
business is the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food in a
ready-to-consume state for the consumption within the building or offpremises.
FENCE — A barrier greater than 2 1/2 feet in height made of posts and
wires, boards or other similar material.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The aggregate floor area, in square feet, of all
buildings on a lot divided by the square-foot area of such lot.
FLOOR AREA, AGGREGATE — The sum of the gross horizontal areas
of the several floors of the building or buildings on a lot, measured
from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from the center line of
§ 189.01.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.01.050
001:518
party walls separating two buildings, excluding roof areas, terraces or
balconies, cellar and basement areas used only for storage or for the
operation and maintenance of the building, and further excluding any
areas devoted only to accessory off-street parking or loading.
FRONT YARD SETBACK — The area between the line parallel to the
street line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard
required for the district in which the lot is located and the street line,
which area shall be open and unoccupied.
GARAGE — A building accessory to the principal use on a lot for the
storage of motor vehicles, either for or without compensation.
GRADE PLANE — The reference plane representing the average of
finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. Where
the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the
reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the
area between the building and the lot line or where the lot line is more
than six feet from the building between the building and a point six feet
from the building.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance of a structure derived
from the average finished grade at the foundation corners of the
building or structure, including additional measurements at the center
of all exterior side, front and rear building walls, to the highest point
of the building or structure, excluding a chimney or other similar
structures.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing health services, and medical
or surgical care of the sick or injured, both as inpatients and as
outpatients, including, as an integral part of the institution, such
related facilities as laboratories, training facilities, central service
facilities and staff offices.
HOTEL — A building or part thereof which contains 48 or more rented
rooms without cooking facilities, served by a common entrance.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure or part thereof used primarily
for the collecting, storage and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal
or other scrap or discarded material or for the collecting, dismantling,
storage or salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition
and for the sale of parts thereof. An automobile "junkyard" shall consist
of the storage of three or more unlicensed automobiles for the purpose
of salvaging used parts therefrom or reducing said automobile to scrap,
whether or not said use is accessory to a permitted use.
LOADING SPACE — A portion of a lot contiguous to a building which is
set aside for the parking of vehicles while materials or goods are being
loaded or unloaded.
LOT — Any parcel of land which is occupied or intended to be occupied
by a building or buildings and its accessory buildings, together with the
required open spaces and accessory uses appurtenant to such building
or group of buildings.
§ 189.01.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.01.050
001:519
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between front and rear
lot lines, measured in the general direction of its side lot lines. In the
case of an irregularly shaped lot which comes to a point in the rear,
the "lot depth" shall be the distance of the perpendicular line extending
from the center of the rear lot line to the street.
LOT FRONTAGE — Shall be the same as lot width except in the case of
flag lots where it shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — See definition of "street line."
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line generally opposite to the street line; if
the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length or if the lot comes to a
point in the rear, the "rear lot line" shall be deemed to be an imaginary
line parallel to the street line not less than 10 feet long lying furthest
from the street line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — The lot lines extending from the street line to the
rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH — The lot width shall be measured at the front yard
setback line.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets. A
lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed to be a "corner lot" if the
tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines
with the street lines intersect at an interior angle of 135° or less.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot which is not a corner lot.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot having street frontage both in front and to the
rear.
MACHINE or DEVICE — Any coin-operated automatic amusement
game, including but not to the exclusion of other devices known as
"roulette," "baseball," "pinball," "shooting games," "video-type games
or machines" or similar devices that use a display screen which, upon
the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into a slot, crevice
or other opening, will commence operation, which is maintained or
used within a public or quasi-public place. Each "machine" or "device"
shall have an obstructed perimeter zone or distance of five feet around
the sides and front of said "machine" or "device." Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to refer to vending machines for
cigarettes, foods, confections, music or merchandise.
MASTER PLAN — The document or documents, as amended, which
have been adopted by the Pequannock Township Planning Board as the
"Master Plan" of the Township of Pequannock.
MOBILE HOME(S) — A structure transportable in one or more sections
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with
or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
§ 189.01.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.01.050
001:520
MOTEL — A building or group of buildings containing rented rooms
which have direct outside access (the term "outside access" to include
access to open or screened porches), including establishments
designated as "motor inn," "tourist court," "tourist cabins" or "roadside
hotel."
NONCONFORMING USE — A building or use, or both, which lawfully
existed prior to the enactment of a Zoning Ordinance or any
amendment thereto and which is continued after the effective date
thereof although it does not conform to the use regulations of the
district in which it is located.
NURSING HOME — A facility operated for the purpose of providing
therein lodging, board and nursing care to sick, invalid, infirm, disabled
or convalescent persons for compensation.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY — The use of any portion of a lot outside the
enclosed portions of a structure for purposes of display, sales or
storage.
PARKING SPACE — An open space or a garage, on a lot, used for
parking of motor vehicles and to which there is access from a street or
aisle.
PLANNER — The Township Planner of the Township of Pequannock.
PLANNING BOARD — The duly and legally appointed Planning Board
of the Township of Pequannock.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which the building is located.
PROFESSION or PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATION — Those businesses
and offices which are licensed by the State of New Jersey.
RESTAURANT — A building or portion thereof where food is
commercially sold for on-premises consumption to patrons seated at
tables or counters.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — A building for which food or drink
is offered for retail sale for consumption off-premises.
SERVICE STATION — A premises used for the retail sale of gasoline
and other fuels and oil and other lubricants for the operation of motor
vehicles and accessory uses.
SETBACK OR YARD REQUIREMENTS — For the purpose of measuring
the yard dimension, the location of the building wall closest to the
property line shall constitute the location of the building. No
architectural projections, such as a roof overhang or bay window, shall
extend more than 1 1/2 feet beyond the required setback.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by
one or more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is
separate and distinct from that of any adjoining lot.
§ 189.01.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.01.050
001:521
SITE PLAN — Plan for use and/or development of any lot, parcel or
piece of land other than for a single one-family or single two-family
residence and uses accessory thereto, prepared in accordance with the
provisions of Section 189.10 of this chapter.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
STORY — That part of any building, not including basements,
comprised between the level of one finished floor and the level of the
next higher finished floor or, if there is no higher finished floor, then
that part of the building comprised between the level of the highest
finished floor and the top of the roof beams.
STORY, HALF — Any space partially within the roof framing, where the
clear height of not more than 50% of such space between the top of the
floor beams and the structural ceiling level is seven feet or more.
STREET — A street, improved to Township standards, which is one of
the following: an existing Township, county or state highway or street;
a street shown on an approved subdivision final plat; or a street shown
on the Official Map of the Township.
STREET LINE — The subdividing line between the street and the lot,
across which there is a permanent access to the lot.
STRUCTURE — See definition of "building."
YARD, FRONT — An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the
street line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines
of that lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of any
building. The depth of a "rear yard" shall be measured at right angles
to the rear line of the lot or, if the lot is not rectangular, then in the
general direction of its side lot lines.
YARD, SECONDARY FRONT — On a corner lot, the open unoccupied
area facing the street that is not associated with the front or main
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks and female breasts below a point immediately
above the top of the areola.
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
(3)
§ 189.01.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.01.050
001:522
§ 189.02. Districts, Zoning Map and Boundaries.
§ 189.02.010. Classes of districts.
For the purposes of this chapter, the Township of Pequannock is hereby
divided into these classes of districts which shall be designated as follows:
R-87 Residence District
R-45 Residence District
R-22 Residence District
R-15 Residence District
R-11 Residence District
R-9 Residence District
PRD Planned Residential Development District
CCRCD Continuing Care Retirement Community District
C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District
C-2 Highway Commercial District
C-3 Regional Commercial District
C-4 Regional Commercial District
I-1 Industrial District
I-2 Industrial District
I-3 Industrial District
entrance of the principal building. An open, unoccupied space on the
same lot with the building, extending the full width of the lot and
situated between the street line and the non-principal side of the
building projected to the side lines of that lot.
YARD, SIDE — An open, unoccupied space between the side line of the
lot and the nearest point of the building and extending from the front
yard to the rear yard or, in absence of either of such yards, to the street
or rear lot lines, as the case may be. The width of a "side yard" shall be
measured at right angles to the side lines of the lot.
ZONING OFFICER — The duly appointed Zoning Officer of the
Township of Pequannock.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Administrative Officer
(1) which is required by Ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion or installation of structure or building which
complies with the provision of the Municipal Ordinance or variance
therefrom duly authorized by a Municipal Agency pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60 and 40:55D-70.
§ 189.01.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.02.020
001:523
§ 189.02.020. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the above districts shall be as shown on the map attached
to and made a part of this chapter, which map shall be known as the
"Zoning Map of the Township of Pequannock." Said map and all notations,
references and data shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference
into this chapter.
§ 189.02.030. Interpretation of boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to any boundaries as shown on the Zoning Map,
the following rules shall apply:
§ 189.03. Residential Districts.
§ 189.03.010. R-87 Residence District.
In the R-87 Residence District, the following regulations shall apply:
A. The boundaries of the several respective zones are as shown on the
Zoning Map. If not shown and where such zone boundary lines are not
fixed by dimensions as shown on the Zoning Map, the zone boundary
lines are intended to follow either the center lines of streets, railroad
rights-of-way, streams or road or property lines as they exist on plats of
record.
B. Where such boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where they
approximately follow lot lines and where they do not scale more than 10
feet distant therefrom, such lot lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries, unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In subdivided land and where a zone boundary divides a lot, the location
of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by dimensions shown on
the map, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing thereon.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following purposes and no other:
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) One-family detached dwellings, not to exceed one dwelling per
lot.
(b) Public recreation areas.
(c) Private open space or recreation areas, when owned and
operated for the exclusive use of a homeowners' association
which has been formed under the cluster provisions of this
chapter and has been approved by the Planning Board.
(2) Accessory uses.
§ 189.02.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.010
001:524
(a) Buildings for the housing of animals, as regulated in Section
189.07 of this chapter.
(b) Off-street parking for the permitted uses on the lot.
(c) Private garages for the use of the occupants of the lot.
(d) Private swimming pools, tennis courts or other private sports
facilities.
(e) Home occupations as an accessory use.
(f) Signs, as permitted by the Township Sign Ordinance.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter.
(a) Truck gardening.
(b) Plant nurseries.
(c) Greenhouses.
(d) Propagating houses or other farming operations.
(e) Museums and historical sites.
(f) Schools.
(g) Churches and religious uses.
(h) Community centers.
(i) Nursery schools.
(j) Hospitals.
(k) Nursing homes.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses which are not specifically permitted in
the R-87 Zone are hereby prohibited.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 87,120 square feet shall be
provided.
(2) Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 200 feet.
(3) Height. No structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height,
whichever is less. In measuring height within this zone district, it
shall be the average height of the gable, as opposed to the highest
point of the ridge, that shall be the basis of this determination.
(4) Front yard. There shall be a front yard at least 75 feet in depth.
§ 189.03.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.010
001:525
§ 189.03.020. R-45 Residence District.
In the R-45 Residence District, the following regulations shall apply:
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be 75 feet in
depth.
(6) Side yard. There shall be two side yards, each not less than 25 feet,
and the aggregate of the two side yards shall be not less than 70
feet.
(7) Coverage. No more than 8% of the area shall be covered by
buildings, and not more than 20% of any lot shall be covered by
impervious surfaces, including the building coverage.
(8) Lot frontage. Shall be equal to lot width provided, however, that for
lots around the bulb of a cul-de-sac lot frontage shall be at least
50% of the lot width.
(9) Lot depth. There shall be a lot depth of at least 435 feet in length.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following purposes and no other:
(1) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are permitted in
the R-45 Zone.
(2) Accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are
permitted in the R-45 Zone.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet requirements of
Section 189.07 of this chapter. Conditional uses permitted in the
R-87 Zone are permitted in the R-45 Zone.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses which are not specifically permitted in
the R-45 Zone are hereby prohibited.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 45,000 square feet shall be
provided.
(2) Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 150 feet.
(3) Height. No structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height,
whichever is less. In measuring height within this zone district, it
shall be the average height of the gable, as opposed to the highest
point of the ridge, that shall be the basis of this determination.
(4) Front yard. There shall be a front yard at least 50 feet in depth.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be 75 feet in
depth.
§ 189.03.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.020
001:526
§ 189.03.030. R-22 Residence District.
In the R-22 Residence District, the following regulations shall apply:
(6) Side yard. There shall be two side yards, each not less than 20 feet,
and the aggregate of the two side yards shall be not less than 55
feet.
(7) Coverage. No more than 10% of the area shall be covered by
buildings, and not more than 25% of any lot shall be covered by
impervious surfaces, including building area.
(8) Lot frontage. Shall be equal to lot width provided, however, that for
lots around the bulb of a cul-de-sac lot frontage shall be at least
50% of the lot width.
(9) Lot depth. There shall be a lot depth of at least 300 feet in length.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following purposes and no other:
(1) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are permitted in
the R-22 Zone.
(2) Accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are
permitted in the R-22 Zone.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter. Conditional uses permitted in the
R-87 Zone are permitted in the R-22 Zone.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses which are not specifically permitted in
the R-22 Zone are hereby prohibited.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 22,000 square feet shall be
provided.
(2) Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 110 feet.
(3) Height. No structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height,
whichever is less.
(4) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of a least 50 feet in depth
provided, however, that where the average setback is less than 50
feet, the average setback will apply.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be 50 feet in
depth.
(6) Side yard. There shall be two side yards, each not less than 15 feet,
and the aggregate of the two side yards shall not be less than 40
feet.
§ 189.03.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.030
001:527
§ 189.03.040. R-15 Residence District.
In the R-15 residence district, the following regulations shall apply:
(7) Coverage. No more than 12% of the area of any lot shall be covered
by buildings, and not more than 30% of any lot shall be covered by
impervious surfaces, including building area.
(8) Lot frontage. Shall be equal to lot width provided, however, that for
lots around the bulb of a cul-de-sac lot frontage shall be at least
50% of the lot width.
(9) Lot depth. There shall be a lot depth of at least 200 feet in length.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following purposes and no other:
(1) Permitted uses. Used permitted in the R-87 Zone are permitted in
the R-15 Zone.
(2) Accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are
permitted in the R-15 Zone.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter.
(a) Conditional uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are permitted in
the R-15 Zone.
(b) Professional offices.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses which are not specifically permitted in
the R-15 Zone are hereby prohibited.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 15,000 square feet shall be
provided.
(2) Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 100 feet.
(3) Height. No structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet in height,
whichever is less.
(4) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of at least 50 feet in depth
provided, however, that where the average setback is less than 50
feet, the average setback will apply.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be 40 feet in
depth.
(6) Side yard. There shall be two side yards, each not less than 15 feet,
and the aggregate of the two side yards shall be 35 feet.
§ 189.03.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.040
001:528
§ 189.03.050. R-11 Residence District.
In the R-11 Residence District, the following regulations shall apply:
(7) Coverage. No more than 15% of the area shall be covered by
buildings, and not more than 35% of any lot shall be covered by
impervious surfaces.
(8) Lot frontage. Shall be the same as lot width provided, however, that
for a lot around the bulb of a cul-de-sac lot frontage shall be at least
50% of the lot width.
(9) Lot depth. There shall be a minimum lot depth of 150 feet.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following purposes and no other:
(1) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are permitted in
the R-11 Zone, except that private open space or recreation areas
are not permitted since clustering is not permitted.
(2) Accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are
permitted in the R-11 Zone.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter.
(a) Conditional uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are permitted in
the R-11 Zone.
(b) Professional offices.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses which are not specifically permitted in
the R-11 Zone are hereby prohibited.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 11,250 square feet shall be
provided.
(2) Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 90 feet.
(3) Height. No structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 32 feet in height,
whichever is less.
(4) Front yard. There shall be a front yard of at least 50 feet in depth
provided, however, that where the average setback is less than 50
feet, the average setback will apply.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be 30 feet in
depth.
(6) Side yard. There shall be two side yards, each not less than 10 feet,
and the aggregate of the two side yards shall be 25 feet.
§ 189.03.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.050
001:529
§ 189.03.060. R-9 Residence District. [Amended 12-13-2011 by Ord.
No. 2011-27; 4-24-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-11; 8-22-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-12]
In the R-9 Residence District, the following regulations shall apply:
(7) Coverage. No more than 16% of the area shall be covered by
buildings, and not more than 40% of any lot shall be covered by
impervious surfaces, including structures.
(8) Lot frontage. Shall be the same as lot width provided, however, that
for lots around the bulb of a cul-de-sac lot frontage shall be at least
50% of the lot width.
(9) Lot depth. There shall be a lot depth of at least 125 feet.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following purposes and no other:
(1) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are permitted in
the R-9 Zone, except that private open space or recreational areas
are not permitted since clustering is not permitted.
(2) Accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are
permitted in the R-9 Zone.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter.
(a) Conditional uses permitted in the R-87 Zone are permitted in
the R-9 Zone.
(b) Professional offices.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses which are not specifically permitted in
the R-9 Zone are hereby prohibited.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 9,375 square feet shall be
provided.
(2) Lot width. The minimum lot width shall be 75 feet.
(3) Height. No structure shall exceed 2 1/2 stories or 32 feet in height,
whichever is less, except that the height for residential structures,
located in the Special Flood Hazard Area, may be increased to 2 1/2
stories or 35 feet, whichever is greater provided the increased
height, in excess of the underlying maximum permitted height, is
necessary to raise the structure's first floor elevation above the
Special Flood Hazard Area.
(4) Front yard setback. There shall be a front yard at least 35 feet in
depth. The front yard setback of a residential structure located in
§ 189.03.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.060
001:530
the Special Flood Hazard Area may be reduced to not less than
25 feet if the elevation of the structure has been raised above the
Special Flood Hazard Area elevation and subject to the limitations
contained in the subsection. The purpose of the decreased front
yard setback is to provide additional area for that portion of the
structure related to the entrance staircase, platform(s)/landings(s)
and porch needed in the effort to raise an existing residential
structure's first floor elevation above the Special Flood Hazard
Area. Such entrance staircase, platform(s)/landing(s) and porch
shall not occupy more than 4% of the required front yard area
of the residence, where the standard front yard setback is 35
feet. The entrance staircase structure shall not exceed a maximum
of 10 risers to a platform/landing. Such a restriction will ensure
that any proposed new entry will not result in a long expansive
staircase entrance to the home. The entrance shall be permitted to
be covered by a roof to provide both protection from the elements
and to provide aesthetic improvement. Such covered structure
shall only be over the raised first floor entrance and its
encroachment into the required front yard setback shall not exceed
the permitted 25 feet setback associated with the entrance
staircase, platform(s)/landing(s) and porch. The area around the
entrance staircase and platform(s)/landing(s) shall be landscaped
with a variety of evergreen shrubs to provide screenings and
coverage of the base or underside of the entrance staircase,
platform(s)/landing(s) and porch structure.
(4A) All new or elevated structures shall comply with the following
requirements:
(a) Structures that are built on conventional concrete or concrete
block foundations shall provide a maximum exposed
foundation of 36 inches. Treatment is required for exposed
foundations in excess of the 36 inches limit and shall include
treatments such as natural or faux stone facing, brick facing,
wood batten, lattice or siding. Treatment shall not include a
skim coat of mortar over concrete block work.
(b) Structures that are built on piling or pier type foundations shall
enclose the entire foundation with a finished architectural
treatment, such as stone, masonry, framed lattice, framed
louvers or siding to enclose the entire foundation same to be
reviewed and approved by the Construction Official.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be 25 feet in
depth.
(6) Side yard. There shall be two side yards, each not less than 10 feet.
(7) Coverage. No more than 17% of the area shall be covered by
buildings, and not more than 42% of any lot shall be covered by
impervious surfaces.
§ 189.03.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.060
001:531
§ 189.03.070. Cluster development regulations.
In the R-87, R-45, R-22, R-15 and R-11 Zones, clustering will be permitted
subject to the regulations of this section and where 10 or more acres of land
are involved.
(8) Lot frontage. Shall be the same as lot width provided, however, that
for lots around the bulb of a cul-de-sac lot frontage shall be at least
50% of the lot depth.
(9) Lot depth. There shall be a minimum lot depth of 125 feet.
A. Clustered bulk regulations. Where a cluster form of development is
elected, the smallest lot size permitted in the cluster shall be no less
than that permitted in the R-9 Zone. All use and bulk requirements of
the chosen zone shall apply. The number of buildable lots created shall
be no greater than if the tract were developed as a conventional
subdivision and the lots were not reduced in size.
B. Method of calculation. The maximum number of lots which may be
approved under the cluster option of subdivision in any zone shall be
computed by providing to the Planning Board a sketch layout of the
property as it could be developed in a conforming manner under
existing zoning and within the regulations established in the Township
Subdivision Ordinance. The total number of buildable lots, as
determined by the Planning Board in accordance with good planning,
zoning and engineering principles, which could be placed upon the
property in such a manner shall be the total number of lots permitted
under the cluster option.
C. Location of open space.
(1) The location of the open space resulting from a cluster method of
development shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board,
in accordance with good planning, zoning and engineering
principles, so as to protect the environment. Particular attention
shall be paid to the following:
(a) Land shown on the Township's Official Map or Master Plan as
open space.
(b) Floodplains and floodways.
(c) Location along ditches, watercourses, water bodies and
wetlands.
(d) Flood- and stormwater retention areas.
(e) Reservoirs, well fields and aquifer recharge areas.
(f) Areas of steep slope.
(g) Areas of natural outcropping.
§ 189.03.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.070
001:532
(h) Areas of unique or unusual vegetation or animal habitat.
(i) Farmlands.
(j) Areas located on the Township's Official Map for use for public
purposes, such as schools, libraries, etc.
(k) Accessibility to residents of the proposed development.
(l) Other areas which, upon investigation, the Planning Board may
find to be worthy of preservation.
(2) Any open space shall not have any dimension which is less than 20
feet. The Planning Board may require of the developer such
improvements to the open space so as to make the area usable to
the residents of the development and able to be maintained. Such
improvements may include minor grading, seeding, stabilizing,
cleaning, clearing and similar work, but shall not be required to
include placing of equipment, structures or buildings.
D. Ownership of open space.
(1) All open space, tree cover, recreational area, scenic vistas or other
authorized land use whose acreage shall be utilized in the
determination of the common land as is hereinabove provided shall
be conveyed in fee simple title by warranty deed from the
subdivider or owner to an association made up of homeowners
purchasing homes in the subdivision, which conveyance will be for
the sole benefit, use and enjoyment of the lot owners, present and
future. The deed and agreements complying with the provisions of
this section shall have attached thereto a written legal opinion
prepared and signed by an attorney licensed to practice law by the
State of New Jersey. Said opinion shall set forth the attorney's legal
conclusion as to the legal form and effect of said deeds and
agreement. The deed shall be insured by a title insurance company
licensed to do business in New Jersey. Said deeds and agreement
shall be approved by the Planning Board and shall be filed with the
Morris County Clerk's office simultaneously with the recording of
the final plat of the subdivision authorized under the ordinance.
(2) Alternately, said subdivider or owner may dedicate said property to
the Township of Pequannock, restricting said conveyance in
perpetuity for open space, recreational or other public purposes.
Such conveyance shall be accompanied as well by an opinion of an
attorney of the State of New Jersey, representing said subdivider,
attesting to the legality of said agreement and conveyance. All
deeds to the Township shall be accompanied by a title policy
guaranteeing the right of the subdivider or owner to convey the
deed to the property.
E. Use of open space. The open space resulting from the cluster method of
subdivision shall be restricted to those recreational and open space
§ 189.03.070 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.070
001:533
§ 189.03.080. Planned Residential Development District (PRD).
In the Planned Residential Development District, the provisions of the R-87
Zone shall apply, unless the minimum requirements for the PRD can be
met. These requirements shall be a minimum lot area of 100 acres and
a minimum frontage along an arterial roadway of 1,000 feet. If these
requirements are met, the following regulations shall apply:
uses permitted by the Planning Board or to such public utility
structures or uses which the Township Council may find now or in the
future to be necessary to serve the community.
F. Planning Board approval. Nothing in this section shall be construed as
requiring the Planning Board to accept the cluster form of development
if the Board finds that such development would not be in the best
interests of the community. If the cluster method of subdivision is
approved, the applicant shall be required to fulfill the requirements of
the Subdivision Ordinance* in the same manner as a subdivision
without the cluster option.
G. Effect on conditional uses. This section of the Zoning Ordinance shall
not be construed to have any effect on the number, size or type of
conditional use permitted in any zone district prior to clustering.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following purposes and no other:
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Single family detached dwelling until per lot.
(b) Single-family semiattached dwellings (duplexes): one dwelling
unit per lot.
(c) Townhouses.
(d) Patio homes.
(e) Multifamily housing.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Off-street parking and loading as required: Up to 50% of the
required parking may be off the residential lot but within 200
feet of the unit it serves.
(b) Private recreational areas, open space, recreational buildings
and administrative offices when owned and operated for the
exclusive use of a homeowners' association which has been
formed under the provisions of this chapter and which has
been approved by the Planning Board. There shall be no
storage of mechanical equipment or materials permitted within
the association areas, open space, buildings, or offices.
§ 189.03.070 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.080
001:534
(c) Public recreation areas and open spaces.
(d) Signs, as permitted by the Township Sign Ordinance.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter.
(a) Nursing homes.
(b) Hospitals.
(c) Convalescent homes.
(d) Schools.
(e) Churches and houses of worship.
(f) Nursery schools.
(g) Home occupations accessory to a permitted use.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses which are not specifically permitted in
the R-87 Zone are hereby prohibited.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 100 contiguous acres shall be
required for a planned residential development. In a case where
100 acres are not owned in single ownership, the applicant may
present to the Planning Board an executed agreement between the
various parties who together control 100 or more contiguous acres
of land, which shall qualify the properties for application for and
development of a PRD.
(2) Lot width. A planned residential development shall have 1,000 feet
of frontage on a through arterial street of at least 60 feet in right-ofway
width. Said street shall exist at the time of application or shall
be part of the development of the PRD. In the latter case, the
construction of said street shall be part of the first phase of
construction.
(3) Height. No structure in the PRD shall exceed three stories or 40
feet in height, whichever is less.
(4) Required buffers. There shall be a one-hundred-foot buffer between
any structures within the PRD and the boundaries of the PRD. This
area shall be a planted buffer using landscaping and/or existing
vegetation in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Board. No
parking or access drives shall be included within this buffer. No
natural vegetation shall be removed without approval of the
Planning Board.
§ 189.03.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.080
001:535
(5) Coverage. In the PRD, the maximum building coverage and
coverage by impervious cover shall be those maximums established
for each building type.
(6) Open space.
(a) The minimum amount of common open space, separate and
apart from any yard areas required for individual lots in the
PRD Zone, shall be 35% of the gross acreage.
(b) Said open space may include no structures other than a public
school, public park, private recreational building not exceeding
10,000 square feet in size or other community building.
Required buffer areas may be included in the open space, as
well as open space medians between street pavements,
provided that the median is at least 20 feet in width. Any open
space area shall not have any dimension which is less than 20
feet. All lots within the PRD Zone shall have access to the
common open space.
(c) Ownership of open space.
[1] All open space, tree cover, recreational area, scenic vista
or authorized land use whose acreage shall be utilized in
the determination of the common land as is hereinabove
provided shall be conveyed in fee simple title by warranty
deed from the subdivider or owner to an association made
up of homeowners purchasing homes in the subdivision,
which conveyance will be for the sole benefit, use and
enjoyment of the lot owners, present and future. The deeds
and agreements complying with the provisions of this
section shall have attached thereto a written legal opinion
prepared and signed by an attorney licensed to practice
law by the State of New Jersey. Said opinion shall set forth
the attorney's legal conclusion as to the legal form and
effect of said deeds and agreement. The deed shall be
insured by a title insurance company licensed to do
business in New Jersey. Said deeds and agreements shall
be approved by the Planning Board and shall be filed with
the Morris County Clerk's office simultaneously with the
recording of the final plat of the subdivision authorized
under the ordinance.
[2] Alternately, said subdivider or owner may dedicate said
property to the Township of Pequannock, the County, State
or Federal Government or a private nonprofit organization,
restricting said conveyance in perpetuity for open space,
recreational or other public purposes. Said conveyance
shall be accompanied as well by an opinion of an attorney
of the State of New Jersey, representing said subdivider,
attesting to the legality of said agreement and conveyance.
§ 189.03.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.080
001:536
All deeds to the Township shall be accompanied by a title
policy guaranteeing the right of the subdivider or owner to
convey the deed to the property.
(d) The location of the open space shall be subject to approval by
the Planning Board, in accordance with good planning, zoning
and engineering principles, so as to best protect the
environment, with particular attention paid to the following:
[1] Land shown on the Official Township Map or Master Plan
as open space.
[2] Flood hazard areas.
[3] Location along ditches, watercourses and water bodies
and wetlands.
[4] Floodwater retention areas.
[5] Reservoirs, well fields and aquifer recharge areas.
[6] Areas of steep slope.
[7] Areas of natural rock outcropping.
[8] Areas of unique or unusual vegetation or animal habitat.
[9] Areas located on the Official Township Map for use for
public purposes, such as schools, libraries, etc.
[10] Number of units.
[a] In the PRD Zone, the total number of dwelling units
permitted shall not exceed a maximum of four
dwellings per gross acre.
[i] The following shall be the percentage of the total
number of dwellings permitted for each housing
type:
[A] Single-family detached dwellings: 0% to 30%.
[B] Single-family semiattached dwellings
(duplexes): 0% to 20%.
[C] Patio homes: 0% to 40%.
[D] Townhouses: 0% to 60%.
[E] Multifamily housing: 0% to 60%.
[ii] The above distribution schedule as to percentage
ratios for dwelling types may be varied by the
Planning Board, provided that the applicant shall
demonstrate, through a market feasibility study
§ 189.03.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.080
001:537
and other documentation as may be required by
the Planning Board, that such variation is
necessary to ensure construction of low- and
moderate-income housing. Any variations granted
by the Board shall maintain at least two dwelling
types and ensure that at least 35% of the PRD site
will be maintained in common open space.
[b] The net density for particular types of dwelling units
shall be in accordance with the schedule below. In
calculating permitted net densities as outlined herein,
the area of land covered by such uses shall include
internal streets, parking areas and all private yards,
but not areas designated as common open space.
[i] The net density of single-family detached units
shall not exceed four dwelling units per acre.
[ii] The net density of single-family semiattached
units shall not exceed 10 dwelling units per acre.
[iii] The net density of patio homes shall not exceed 10
dwelling units per acre.
[iv] The net density of townhouses shall not exceed 10
dwelling units per acre.
[v] The net density of multifamily housing units shall
not exceed 15 dwelling units per acre.
[vi] Location of each housing type. The location of
each housing type shall be subject to the approval
of the Planning Board, in accordance with good
planning, zoning and engineering principles, so as
to protect the environment. Particular attention
shall be paid to the following:
[A] Relationship to open space and the criteria
used to determine its location.
[B] Existing and proposed street patterns.
[C] Harmony with adjacent housing types, both
within the PRD and surrounding areas.
[D] Relationship to schools and recreational and
community facilities.
[vii] Bulk regulations for each housing type.
[A] Single-family detached dwellings. The
following standards and bulk regulations
§ 189.03.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.080
001:538
shall apply for single-family detached in the
PRD Zone:
(1) Minimum lot area: 9,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 75 feet.
(3) Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories or 35
feet.
(4) Minimum front yard: 35 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: 6 feet, and an
aggregate width of 25% of the width of
the lot.
(7) Maximum coverage by buildings: 20%.
(8) Maximum coverage by impervious
surfaces: 50%.
(9) Parking: at least 2 off-street spaces.
[B] Single-family semiattached dwellings
(duplexes). The following standards and bulk
regulations shall apply for semiattached
(duplex) dwellings in the PRD Zone:
(1) Minimum lot area per unit: 7,000 square
feet.
(2) Minimum lot width per unit: 70 feet.
(3) Minimum height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: 6 feet, and an
aggregate side yard width equal to 30%
of the lot width.
(7) Maximum coverage by buildings: 30%.
(8) Maximum coverage by impervious
surfaces: 55%.
(9) Parking: 2 off-street spaces per dwelling.
[C] Patio homes. The following standards and
bulk regulations shall apply for patio homes
in the PRD Zone:
(1) Minimum lot area: 4,500 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
(3) Maximum height: 2 1/2 stories or 35
feet.
§ 189.03.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.080
001:539
(4) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: only one side yard
shall be permitted, which shall be no less
than 10 feet. There shall be no windows,
vents or other openings on the side of
the structure which has no side yard,
and a maintenance easement shall be
provided on the adjacent lot for the wall
which is constructed on the property
line.
(7) Maximum coverage by buildings: 50%.
(8) Maximum coverage by impervious
surfaces: 70%.
(9) Parking: At least 2 off-street parking
spaces shall be required.
[D] Townhouses. The following standards and
bulk regulations shall apply for attached
townhouses in the PRD Zone:
(1) Minimum lot width:
(a) Interior unit: 16 feet.
(b) End unit: 25 feet.
(2) Maximum height: 3 stories or 40 feet.
(3) Minimum average front yard per 10-unit
group: 20 feet.
(4) Minimum average rear yard per 10-unit
group: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard: none permitted, except
for the end unit in the structure which shall
have a minimum side yard of 10 feet.
(6) Minimum distance between structures: 20
feet.
(7) Maximum number of units per structure: 10.
(8) Maximum coverage by buildings: 55%.
(9) Maximum coverage by impervious surfaces:
75%.
(10) Parking: at least 2 off-street parking spaces.
[E] Multifamily dwellings. The following
standards and bulk regulations shall apply for
multifamily dwellings in the PRD Zone:
§ 189.03.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.080
001:540
(1) Maximum number of dwellings per
structure: 24.
(2) Maximum height: 3 stories or 40 feet,
whichever is less.
(3) Minimum lot area: none required.
(4) Minimum lot width: none required.
(5) Minimum average front yard per structure:
30 feet from nearest interior street or
common parking area.
(6) Minimum average rear yard per structure:
20 feet from nearest interior street or
common parking area.
(7) Minimum distance between structures: 30
feet.
(8) Maximum coverage by buildings: none
required.
(9) Maximum coverage by impervious surfaces:
none required.
(10) Parking: at least 2 off-street parking spaces,
both of which must be within 300 feet of the
dwelling to be served.
(11) Improvements.
(a) All improvements shall be constructed
according to Township standards and
specifications. In general, the layout of
the PRD shall be such that nonvehicular
traffic is encouraged and given
preference. Grade-separated
pedestrian, bicycle and equestrian
paths shall be developed, and these
facilities shall provide the shortest
distance between the residences and
community facilities and services.
Pedestrian pathways shall be separated
from bicycle and equestrian trails. All
residences shall have access to the
open space system. Streets shall be
broken into the following
classifications:
§ 189.03.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.080
001:541
(1) Arterial: minimum right-of-way
width of 60 feet; minimum
pavement width of 40 feet; curbs
and sidewalks on both sides of the
street; services a population of 500
or more dwellings and/or major
community facilities. No dwellings
shall have frontage or direct
vehicular access to any arterial
street.
(2) Primary collector: minimum rightof-
way width of 50 feet; minimum
street width of 34 feet; curbs and
sidewalks on both sides of the
street; services population of 100 to
500 dwellings.
(3) Secondary collector: Minimum
right-of-way width of 50 feet;
minimum street width of 34 feet;
curbs on both sides; services
population of 15 to 100 dwellings.
(4) Local: minimum right-of-way width
of 40 feet; minimum street width
of 30 feet; curbs on both sides of
street; services population of zero
to 15 dwellings.
(b) For primary collector streets, sidewalks
may be eliminated if a pedestrian
pathway is placed in another location
which will serve the same function. All
other improvements shall be as
specified in the Subdivision Ordinance*
and any other ordinances of the
Township of Pequannock which
regulate development standards.
§ 189.03.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.080
001:542
(c) Prior to approval of a PRD Zone
application, the site must be served by
a water supply and sanitary sewerage
system which is adequate to handle the
projected load from the site following
full development. Alternatively, a plan
for providing the above utilities, which
plan must have received Township and
state approval, must be constructed as
part of the first phase of development
and must be in operational order and
fully approved to operate prior to the
issuance of any building permit for the
site.
(d) All other improvements on the site shall
be as specified by the Subdivision
Ordinance or any other ordinance of the
Township which regulates development
standards.
C. General regulations.
(1) Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
AFFORDABLE — That a household at the ceiling income for each
income group, for each household size, is not required to pay more
than 25% of its gross household income for the total of principle,
interest, property taxes, insurance and homeowners' association
assessments, calculated on the basis of a 10% down payment and
realistically available mortgage interest rates. In the case of rental
housing, such a household is not required to pay more than 25% of
income for rent, including utilities.
LOW-INCOME — Having a total gross household income equal to
50% or less of the median household income for households of
the same size using the median income data for household size
prepared by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) for the region which includes Pequannock
(presently the Newark S.M.S.A.) or, if HUD data is not available,
equivalent data from other sources acceptable to the Planning
Board.
MODERATE-INCOME — Having a total gross household income
between 50% to 80% of the median household income for
households of the same size for the region which includes
Pequannock using the median income data for household size
prepared by HUD or, if HUD data is not available, equivalent data
from other sources acceptable to the Planning Board.
(2) Low- and moderate-income housing requirements.
§ 189.03.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.080
001:543
(a) At least 10% of the total number of residential dwellings shall
be made affordable and sold or rented to low-income persons,
and 10% shall be made affordable and sold or rented to
moderate-income persons.
(b) At least 20% of the low- and moderate-income units shall be
three-bedroom units, and no more than 50% shall be onebedroom
units or efficiency units.
(c) The developer shall agree not to impose age restrictions upon
the occupants of any low- and moderate-income unit, except as
to publicly subsidized senior citizen housing, nor to impose
residency requirements.
(d) Affirmative marketing plan.
[1] The developer shall formulate and implement a written
affirmative marketing plan acceptable to the Planning
Board or the agency designated by it. The affirmative
marketing plan shall be realistically designed to ensure
that lower-income persons of all races and ethnic groups
are informed of the housing opportunities in the
development, feel welcome to seek to buy or rent such
housing and have the opportunity to buy or rent such
housing. It shall include advertising and other outreach
activities realistically designed to reach:
[a] Lower-income persons of all races and ethnic groups
in municipalities in northeastern New Jersey that have
higher than average proportions of Blacks, Hispanics
or lower-income households.
[b] Lower-income persons of all races and ethnic groups
who work in Morris County but do not live within the
county.
[2] The plan shall include advertisement in newspapers,
periodicals and other media aimed at Black and Hispanic
populations.
(e) A developer shall submit a phasing schedule for the
construction of the low- and moderate-income units. The
developer may construct the first 20% of the development
without constructing any low- or moderate-income units. By
the time 40% of the units in the development are constructed,
at least 20% of the low- and moderate-income units shall be
constructed and sold to lower-income purchasers. By the time
60% of the units in the development are constructed, at least
45% of the low- and moderate-income units shall be
constructed and sold to lower-income persons. By the time
80% of the units in the development are occupied, at least 70%
of the low- and moderate-income units shall be constructed
§ 189.03.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.080
001:544
and sold to lower-income persons. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for units other than units affordable to lowor
moderate-income households until all low- and moderateincome
units in the previous phase have been completed. The
developer shall provide equal numbers of low- and moderateincome
units in each passing schedule.
(f) Resale and rental controls.
[1] A developer shall submit a plan for resale or rental
controls to ensure that the units remain affordable to lowand
moderate-income households for at least 30 years. The
purchaser shall be entitled to sell the units for:
[a] The original sales price multiplied by 75% of the
percentage increase in the consumer price index
between the date of purchase and the date of resale.
[b] Reimbursement for documented monetary outlays for
reasonable improvements.
[2] The low-income units, upon resale, may be sold only to
low-income persons, and the moderate-income units may
be sold to low- or moderate-income purchasers. If,
however, no low-income purchaser is found within six
months, the low-income unit may be sold to a moderateincome
purchaser or, if none is available, to any interested
purchaser. If no moderate-income purchaser is found for a
moderate-income unit within six months, the unit may be
sold to any purchaser; the resale controls shall remain in
effect for subsequent resales. The developer may create a
nonprofit corporation, enter into an agreement with a
nonprofit corporation or a governmental agency or choose
to administer the resale controls himself, but in no event
may the resale controls be administered merely by a deed
restriction.
(g) Rentals. Where units are offered as rental units, they shall
continue to be offered as rental units for 15 years. After 15
years, they may be sold at prices affordable to moderateincome
households, subject to such resale price controls as
may be necessary to ensure that the units continue to be
affordable to moderate-income households for the remainder
of the thirty-year period commencing from the date of initial
rental.
(h) Waivers, modifications or other actions. A developer in the PRD
and PUD Zone may request the Planning Board and/or
Township to further increase densities, to waive or modify costgenerating
requirements in the Zoning, Subdivision or Site
Plan Ordinance, to waive or reduce fees or to grant tax
abatement to the extent authorized by law if the developer
§ 189.03.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.080
001:545
§ 189.03.090. Continuing Care Retirement District (CCRCD).
In the CCRCD Continuing Care Retirement Community District, the
following provisions shall apply:
determines that such actions are necessary to provide the 20%
low- and moderate-income housing. A developer may choose
one of three impartial housing experts from a list prepared
by the Planning Board and shall have the expert make
recommendations, at the expense of the developer, on the
necessity for the proposed waivers, modifications or other
actions. The expert shall also consider whether the
requirement for which the waiver or modification is sought is
a necessary minimum standard required for public health and
safety. In the event that the expert determines that, even after
full municipal cooperation, it is not economically feasible for
the developer to provide the full amount of affordable low- and
moderate-income units as defined in this subsection, the expert
may recommend that the developer provide 12% moderateincome
and 8% low-income units. Such a modification in the
low- and moderate-income obligation shall not be approved
unless the expert determines that the Township has
substantially complied with his recommendations for
municipal actions to reduce costs. In the event that the
Planning Board declines to accept one or more of the
recommendations of the expert, it shall detail its reasons in
writing.
A. Definitions.
(1) A Continuing Care Retirement Community ("CCRC") shall mean a
facility which has a primary purpose of providing housing and
continuing care for people over the age of 60 or where either the
husband or wife is over age 60, consists of Independent Apartment
Units, Assisted Living Units, Skilled Care Nursing Units and
Continuing Care Retirement Community Accessory Uses all as
defined herein and as regulated by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-330 through
357, known as the Continuing Care Retirement Community
Regulation and Financial Disclosure Act. For purposes of this
chapter, "continuing care" means the provision of lodging, nursing,
medical or health related services at the same or another location
to an individual pursuant to an agreement effective for the life of
the individual or for a period greater than one year, including
mutually terminable contracts, and in consideration of the payment
of an entrance fee with or without other periodic charges to an
individual who is at least 60 years of age.
(2) An Independent Apartment Unit shall mean a dwelling unit
containing living areas, bedroom areas, kitchen areas and
bathrooms, including studio style apartments, varying in square
footage from 350 square feet to 2,000 square feet, which house one
§ 189.03.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.090
001:546
or more people over the age of 60 in a manner in which they may
live independently while receiving one or more meals per day in a
congregate setting.
(3) An Assisted Living Unit is a dwelling unit varying in square footage
from 200 square feet to 500 square feet that provides a residential
living environment assisted by congregate meals, housekeeping,
and personal services, for persons age 60 or older, who have
temporary or periodic difficulties with one or more essential
activities of daily living, such as feeding, bathing, dressing or
mobility. An Assisted Living Unit shall include accessory uses
including dining rooms, bathing areas, common areas, offices and
other space necessary to provide the above services.
(4) A Skilled Nursing Care Unit shall mean a nursing bed or individual
room which provides board, shelter and twenty-four-hour skilled
nursing and medical care to chronic or convalescent patients. A
Nursing Unit shall include accessory uses including dining rooms,
bathing areas, common areas, offices, clinics, therapy areas,
medical facilities and other space necessary to provide the above
services.
(5) Continuing Care Retirement Community Accessory Uses within a
Continuing Care Retirement Community shall mean any use
necessary for the operation of the facility or for the benefit or
convenience of the residents and their guests including, but not
limited to: kitchen and dining facilities, places of worship, indoor
and outdoor recreational buildings and uses, retail and banking
facilities, beauty salons and barber shops, gift shops, class rooms,
security facilities, conference rooms, common areas, guest rooms,
administrative offices, medical offices, postal center, pharmacy,
maintenances facilities, craft and music rooms, library and
television room, and heating and cooling equipment structures,
provided that the Accessory Use is for the primary benefit of the
Continuing Care Retirement Community, and provided that there is
no exterior announcement of the use.
B. Use Regulations. Structures and lots may be used or occupied for the
following uses in CCRC District:
(1) Permitted uses:
(a) Continuing care retirement community.
(b) Independent apartment units.
(c) Assisted living units.
(d) Skilled nursing units.
(2) Accessory uses:
§ 189.03.090 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.090
001:547
(a) Continuing care retirement community accessory uses as
defined herein.
(b) Off-street parking and loading as required by this chapter.
(c) Garages for the use of occupants of the CCRC Zone.
(d) Signs, as permitted by the Township Sign Ordinance.
C. Bulk regulations applicable to CCRC uses.
(1) Minimum lot area: 125 acres. However, the 125 acres minimum lot
area for development of a CCRC shall not prevent the development
from proceeding in sections or phases.
(2) Maximum impervious coverage: 50%.
(3) Minimum width: none.
(4) Minimum depth: none.
(5) Minimum front yard: 100 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard: 50 feet.
(7) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet.
(8) Maximum building height: seven stories or 75 feet, exclusive of roof
structures and towers.
(9) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.60.
(10) Open space: The purpose of this section is to both promote the
retention of as much open space as possible that results from the
method of development that is permitted by the bulk regulations
contained in the CCRC Zone and to prevent inappropriate
development from taking place in areas of the Township
characterized by steep slopes and/or areas of environmental and
natural sensitivity. Substantial portions of the land lying within the
CCRC Zone are characterized by slopes of 25% or greater and
invariably involve severe limitations to development, including but
not limited to, building and road construction, drainage facilities
and improvements and effluent disposal. Moreover, it is found that
the removal of vegetation and disturbance of soils on steep slopes
by excavation and fill will increase runoff and result in soil erosion
and siltation with the resultant pollution of streams, watercourses,
waterbodies and wetlands, as well as the potential danger of
flooding and water drainage, thereby having the potential of
endangering public and private property and life. These conditions
are aggravated by soil disturbance, construction and development
on these slopes which create an additional hazard to the lives and
property to those dwelling in the proximity of the slopes below
them.
§ 189.03.090 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.090
001:548
In addition to the prominent steep slope characteristics of the
land lying within the CCRC Zone, said lands contain a preexisting
system of trails and pathways that are connected and/or located in
the proximity of existing public parklands within the Township and
which have been enjoyed by the public over the course of many
years.
Accordingly, the location of the open space resulting from the
cluster-type method of development which is permitted and
favored by the Township for the CCRC Zone shall be subject to
the approval of planning, zoning and engineering principles, so
as to protect the environment and promote the retention of the
maximum amount of open space as shall be reasonably possible.
Therefore, the following bulk regulations relating to open space
shall apply within the CCRC Zone.
(a) The minimum amount of open space shall be 50% of the gross
acreage.
(b) Open space shall be included in calculation of minimum lot
area, density, maximum impervious coverage, maximum floor
area ratio and minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks and
buffer areas.
(c) Said open space may include the following uses and
appurtenant structures: public or private park or recreational
uses, drainage and detention facilities, paths, trails, public or
private utilities such as, but not limited to: sewer, water, cables
and electrical, all to service the Township of Pequannock and
for the CCRC. Any open space shall not have a dimension less
than 20 feet nor a minimum contiguous size of less than 1/2
acre.
D. Ownership of open space.
(1) All open space as hereinabove provided shall be first offered for
dedication to the Township of Pequannock, and then to other
suitable entities. In the event the Township of Pequannock shall
decline the dedication for any reason, the land shall revert to the
property owner with the restriction that said property shall be used
in perpetuity for open space to be utilized for the benefit and
enjoyment of the public. Any deeds of conveyance and agreements
complying with the provisions of this section shall be accompanied,
as may be necessary, by all approvals and legal opinions as may be
necessary to comply with the regulations of the Township of
Pequannock and the State of New Jersey. Any deed of dedication to
the Township of Pequannock shall be accompanied by a policy of
title insurance issued by a title insurance company licensed to do
business in the State of New Jersey guaranteeing the right of the
owner to convey the deed to the property free of all claims and
rights of others, except for any easement and/or restrictions of
§ 189.03.090 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.090
001:549
record, so long as said easements and/or restrictions: (1) are not
presently violated; (2) provide that the property would not be
forfeited if they were violated; or (3) do not unreasonably limit the
intended use of the property by the public as open space consistent
with the provisions of this chapter.
E. Location of open space. The location of open space shall be subject to
the approval by the Planning Board, in accordance with good planning,
zoning and engineering principles, so as best to protect the
environment, with particular attention paid to the following:
(1) Land shown on the official Tax Map or Master Plan as open space.
(2) Flood Hazard areas.
(3) Location along ditches, watercourses and waterbodies and
wetlands.
(4) Floodwater retention or detention areas.
(5) Reservoirs, well fields and aquifer recharge areas.
(6) Areas of steep slope.
(7) Areas of natural rock outcropping.
(8) Areas of unusual vegetation or animal habitat.
F. Special setbacks applicable to CCRC uses.
(1) Building setbacks. All buildings shall be set back at least 100 feet
from any perimeter lot line which abuts a residential zone or a
residential use or which abuts land within another municipality. If
the applicant provides an undisturbed natural buffer, the Planning
Board may reduce this setback as it deems necessary and
appropriate, but in no event shall the setback be less than 50 feet.
(2) All principal building structures shall be set back at least 30 feet
from other principal structures.
(3) Notwithstanding the foregoing, all buildings may be connected by
covered/enclosed walkways within the areas separating principal
buildings.
G. Parking and loading requirements applicable to CCRC uses. The
required number of parking spaces shall be 0.9 spaces per Independent
Apartment Unit inclusive of all staff, resident and visitor parking and
inclusive of all Assisted Living Units and Skilled Care Nursing Units
within the CCRC. The required number of loading spaces shall be one
per community building over 40,000 square feet.
H. Number of CCRC units. The maximum permitted density shall be six
Independent Apartment Units per gross acre, calculated on a minimum
of 125 acres, and in conjunction therewith, up to 0.40 Assisted Living
§ 189.03.090 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.090
001:550
§ 189.03.100. Senior Citizen Housing Overlay District. [Added
5-26-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-16; 7-26-2011 by Ord. No. 2011-20]
In the Senior Citizen Housing Overlay District, the following provisions shall
apply:
Units and Skilled Care Nursing Units per Independent Apartment Unit
shall be permitted. There shall be no requirement that the Assisted
Living Units and Skilled Nursing Care Units be actually constructed
in any proportion to Independent Apartment Units provided that the
CCRC applicant shall, at the time of application, present a reasonable
plan for construction of all aspects of the development upon
completion.
I. Zero lot lines within a CCRC. As part of an overall development plan
approval for a parcel, interior lots may be created within a CCRC and in
such event the side yard, front yard, and rear yard requirements
generally applicable to the CCRC shall not apply to lots within the
CCRC created by said subdivision. In the event of such a subdivision,
there shall be no prohibition against more than one building on any one
lot.
J. Approvals.
(1) To facilitate development in this zone, the Planning Board shall
apply the site plan and subdivision standards of this chapter in such
a way as to encourage and promote flexibility, economy and
environmental soundness in design and layout, and the Planning
Board shall not be required to have all detailed engineering
information at the time of any preliminary approval. The applicant
may not build on preliminary approval unless detailed drawings
meeting all ordinance standards are supplied. Any development
may take place in conjunction with an overall phasing plan
approved by the Board.
(2) In the event a CCRC development is proposed and preliminary site
plan approval granted, the Planning Board may, in its discretion,
extend the three year protection of such approvals afforded an
applicant pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49d.
K. Amendment of Zoning Map. The CCRC designation shall be as
designated on the Amendment to the Zoning Map attached and made a
part of this chapter.
A. Purpose.
(1) The goals and objectives of the Pequannock Township Master Plan
and Periodic Re-Examination Reports point to the need for low and
moderate-income housing as well as the need for a diversity of
housing stock in the community. There continues to be a present
need for senior citizen housing in Pequannock Township as
indicated by the older demographic studies in the Master Plan as
§ 189.03.090 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.03.100
001:551
well as lengthy waiting lists for such housing currently maintained
by Hearle Village and periodically revised in past years as required
by New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency regulations.
(2) The purpose of this ordinance is to permit the future development
of senior citizen housing as an adjunct to the Alex Hearle Senior
Citizens Housing Project and for the further purpose of recognizing
as a permitted use, the Alex Hearle Project, approved
approximately 30 years ago by the Township of Pequannock for
subsidized, nonprofit high density housing through the Use
Variance process.
(3) The further purpose of this ordinance is to specifically provide for
the development of new senior citizen housing by Pequannock
Senior Citizens Housing Corp. on previously acquired properties
adjacent to the existing Alex Hearle Project as well as a single
adjacent property to be acquired in the future for such use.
(4) The final and procedural purpose of this ordinance is to overlay
zoning regulations applicable to nonprofit senior citizen housing
within the R-15 Residential District, South of Jacksonville Road,
where such uses have historically proven to be a compatible use.
B. Principal permitted uses. This zone is limited to senior citizen housing
as defined by this chapter. The following dwelling unit types are
permitted:
(1) Attached single-family dwelling units.
(2) Detached single-family dwelling units.
(3) Multifamily dwellings (apartments) not to exceed two stories in the
architectural style and design of the existing development.
C. Permitted accessory uses.
(1) Uses and structures customarily incidental to the principal
permitted use, including independent recreational and meeting
facilities.
(2) A two bedroom unit for use by the Project building superintendent.
D. Location. Senior citizen housing shall be allowed as such use currently
exists at the Pequannock Township Senior Citizens project site on
property described on the municipal tax assessment map as Block 3506,
Lot 4 and also on an adjacent property, previously acquired by the
Pequannock Township Senior Housing Corp., and approved for such
purpose by New Jersey Housing Mortgage Finance Agency, being Block
3505, Lot 7 and Lot 8, and Block 3902, Lot 11.
E. Additional zone standards (all minimum except as indicated).
(1) Lot area: 392,040 square feet (9.0 acres).
§ 189.03.100 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.03.100
001:552
§ 189.04. Historic Landmark District Zone.
§ 189.04.010. Establishment; purpose.
There is hereby established the Historic Landmark District Zone for the
purpose of protecting and preserving sights or structures which are,
(2) Lot width: 800 feet.
(3) Lot depth: 500 feet.
(4) Building height (maximum): 2 1/2 stories/35 feet.
(5) Building coverage (maximum): 25%.
(6) Impervious coverage (maximum): 50%.
(7) Setbacks.
(a) Front: 50 feet.
(b) Rear: 30 feet.
(c) Side: 30 feet.
(8) Distance between buildings: 10 feet.
(9) Units/acre (maximum): 20.
F. Supplemental Regulations.
(1) Each dwelling unit in the development shall be serviced by a
municipal sanitary sewer system and by municipal water supply.
(2) Off street parking shall be provided at the ratio of 0.5 space per
unit.
(3) Each development project in the zone shall include in its
application assurances that senior citizen occupants shall qualify
by age and income for the particular category of housing at the
time of occupancy.
(4) Parking in the front yard shall be permitted with a minimum front
yard setback of 25 feet.
(5) Screening, landscaping and open space. Where a multifamily
residential use abuts a single-family residential use there shall be a
ten-foot buffer strip which consists of landscaping or natural
vegetation as approved by the Planning Board. Said buffer area
shall include a solid fence, in conformance with other requirements
of this chapter as approved by the Planning Board. Such a buffer
may be located within the rear or side yard setback requirement.
The object of said buffer shall be to screen year-round the adjacent
areas.
§ 189.03.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.04.010
001:553
because of age, association or architecture, of special historical and
aesthetic interest or character and which, as such, have an impact upon the
economic well-being and general welfare of the residents of the Township
of Pequannock.
§ 189.04.020. Initiation of reclassification.
An amendment to reclassify property to an Historic Landmark District Zone
may be initiated by the property owner, the Township Planning Board, the
Township Council or the Historic District Commission.
§ 189.04.030. Designation of criteria.
For the purposes of this section, an "historical landmark or monument" may
be any real property, such as building, structure, ruins, foundation, route,
trail or place, including but not limited to a cave, cemetery, burial ground,
camp or village area or a natural configuration, geological formation or
feature which:
§ 189.04.040. Application procedure.
Any application for an Historic Landmark District classification hereunder
shall first be referred to the Historic District Commission of the Township of
Pequannock for a report and recommendation. In addition, the Commission
may and, if requested by the Township Council, shall initiate studies of
structures or sites within the Township for possible inclusion hereunder.
A. Is of particular historical, cultural, scenic or aesthetic significance to
the Township of Pequannock and in which the broad cultural, political,
economic or social history of the nation, state or community is reflected
or exemplified.
B. Is identified with historic personages or with important events in the
main current of national, state or local history.
C. Shows evidence of habitation, activity or the culture of prehistoric or
early man.
D. Embodies a distinguishing characteristic or an architectural type
valuable as representative of a period, style or method of construction.
E. Represents a work of a builder, designer, artist or architect whose
individual genius influenced his age.
F. Is imbued with traditional or legendary lore.
G. Is specifically identified within the community facilities plan element of
the Master Plan as recognized by the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28b(6).
§ 189.04.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.04.050
001:554
§ 189.04.050. Standards.
In classifying historical landmark or monument in an Historic Landmark
District Zone, the Township Council shall rely upon the following standards,
in addition to those provided in Section 189.04.030:
§ 189.04.060. Permit required for alterations.
An historical landmark, either as an individual structure or within an
Historic Landmark District Zone, shall not be altered, modified, relocated
or demolished without a certificate of approval issued by the Township
Planning Board after review and recommendation thereof by the Historic
District Commission. A certificate of approval will declare that such
alterations are consistent with the style and general design of the historic
structure or district in question.
§ 189.04.070. Application procedure.
An application under Section 189.04.060 shall be made, in writing, to the
Historic District Commission and shall indicate, in detail, the proposed
alteration. Plans and drawings submitted pursuant to any other section of
the Township Zoning Ordinance may be used in total or partial satisfaction
of this requirement. Existing and proposed elevation drawings of the
historic building alterations shall be supplied to the Commission for its
review of the application. The Historic District Commission shall also
consider the following criteria when reviewing an application and prior to
any recommendation to issue or deny a certificate of approval:
A. The landmark designated shall have a historical, aesthetic or special
character or interest for the general public.
B. The designation of such landmark shall not infringe upon the rights of a
private property owner hereof to make any and all uses of such
landmark which are not in conflict with the purposes of this section.
C. The designation of such landmarks shall not require expenditures by
the Township of Pequannock of any amount, unless such designation
results in a dedication of the building, structure, area or property for
public purposes, in which case the property owner shall be entitled to
just compensation within one year after the approval of the final plat or
site plan pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-44.
D. Any historical landmark, monument, parcel or place as otherwise
described in Section 189.04.030 which has been included in the
Historic Register on either the county, state or federal level shall be
included in the Historic Landmark District Zone of the Township of
Pequannock.
A. Architectural style. Any alterations or additions being considered shall
not detract from the original architectural style of the structure.
§ 189.04.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.04.070
001:555
§ 189.04.080. Public hearings.
The Township Planning Board, after review and recommendation of the
Historic District Commission, shall hold a public hearing on any application
under Section 189.04.070, said hearing to be scheduled in accordance with
the Open Public Meetings Act of 1975 of the State of New Jersey.19
§ 189.04.090. Demolition of landmarks.
If an application under 189.04.070 is for demolition of an historical
landmark hereunder, the Historic District Commission, with the
concurrence of the Township Planning Board, may suspend for up to 60
days the granting of permits requisite to demolition in order to allow
consideration by the Township of acquisition by the Township or any other
public or private entity of the landmark for the purpose of preservation
thereof.
§ 189.04.100. Time limit for action on applications.
Within 45 days of the date the application was submitted, the Historic
District Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, disapprove or
request revision of the plans or drawings. Failure by the Commission to
act within 45 days shall be deemed approval of the application, unless the
applicant shall consent to an extension of time.
§ 189.04.110. Registration with state.
The Township Council or the Historic District Commission may register with
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Office of Historic
Sites, a landmark or site which has historical or architectural significance,
where the registration would assist in the preservation thereof.
§ 189.04.120. Appeals.
B. Design. Any modifications to the proposed structure regarding design,
including but not limited to fenestration, roof lines and decorations,
shall be consistent with the historical features of the original structure.
C. Color, texture and materials. Use of color, texture and types of materials
shall be judged in comparison to the original structure's historical
features.
D. Other exterior considerations. Lighting, landscaping, signs, utilities and
parking shall not detract from the historical character of the structure
or structures in question. Signs shall be in keeping with the historical
character of the structure, and no illuminated signs shall be permitted
on or near historic structures.
19.Note: See N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 189.04.070 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.04.120
001:556
§ 189.04.130. Historic District Commission.
§ 189.05. Commercial Districts.
§ 189.05.010. C-1 Community Business District. [Amended
12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-22; 7-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
In the C-1 Community Business District, the following regulations shall
apply:
A. From the governing body. A decision by the governing body regarding
designation of any building, structure, area or property as an "historic
site," and thereby includable in the Historic Landmark District Zone,
may be appealed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
otherwise known as the Municipal Land Use Law.
B. From the Planning Board. A decision by the Township Planning Board
regarding any application for a permit as herein provided may be
appealed to the governing body of the Township of Pequannock within
45 days after the day of the action of the Planning Board. A written
petition of appeal should be filed with the Clerk of the Township of
Pequannock within said forty-five-day period, after which the governing
body shall set a date for hearing thereon, upon notice to all parties in
interest, who shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. After such
hearing, the governing body may affirm or reverse the action of the
Planning Board. The determination to affirm or reverse the action of the
Planning Board shall be based on a majority vote of the total number of
the governing body in attendance. The findings and reasons for the
disposition of the appeal shall be stated on the records of the governing
body, and a copy thereof shall be given to the appellant, with a brief
description of the disposition to be published within 10 days after final
hearing. Any appeal to the governing body shall be held within 45 days
after notice of the appeal is filed with the Township Clerk, and the
Township Clerk shall notify the appellant of said hearing date at least
20 days before said hearing, by certified or registered mail.
A. For the administration of the provisions of this section, the governing
body shall appoint an indeterminate number of members, not exceeding
12, to the Historic District Commission, which shall be available for
consultation with the Township Planning Board as well as the governing
body.
B. All members of the Historic District Commission shall be residents of
the Township of Pequannock and shall serve for terms of five years,
which terms shall be staggered so that one term shall expire in each
year. All members of the Historic District Commission shall serve
without compensation.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following purposes and no other:
§ 189.04.120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.05.010
001:557
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Retail sales of goods and services, in fully enclosed stores,
serving primarily the residents of the surrounding
neighborhoods. The following specific retail sales are
permitted: bakeries; banks; barber shops and beauty parlors;
book and stationery stores; clothing and clothing accessory
shops; drugstores; dry cleaning establishments; dry goods and
variety stores; florists; food stores; hardware stores; household
appliance stores; locksmiths; newsstand; business professional
and governmental offices; packaged liquor stores; pet shops;
photographic studios; sporting and athletic goods stores;
music and dancing studios; and other similar retail and service
uses.
(b) Business, professional and governmental offices and banks,
including banks with drive-in facilities accessory to an officebank
type of facility.
(c) Funeral or mortuary establishments.
(d) Medical and dental clinics and medical diagnostic centers,
provided that there are no facilities for keeping persons
overnight.
(e) Churches and houses of worship, parish houses and convents.
(f) Community centers operated as an accessory use to churches
and houses of worship.
(g) Laundry and dry - cleaning establishments.
(h) Public parks and playgrounds.
(i) Public and parochial schools, nursery schools and schools
which teach special skills which are related to permitted uses
in the C-1 Zone, such as dance schools, secretarial schools, etc.
(j) Shopping centers for uses permitted in the C-1 Zone.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Signs, as permitted by the Township Sign Ordinance.
(b) Off-street parking and loading as required by this chapter,
provided that parking shall not be conducted as the principal
use of any lot.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter.
(a) Two-family houses.
(b) Multifamily dwelling units.
§ 189.05.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.05.010
001:558
(c) Clubs, lodges and similar establishments.
(d) Apartment units above commercial uses.
(e) Restaurants, exclusive of fast food restaurants and drive-in
restaurants.
(f) Outdoor display of merchandise.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses which are not specifically permitted in
the C-1 Zone are hereby prohibited. The following uses are
specifically prohibited.
(a) Adult book and/or gift stores.
(b) Adult mini-motion-picture theaters.
(c) Adult motion-picture theaters.
(d) Hotels.
(e) Motels.
(f) Pawnshops.
(g) Pool and billiard halls.
(h) Dance halls distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for either observation
or participation by patrons therein.
(i) Establishments offering live entertainment which is
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, either for observation or
participation by patrons therein.
(j) Bars, taverns, inns, pubs, grog shops and other such similar
establishments holding a Class C liquor license such that
alcoholic beverages may be consumed or purchased on the
premises.
(k) Gasoline, service and automobile, motorcycle and commercial
vehicle sales and service establishments.
(l) Boardinghouses.
(m) Those uses prohibited in the I-1 Zone, except where otherwise
permitted.
(n) Amusement parlors and arcades.
(o) Tattoo and body piercing parlors.
B. Bulk regulations.
§ 189.05.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.05.010
001:559
§ 189.05.020. C-2 Highway Commercial District. [Amended
12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-22]
In the C-2 Highway Commercial District, the following regulations shall
apply:
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than 4,000 square feet for each lot
shall be provided.
(2) Lot width. A minimum lot width shall be 40 feet.
(3) Height. No structures shall exceed two stories or 30 feet in height,
whichever is less.
(4) Front yard. There shall be a front yard 25 feet in depth. No parking
shall be permitted in the front yard.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard which shall be 10% of the
depth of the lot, but not less than 10 feet.
(6) Side yard. There shall be two side yards, each not less than three
feet in width and the aggregate of the two side yards shall not be
less than 25% of the width of the lot.
(7) Coverage. No more than 30% of the lot shall be covered by
buildings, and not more than 90% of the lot shall be covered by
impervious surfaces, including buildings.
(8) Screening, landscaping and open space. Landscaping, as required
by the approved site plan, shall be maintained for the life of the
property to standards as approved in the site plan. Where a nonsingle-
family residential use abuts a single-family residential zone
or an area which is used as a single family residence, a buffer of at
least five feet in width shall be provided on the non-single-family
residential lot. Said buffer area shall include a solid fence in
conformance with other requirements of this chapter as approved
by the Planning Board. This buffer may be located in the required
yard area but shall not include parking or driveways and shall be
planted and maintained in a manner acceptable to the Planning
Board and approved as part of the site plan. The effect of such
buffer shall be to screen the business use in the C-1 Zone from the
adjacent residences. Special attention shall be paid to screening
parking, loading and mechanical systems.
(9) Lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following purposes and no other:
(1) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the C-1 Zone are permitted in
the C-2 Zone. In addition, the following uses are permitted:
a. Job printers.
§ 189.05.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.05.020
001:560
b. Veterinarians or animal hospitals, provided that no kennels or
boarding of animals is permitted.
c. Establishments serving alcoholic beverages, provided that no
live entertainment shall be offered.
d. Shopping centers consisting of uses permitted in the C-2 Zone.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Signs, as permitted by the Township Sign Ordinance.
(b) Off-street parking and loading as required by this chapter,
provided that parking shall not be conducted as the principal
use of any lot.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter.
(a) Clubs, lodges and similar establishments.
(b) Gasoline service stations.
(c) Businesses that service, repair or install automobile and
motorcycle parts.
(d) Restaurants, except restaurants of the drive-in type.
(e) Commercial recreational uses.
(f) Outdoor display of merchandise.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses not specifically permitted in the C-2
Zone are hereby prohibited. Specifically prohibited are:
(a) Residential uses.
(b) Those uses prohibited in the C-1 Zone, except where otherwise
permitted.
(c) "Big box" retail.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than one acre shall be required.
(2) Lot width. A minimum lot width of 200 feet shall be required.
(3) Height. No structure shall exceed two stories or 30 feet in height,
whichever is less.
(4) Front yard. There shall be a front yard which shall be not less than
50 feet in average depth, but in no case shall any portion of the
structure be constructed closer than 35 feet to the street line. A
maximum of 70% of the front yard shall be used for parking and
access drives.
§ 189.05.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.05.020
001:561
§ 189.05.030. C-3 Regional Commercial District. [Amended
12-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-22; 7-9-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-10]
In the C-3 Regional Commercial District, the following regulations shall
apply:
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20% of the
depth of the lot, but in no case shall a rear yard be less than 12 feet,
nor shall any rear yard be required to exceed 20 feet.
(6) Side yard. No side yard shall be required. Where provided,
however, the minimum side yard shall be six feet in width.
(7) Coverage. No more than 30% of the lot shall be covered by
buildings, and not more than 90% of the lot shall be covered by
impervious surfaces, include buildings.
(8) Screening, landscaping and open space.
(a) In each case when a lot abuts a residential zone or a park area,
there shall be a ten-foot buffer strip which consists of
landscaping or natural vegetation as approved by the Planning
Board. Said buffer area shall include a solid fence in
conformance with other requirements of this chapter as
approved by the Planning Board. Such a buffer shall not
include the rear or side yard required or any parking or
driveways. The object of said buffer shall be to screen yearround
the adjacent areas, with particular attention to parking,
loading and service area.
(b) All landscaping as required by a site plan approval under the
terms of this chapter shall be maintained for the life of the
property to standards as approved in the site plan.
(9) Lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following purposes and no other:
(1) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the C-1 Zone are permitted in
the C-3 Zone. In addition, the following uses are permitted:
(a) Restaurants, excluding restaurants of the drive-in type.
(b) Establishments serving alcoholic beverages, including
establishments which offer live entertainment.
(c) Telephone exchanges and utility buildings.
(d) Passenger rail stations and facilities customarily incidental
thereto.
(e) Catering and banquet establishments.
§ 189.05.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.05.030
001:562
(f) Hotels and motels of 50 or more rooms.
(g) Clubs, lodges and similar establishments.
(h) Any combination of the uses permitted in the C-3 Zone,
including shopping centers and malls, hotel complexes, etc.
(i) Movie theaters (excluding drive-ins), public auditoriums and
theaters for live performances.
(j) Tattoo and body piercing parlors.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Signs, as permitted by the Township Sign Ordinance.
(b) Off-street parking and loading, including parking garages, as
may be required by this chapter.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter.
(a) Gasoline service stations.
(b) Businesses that service, repair or install motor vehicle parts.
(c) Automobile, motorcycle and commercial vehicle sales.
(d) Fully enclosed sales and storage of building materials.
(e) Commercial recreational uses.
(f) Nursery and garden centers.
(g) Outdoor display of merchandise.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses not specifically permitted in the C-3
Zone are hereby prohibited. Specifically, those uses prohibited in
the C-1 Zone are prohibited, unless otherwise permitted. Also
prohibited are:
(a) Carting, express hauling, or truck storage yards.
(b) Truck terminals or depots.
(c) Contractor's storage yards.
(d) Any kind of manufacture or treatment other than the
manufacture or treatment of products clearly incidental to the
conduct of a retail business conducted on the premises.
(e) Amusement parlors and arcades.
(f) "Big box" retail.
(g) Outdoor concerts.
§ 189.05.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.05.030
001:563
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than four acres shall be provided.
(2) Lot width. A minimum lot width of 350 feet shall be provided.
(3) Height. No structures shall exceed five stories or 70 feet in
accordance with the Floor Area Ratio Schedule in this section.
(4) Front yard. There shall be a front yard which shall be not less than
75 feet in depth. No more than 75% of the front yard shall be used
for parking and access drives.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be provided a rear yard at least equal to the
height of the building, but no rear yard shall be less than 30 feet. At
least five feet of the rear yard shall be planted and landscaped.
(6) Side yard. There shall be provided two side yards which shall be at
least as great as the height of the building, but in no case shall each
side yard be less than 30 feet. At least five feet of the side yard shall
be planted and landscaped.
(7) Coverage. Building coverage and coverage by impervious surfaces
shall be governed by the following Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.)
Schedule:
Building
Height
(stories)
Building
Coverage
Floor Area
Ratio
Land
Coverage by
Impervious
Surfaces
1 30% 0.30 80%
2 20% 0.40 75%
3 17% 0.51 70%
4 15% 0.60 65%
5 14% 0.70 60%
(8) Screening, landscaping and open space.
(a) All areas of the lot not devoted to use by structures, parking,
loading and other functions on the lot shall be left in their
natural state or they shall be landscaped in accordance with a
site plan approved by the Planning Board. All landscaped areas
or natural areas shall be maintained by the owner as approved
by the Planning Board.
(b) Nothing in this section shall prevent an owner from donating to
the Township, County, State or Federal Government or other
agency or nonprofit organization any open space which results
from the construction of a use in accordance with the F.A.R.
Schedule, even if this donation reduces the remaining area of
§ 189.05.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.05.030
001:564
§ 189.05.040. C-4 Regional Commercial District. [Amended
5-27-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-22]
In the C-4 Regional Commercial District, the following regulations shall
apply:
the lot or other nonuse requirement of this chapter below
the minimum required. Such donation, including the amount
and location, shall be subject to review and approval by the
Planning Board.
(c) The uses to which the open space which results from use of the
F.A.R. Schedule may be put shall be limited to open-spacerelated
uses, including but not limited to parks, flood retention
areas, natural areas, public or private golf courses, driving
ranges, swim clubs, riding areas, etc., it being the general
intention to preserve the open space so as to provide areas
which will act as groundwater recharge areas and areas which
will not be subject to flood damage.
(9) Proximity to residential zone or use.
(a) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no
structure in the C-3 Zone shall be constructed closer than 100
feet to the nearest residentially zoned or used property or
public parkland, and no parking area or access drive shall be
located closer than 50 feet to any residentially zoned or used
parcel of land or any public park.
(b) A fifty-foot buffer shall be established, which shall be
extensively planted in accordance with the requirements of a
site plan approved by the Planning Board, but the minimal
effect will be to screen the bulk, parking, loading and service
areas from adjacent existing or proposed residential or park
uses. Said buffer area shall include a solid fence in
conformance with other requirements of this chapter as
approved by the Planning Board.
(c) Buffering areas as required above will not be required when a
park area meeting the minimum requirements of the F.A.R.
Schedule and open space provisions of this section, including
the proximity to residential property, is donated by the
developer to the Township, County, State or Federal
Government.
(10) Lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet.
A. Use regulations. All use regulations of the C-3 Zone shall apply, except
that the following uses shall be specifically prohibited:
(a) Gasoline service stations;
§ 189.05.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.05.040
001:565
§ 189.06. Industrial Districts.
§ 189.06.010. I-1 Industrial District. [Amended 12-23-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-22; 9-8-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-14]
In the I-1 Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply:
(b) Businesses that service, repair or install motor vehicle parts;
(c) Automobile, motorcycle, and commercial vehicle sales;
(d) Nursery and garden centers;
(e) Metal and wood fabricating facilities.
B. Bulk regulations of the C-3 Zone shall apply.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following uses and no other:
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Offices.
(b) Veterinary hospitals.
(c) Research laboratories.
(d) Product development laboratories.
(e) Warehousing.
(f) Metal- and wood-fabricating facilities.
(g) Wholesale distribution.
(h) Assembly of parts manufactured elsewhere.
(i) Packaging of products manufactured or assembled elsewhere.
(j) Any combination of permitted uses, provided that each use
occupies a minimum of 1,000 square feet of floor area.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Off-street parking and loading as required by this chapter.
(b) Signs, as permitted by the Township Sign Ordinance.
(c) Buildings for the storage of trucks and other vehicles and
equipment used for the principal use on the lot.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter.
§ 189.05.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.06.010
001:566
(a) Retail sales of products manufactured, assembled or
warehoused on the premises.
(b) Buildings for the storage and maintenance of commercial
vehicles which are owned and operated by a single operator.
(c) Buildings for indoor sports type uses such as wrestling, batting
cages, weight lifting, golf driving ranges, fitness centers, dance
studios, gymnastics or similar indoor sport type uses. The
following additional conditions shall apply to this use: all
activities shall take place within the building; parking shall be
required at one space per 100 square feet of building.
(4) Prohibited uses.
(a) Those uses which are not specifically permitted in the I-1 Zone
are hereby prohibited.
(b) Specifically, those uses prohibited include the following:
[1] Residences.
[2] Airports or aviation fields or heliports.
[3] Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
[4] Disinfectant, insecticide or poison manufacture.
[5] Fertilizer manufacture.
[6] Commercial incineration, reduction storage, private or
commercial dumps, sanitary landfill depots or depositories
for disposal of solid or liquid waste material.
[7] Sulphurous, sulfuric, nitric, picric, carbolic or hydrochloric
acid manufacture.
[8] Vinegar manufacture.
[9] Dog kennels.
[10] Stockyards.
[11] Slaughtering of animals.
[12] Animal black, lamp black or bone black manufacture.
[13]Rawhide or skin storage, cleaning, curing or tanning.
[14] Soap manufacture from animal fat.
[15] Glue, size or gelatin manufacture, where the processes
include the refining or recovering of products from fish,
animal refuse or offal.
[16] Grease, lard, fat or tallow rendering or refining.
§ 189.06.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.06.010
001:567
[17]Wool pulling or scouring.
[18] Storage, sorting or baling of scrap paper, iron, bottles,
rags or junk.
[19] Automobile junkyards.
[20] Explosives manufacture or storage, except small arms
ammunition.
[21] Pyroxylin plastic manufacture or the manufacture of
articles therefrom.
[22] Rubber or gutta-percha manufacture or treatment.
[23] Smelting of iron, copper, tin, zinc or lead from ore.
[24] Starch, glucose or dextrin manufacture.
[25] Petroleum refining.
[26] Sand, gravel or clay pits and the washing or processing of
sand, gravel or clay.
[27] Outdoor movies.
[28] Animal zoos.
[29] Trucking depots or storage yards.
[30] Stone yards or monument works.
[31] Retail merchandising.
[32] Mortuaries or funeral homes.
[33] Garages used primarily for either automobile or
commercial vehicle service.
[34] Any other trade or use that is noxious or offensive or
extremely hazardous by reason of the emission of odor,
dust, smoke or gas or explosive potential.
[35] Open-front stores and outdoor displays or storage of food
and merchandise.
[36] Dispensing of food, drink or merchandise through an
opening of an exterior wall of a building or providing curb
service.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than one acre shall be provided.
(2) Lot width. A minimum lot width of 150 feet shall be provided.
§ 189.06.010 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.06.010
001:568
§ 189.06.020. I-2 Industrial District. [Amended 12-23-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-22; 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-21]
In the I-2 Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply:
(3) Height. No structure shall exceed two stories or 35 feet in height,
whichever is less.
(4) Front yard. There shall be provided a front yard which shall have
an average depth of not less than 50 feet, and in no case shall any
part of a building project closer to the street than 35 feet. No more
than 50% of the front yard shall be paved for parking and access
drives.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard equal in depth to at least the
height of the building, but in no case less than 30 feet. At least 10
feet of the rear yard shall be landscaped or planted in a manner
acceptable to the Planning Board.
(6) Side yard. Two side yards shall be required, each of which shall be
not less than the height of the building, but in no case less than 30
feet. At least 10 feet of each side yard shall be landscaped or
planted.
(7) Coverage. No more than 35% of the lot shall be covered by
buildings, and no more than a total of 75% of the lot shall be
covered by impervious material, including buildings.
(8) Screening, landscaping and open space.
(a) Adjacent to a residentially zoned or used property and adjacent
to public parkland, there shall be a planted buffer strip at least
25 feet in width which shall be maintained to screen and buffer
the use in the I-1 Zone from adjacent properties. Said buffer
area shall include a solid fence in conformance with other
requirements of this chapter as approved by the Planning
Board. Said buffer strip may include the required side yard but
shall not include parking or access drives.
(b) A five-foot planted buffer shall be required to be planted in
each side and rear yard adjacent to the property line where the
property abuts commercially or industrially zoned or used
property.
(9) Lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following uses and no other:
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Offices.
§ 189.06.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.06.020
001:569
(b) Data processing centers.
(c) Warehousing.
(d) Wholesale distribution.
(e) Packaging of products manufactured or assembled elsewhere.
(f) Any combination of permitted uses, provided that each use
occupies a minimum of 2,000 square feet of floor area.
(g) Assembly of a product that will not result in any contamination
or use any hazardous chemicals.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Off-street parking and loading as required by this chapter.
(b) Signs, as permitted by the Township Sign Ordinance.
(c) Buildings for the storage of trucks and other vehicles and
equipment used for the principal use on the lot.
(d) Eating and clinic facilities for the sole use of employees and
officers of the principal use on the lot.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter. Conditional uses permitted in the
I-1 Zone are permitted in the I-2 Zone.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses prohibited in the I-1 Zone are
prohibited in the I-2 Zone. Also prohibited are mortuary
establishments and funeral homes.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than two acres shall be provided.
(2) Lot width. A minimum lot width of 275 feet shall be provided.
(3) Height. No structure shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height,
whichever is less.
(4) Front yard. There shall be provided a front yard which shall have
an average depth of not less than 50 feet, and in no case shall any
building be constructed closer to the street than 35 feet. No more
than 50% of the front yard shall be paved for parking and access
drives.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be provided a rear yard equal in depth to at
least the height of the building, but in no case shall the rear yard be
less than 30 feet. At least 10 feet of the rear yard shall be
landscaped or planted.
§ 189.06.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.06.020
001:570
§ 189.06.030. I-3 Industrial District. [Amended 12-23-1997 by Ord.
No. 97-22]
In the I-3 Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply:
(6) Side yard. Two side yards shall be required, each of which shall be
not less than the height of the building, but in no case shall the side
yards be less than 30 feet. At least 10 feet of each side yard shall be
landscaped or planted.
(7) Coverage. No more than 40% of the lot shall be covered by
buildings, and no more than 85% of the lot shall be covered by
impervious surfaces, including buildings.
(8) Screening, landscaping and open space.
(a) Adjacent to a residentially zoned or used property, there shall
be provided a planted buffer strip of at least 50 feet in depth
which shall be maintained so as to screen and buffer the use in
the I-2 Zone from adjacent properties. Said buffer area shall
include a solid fence in conformance with other requirements
of this chapter as approved by the Planning Board. Said buffer
strip may include required side yards but shall not include any
parking or access drives.
(b) Adjacent to any parkland, a buffer strip of at least 25 feet shall
be required, and this buffer may include the side yard.
(c) A five-foot planted buffer shall be located along all property
lines where the adjacent property is industrially or
commercially zoned or used.
(9) Lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet.
C. General regulations.
(1) Any permitted use in the I-2 Zone must utilize a closed septic
system or provide sewerage connection to an off-site treatment and
disposal shall be approved by the Township Health Officer.
(2) Before any site plan, building permit or certificate of occupancy
can be approved, the applicant must submit a report indicating:
(a) Chemicals, oils, solvents or other materials used in its
operation.
(b) A general description of the proposed machinery operation and
products.
(c) Controls used to maintain the water quality of runoff from the
site's impervious areas.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following uses and no other:
§ 189.06.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.06.030
001:571
(1) Permitted uses.
(a) Offices.
(b) Research laboratories.
(c) Warehousing.
(d) Wholesale distribution.
(e) Assembly of parts manufactured elsewhere.
(f) Packaging of products manufactured or assembled elsewhere.
(2) Accessory uses. Accessory uses permitted in the I-1 Zone are
permitted in the I-3 Zone.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter. Conditional uses permitted in the
I-1 Zone are permitted in the I-3 Zone.
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses prohibited in the I-1 Zone are
prohibited in the I-3 Zone. Also prohibited are mortuary
establishments and funeral homes.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than three acres shall be provided.
(2) Lot width. A minimum lot width of 275 feet shall be provided.
(3) Height. No structure shall exceed two stories or 35 feet in height,
whichever is less, and all structures shall comply with all height
requirements of the New Jersey Department of Transportation's
Safety and Hazards Zoning Act.
(4) Front yard. There shall be provided a front yard which shall have
an average depth of not less than 75 feet, and in no case shall any
building be constructed closer to the street than 50 feet. No more
than 50% of the front yard shall be paved for parking and access
drives.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be provided a rear yard equal in depth to at
least the height of the building, but in no case shall the rear yard be
less than 50 feet. At least 10 feet of the rear yard shall be
landscaped or planted.
(6) Side yard. Two side yards shall be required, each of which shall be
not less than the height of the building, but in no case shall the side
yards be less than 30 feet. At least 10 feet of each side yard shall be
landscaped or planted.
(7) Coverage. No more than 40% of the lot shall be covered by
buildings, and no more than 85% of the lot shall be covered by
impervious surfaces, including buildings.
§ 189.06.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.06.030
001:572
§ 189.06.040. I-1A Industrial District. [Added 6-24-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-12]
In the I-1A Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply:
(8) Screening, landscaping and open spaces. Adjacent to a
residentially zoned or used property and to parkland, there shall be
provided a planted buffer strip of at least 100 feet in depth which
shall be maintained so as to screen and buffer the use in the I-3
Zone from adjacent properties. Said buffer area shall include a
solid fence in conformance with other requirements of this chapter
as approved by the Planning Board. Said buffer strip may include
required side yards but shall not include any parking or access
drives.
(9) Lot frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 100 feet.
A. Use regulations. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for the following uses and no other:
(1) Permitted uses. Uses permitted in the I-1, I-2 and I-3. In addition,
the following uses are permitted:
(a) Automobile, motorcycle and commercial vehicle sales.
(b) Nursery, garden center or tree farms.
(c) Businesses that service, repair or install motor vehicle parts.
(d) Kennels, horse farms.
(e) Contractors vehicles, equipment and/or materials storage
yard. All vehicles and equipment shall be licensed and insured.
A list of all stored vehicles, equipment and materials shall be
provided to the Building Department.
(f) Buildings for storage and maintenance of commercial vehicles
which are owned and operated by a single operator.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Off-street parking and loading as required by this chapter.
(b) Signs, as permitted by the Township Sign Ordinance.
(c) Buildings for the storage of trucks and other vehicles and
equipment used for the principal use on the lot.
(d) Servicing of vehicles and equipment permitted only within the
building.
(3) Conditional uses. All conditional uses shall meet the requirements
of Section 189.07 of this chapter.
§ 189.06.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.06.040
001:573
(4) Prohibited uses. Those uses which are not specifically permitted in
the I-1 Zone are hereby prohibited.
B. Bulk regulations.
(1) Lot area. A lot area of not less than one acre shall be provided.
(2) Lot width. A minimum lot width of 150 feet shall be provided.
(3) Height. No structure shall exceed two stories or 35 feet in height,
whichever is less.
(4) Front yard. There shall be provided a front yard which shall have
an average depth of not less than 50 feet, and in no case shall any
part of a building project closer to the street than 35 feet. No more
than 50% of the front yard shall be paved for parking and access
drives.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard equal in depth to at least the
height of the building, but in no case less than 30 feet. At least 10
feet of the rear yard shall be landscaped or planted in a manner
acceptable to the Planning Board.
(6) Side yard. Two side yards shall be required, each of which shall not
be less than the height of the building, but in no case less than 30
feet. At least 10 feet of each side yard shall be landscaped or
planted.
(7) Coverage. No more than 35% of the lot shall be covered by
buildings, and no more than a total of 75% of the lot shall be
covered by impervious material, including buildings.
(8) Screening, landscaping and open space.
(a) Adjacent to residentially zoned or used property and adjacent
to public parkland, there shall be a planted buffer strip at least
25 feet in width which shall be maintained to screen and buffer
the use in the I-1A Zone from adjacent properties. Said buffer
area shall include a solid fence in conformance with other
requirements of this chapter as approved by the Planning
Board. Said buffer strip may include the required side yard but
shall not include parking or access drives.
(b) A ten-foot planted buffer shall be required to be planted in
each side and rear yard adjacent to the property line where the
property abuts commercially or industrially zoned or used
property. Said buffer area shall include a solid fence in
conformance with other requirements of this chapter as
approved by the Planning Board.
(9) Lot Frontage. There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet.
C. Site Plan in accordance with Section 189.10.030 required.
§ 189.06.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07
001:574
§ 189.07. Supplemental Regulations.
§ 189.07.010. Airport hazard zone.
§ 189.07.020. Regulations pertaining to residential districts.
[Amended 9-23-1997 by Ord. No. 97-16 Adding D(14) Greenhouse
size restrictions; 11-23-1999 by Ord. No. 99-25; 6-27-2000 by Ord.
No. 2000-17; 2-26-2002 by Ord. No. 2002-1; 10-25-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-21; 10-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-30; 3-24-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-2; 6-24-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-13; 9-13-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-12; 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2018-07]
The following regulations shall apply to all residential districts and, where
stated, shall constitute conditions under which conditional use approval
may be granted.
A. This zone shall be applicable to all districts and shall consist of two
parts:
(1) A Clear Zone which is equivalent to the clear zone established by
N.J.A.C. 16.62; and
(2) An Airport Hazard Restricted Zone which is coincident with the
remainder of the Airport Hazard Area, established by N.J.A.C.
16.62.
B. No structure shall be permitted in the Clear Zone.
C. In the Airport Hazard Restricted Zone, overlay zoning regulations shall
apply and alter or amend the underlying zoning as follows:
(1) Uses that attract birds are prohibited.
(2) Above ground storage of hazardous or flammable materials in tanks
is prohibited.
(3) Above ground utility transmission lines and/or mains are
prohibited.
(4) Residential density shall not exceed one dwelling unit per three
acres except that if a lot is situated so that a portion is within the
airport hazard restricted area and a portion is outside this area and
the proposed dwelling is located outside the restricted area, the
minimum lot size shall be the same as that of the underlying zone.
(5) Vertical limits for structures in the Airport Hazard Restricted Zone
shall be consistent with N.J.A.C. 16:62-4.2 et seq., which is depicted
in diagram (a) and (b), or the underlying zone district requirement
whichever is less.
(6) Variances from the Airport Hazard Overlay Zone restrictions shall
be conditioned upon the approval of the Commissioner of the
Department of Transportation.
§ 189.07 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.020
001:575
A. Home occupations. Home occupations shall be permitted in all
residence districts. A "home occupation" is an accessory use of a
dwelling unit for gainful employment involving the assembly, provision
or sale of goods and/or services or the performance of an art. The
following standards shall control home occupations and use by artists:
(1) The home occupations shall be conducted only in the enclosed
living area of the dwelling.
(2) No electrical or mechanical equipment is to be used in conjunction
with the home occupation which creates visible or audible
interference in radio or television or which creates fluctuation in
line voltage outside the dwelling or which creates noise not
normally associated with a residential use.
(3) The occupation permitted shall be on a limited scale so as not to
interfere with the residential character of a district, and no
employees other than full-time residents of the dwelling shall be
employed in pursuance of the occupation.
(4) Products related to a home occupation shall not be sold on the
premises, and services related to a permitted occupation shall be
provided only within the residence.
(5) The establishment of a home occupation shall not be permitted to
change the principal character of the use as a dwelling.
(6) No storage or display of goods, materials or supplies or equipment
shall be visible from the outside of any structure located on the
premises.
(7) There shall be permitted no more demand for parking than one
vehicle at a time, in addition to the two parking spaces required for
the dwelling.
(8) Only one floor of the dwelling shall be used for the home
occupation. No more than 25% of that floor shall be devoted to the
home occupation.
(9) The following are permitted home occupations:
(a) Dressmaker, seamstress or tailor.
(b) Music or dancing teacher for one pupil at a time.
(c) Artist, sculptor or author.
(d) Lawyer, architect, engineer, realtor, insurance agent or broker
for consultation, provided that this is not the sole place of
business.
(e) Physician, dentist or other licensed medical practitioner for
consultation purposes, provided that this is not the sole place
of business.
§ 189.07.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.020
001:576
(f) Office use when the office is operated by or employs in the
residence only a resident or residents who are permanent fulltime
residents of the dwelling unit and no other persons and
where the office use does not require visits by customers or
business invitees for business purposes.
(10) Specifically prohibited home occupations, unless permitted as a
conditional use, shall be:
(a) Animal hospitals, stables, kennels or livery stables.
(b) Barbershops and beauty parlors.
(c) Clinics or hospitals.
(d) Dancing or music schools and nursery schools.
(e) Rental businesses.
(f) Repair shops.
(g) Retail merchandising.
(h) Restaurants.
(i) Auto repair shops or body shops.
(j) Private clubs.
(k) Mortuaries and funeral homes.
B. Sale of farm products. In conjunction with a farm as a permitted use in
the Township, produce and other products of the farm may be sold on
the premises. Any sales of produce or farm products must take place
from a structure located at least 35 feet from the street upon which the
lot fronts. Parking shall be provided for at least one car for each acre of
land or 5,000 square feet of greenhouse or propagating house under
cultivation and shall be constructed of a dust-free material. Products
sold shall be limited to the extent that at least 75% of the products sold
at any time must be produced on the property.
C. Keeping Animals.
(1) A total of 10 female chickens are permitted in association with a
residentially used property of up to three acres.
(2) The keeping of chickens, as accessory to a residential use shall
comply with all requirements of Chapter 067.
(3) The keeping of animals shall be permitted in all residential districts
as an accessory use.
§ 189.07.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.020
001:577
Type of Animal
Minimum
Lot Size
(acres) Number Permitted
Required
Housing
Space
per
Animal
(square
feet)
Horses 1 1/acre for the 1st 3
acres
2/acre for the 4th and
5th acres
3/acre for more than
the 5th acre
80
Ponies 1 1/acre for the 1st acre
1/half-acre for the 2nd,
3rd, 4th and 5th acres
3/acre for more than
the 5th acre
80
Dairy cattle 3 1/acre 100
Beef cattle 3 1/acre 80
Sheep 3 5/acre 16
Goats 3 5/acre 16
Swine 3 1/acre 64
Poultry, excepting
female chickens
as specified in (1)
and (2) above and
Roosters
1 3/acre
Roosters 3 1/acre
(4) A pony as regulated above shall not exceed 12 hands in height.
(5) Any building for the keeping of animals shall be located at least 50
feet from any dwelling on an adjacent property and at least 50 feet
from the required rear or side yard setback line on all adjacent
residentially zoned or used properties. Any building for the keeping
of animals shall be located at least 30 feet from the dwelling of the
occupant of the lot.
(6) Any outdoor area for keeping animals, including corrals, shall be
located at least 30 feet from residential structures and at least 20
feet from side and rear lot lines. However, this distance to the lot
line may be decreased to 10 feet if the Zoning Officer determines
§ 189.07.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.020
001:578
that an adequate buffer and screening has been provided in
accordance with good planning standards. No stable or outdoor
area for the keeping of animals shall be located closer to the street
line than the required front yard. All structures for the keeping
of animals must be at least 50 feet from any stream, well, water
body or watercourse. All septic and manure pits must also be 50
feet from any stream, well, water body or watercourses and 50 feet
from all property lines. All animals on the property shall be owned
by and for the sole and exclusive use of the residents of the lot upon
which they are located, except that up to one animal for the first
three acres and 25% of all other animals permitted by the quota
above may be boarded for the animal's owner to be used only by
the owner. When calculating the number of animals permitted, any
lot area may only be used once, except that the number of poultry
permitted shall not restrict the use of that property for the other
animals as permitted in the above schedule.
(7) Manure must be collected and maintained in a sanitary manner so
as to prevent offensive odors, fly breeding or other nuisances.
Failure to abide by these standards shall result in revocation by the
Township of permission to keep animals. Those persons keeping
animals must meet all requirements of state and local health
regulations.
D. Greenhouse, propagating and nursery business. Greenhouse,
propagating house and nursery businesses shall be permitted as a
conditional use in all residential districts if the following conditions are
met:
(1) A minimum lot area of six acres shall be required.
(2) A front yard shall be a minimum of 50 feet in depth.
(3) Side and rear yards shall be equal in depth to the height of the
buildings or 30 feet, whichever is greater.
(4) A lot width of 200 feet shall be required.
(5) A twenty-foot planted buffer, acceptable to the Planning Board,
shall be required adjacent to any residentially zoned or used
property.
(6) No driveways shall be located closer than 25 feet to any side or rear
property line.
(7) A ten-foot planted buffer shall be located along all property lines
adjacent to industrially or commercially zoned or used property.
(8) Nursery stock shall be located no closer than 10 feet to any side or
rear property line and no closer than 20 feet to any street.
(9) The maximum building coverage permitted for both temporary and
permanent buildings shall be 30%.
§ 189.07.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.020
001:579
(10) All permanent structures shall require a building permit and site
plan approval.
(11) No structures may exceed 35 feet in height.
(12) Where there are wholesale or retail sales of products, only items
that have been grown on the premises for at least 1/2 of their life
may be sold on the premises.
(13) Where there are retail sales, at least one parking space shall be
provided for each acre under cultivation or for each 5,000 square
feet of area within the greenhouse.
(14) Greenhouses shall be restricted in size as follows:
District
Maximum Size
(square feet)
R-45 1,500
R-22 1,200
R-15 1,200
R-11 900
R-9 900
E. Professional offices. In zones where professional offices are permitted
as a conditional use, the following conditions shall be met:
(1) The office of a member of a recognized profession, when conducted
on a residential property, shall be permitted to be conducted by a
single member of the family residing on that property and shall
include only the office of a doctor or a physician, a dentist, a realtor,
an insurance agent, a minister, an architect, a professional
engineer, a lawyer or such similar professional occupation which
may be so designated by the Planning Board upon finding by such
Board that such occupation is truly professional in character,
training and experience as a condition for the practice thereof. The
practice of such occupation shall in no way adversely affect the safe
and comfortable enjoyment of property rights in any zone in which
it is located to a greater extent than for the professional activities
listed herein. The issuance of a state or local license for regulation
of any gainful occupation need not be deemed indicative of
professional standing.
(2) In addition, the following conditions shall be met:
(a) The property shall front on either Route 23 or the Newark-
Pompton Turnpike.
(b) The minimum lot size shall be 45,000 square feet with a
minimum lot width of 200 feet.
§ 189.07.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.020
001:580
(c) There shall be a fifteen-foot planted buffer adjacent to all rear
and side yards which shall be maintained at least six feet in
height.
(d) The front yard shall be a minimum of 50 feet in depth.
(e) Building coverage shall be limited to 25% of the lot, and total
coverage by impervious materials to 60% of the lot.
(f) All other bulk regulations in the zone shall apply.
(g) Site plan approval shall apply.
(3) In addition, the following shall apply:
(a) The use shall be conducted only in the enclosed living area,
exclusive of porches and garages, of the dwelling.
(b) No electrical or mechanical equipment is to be used in
conjunction with the professional office which creates visible
or audible interference in radio or television or which creates
fluctuation in line voltage outside the dwelling or which
creates noise not normally associated with a residential use.
(c) Products related to a professional office shall not be sold on the
premises, and services related to a permitted occupation shall
be provided only within the residence.
(d) The establishment of a professional office shall not be
permitted to change the principal character of the use as a
dwelling.
(e) No storage or display of goods, materials, supplies or
equipment shall be visible from the outside of any structure
located on the premises.
(f) Parking shall comply with the requirements of Section 189.09.
(g) No more than one professional who resides on the premises
and two support personnel who are not required to reside on
the property may be engaged in the professional office use.
(h) No more than 50% of the ground floor area and no area on any
other floor may be dedicated to the professional office use.
F. Nursing homes, hospitals and intermediary care centers.
(1) Nursing homes and hospitals shall be permitted as a conditional
use in the R-87, R-45, R-22, R-15, R-11 and R-9 Zones.
(2) The minimum required lot size shall be five acres. The minimum lot
width is 300 feet on a street with a right-of-way of 60 feet or more
and a pavement width of 40 feet or more.
§ 189.07.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.020
001:581
(3) The front yard for nursing homes, intermediary care centers and
hospitals shall be twice the minimum front yard required in the
zone in which they are located. The maximum building height for
hospitals shall be five stories or 75 feet, whichever is less; and for
nursing homes, three stories or 40 feet, whichever is less. Rear
yards and side yards shall be 100 feet each, at least 25 feet of which
shall consist of a planted buffer strip. Maximum building coverage
shall be 30% and the maximum coverage by impervious surfaces
shall be 60%.
(4) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, nursing homes, hospitals
and intermediary care centers in the Airport Hazard Restricted
Zone shall obtain the approval of the Commissioner of
Transportation.
G. Schools. Schools shall be permitted as a conditional use in all residence
zones, and each school shall be located on a lot with a minimum lot size
of five acres and frontage on an improved road of at least 50 feet in
width. The minimum lot width shall be 300 feet, and the maximum
height of any structure shall be 35 feet or two stories, whichever is less.
Side and rear yards of at least 50 feet shall be provided, and at least 25
feet of the side and rear yard adjacent to the property lines shall be
planted as a buffer. This buffer may include the side or rear yard, but
shall not include parking areas or access drives. Prior to the issuance of
a building permit, schools in the Airport Hazard Restricted Zone shall
obtain the approval of the Commissioner of the Department of
Transportation.
H. Churches and houses of worship. Churches and houses of worship shall
be permitted as a conditional use in all residences zones on a minimum
lot size of five times the permitted lot size in the zone in which it is to be
located. The minimum lot width shall be twice the minimum lot width
permitted in the zone which it is to be located, and the lot shall be
located on an improved street with a right-of-way of at least 50 feet. The
maximum building height shall be two stories or 50 feet, whichever is
less, exclusive of steeples and bell towers, shall exceed 75 feet. The
minimum side and rear yard shall be 35 feet, at least 20 feet of which
shall consist of a planted buffer strip.
I. Museums and historic sites. Museums and historic sites open to the
general public shall be permitted in all residential districts as a
conditional use, provided that said museum or historic site is of such
significance that it appears on the National and/or State Register of
Historic Places or on the Township's Official Map. Said use shall be
permitted only upon the finding that traffic congestion will not result
from the use and that the use will not have a deleterious impact on the
neighborhood in which it is located. Retail sales of souvenirs shall be
permitted as an accessory use only if located within a structure on the
property.
§ 189.07.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.020
001:582
J. Community centers. Community centers shall be permitted in all
residential zones as an accessory use to a conditionally permitted
church or religious use. The community center may consist of an
auditorium and meeting rooms and must be located with direct access
to an improved street with a right-of-way of at least 60 feet in width. In
order for a community center to be permitted, the lot area must be a
minimum of 10 times the minimum permitted lot size in the zone in
which it is to be located.
K. Libraries. Libraries shall be regulated in the same manner as
community centers.
L. Courts. The minimum dimension of any interior or inner court shall be
not less than one foot for every foot of height of the tallest portion of the
building surrounding the court. In no case shall an inner court have a
dimension of less than 12 feet.
M. Rear dwellings. No building to the rear of and on the same lot with a
primary use shall be erected or used for dwelling purposes.
N. Swimming pools. Swimming pools are permitted in all residential zones
in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 166 of the Code of the
Township of Pequannock. Said pools shall be limited to a use accessory
to a permitted residential use and shall be solely for the use and
enjoyment of the occupants of the lot, plus their guests. There shall be
not more than one swimming pool on any single lot, except in a Planned
Residential District. In the Planned Residential District, there shall not
be more than one pool for every 100 dwelling units. Screening at least
six feet in height by fence or planted materials shall be provided in each
case where the pool is within 15 feet of an adjacent property line,
except that in the Planned Residential District this buffer shall be at
least 50 feet.
O. Tennis courts.
(1) Where permitted by applicable sections of this chapter, tennis
courts shall be fenced by a suitable material no more than 12 feet in
height. The tennis court and its fence shall be located at least 12
feet from the nearest adjacent property line for an unlighted court
and 25 feet for a lighted court, except that in a Planned Residential
District the required distance shall be no less than 50 feet. All
lighting shall be shaded so as not to create glare or more than 0.25
footcandle of illumination at the property lines.
(2) There shall be no more than one tennis court on any lot, except that
in a Planned Residential District up to one tennis court per 100
dwelling units may be constructed.
(3) Tennis courts shall be for the sole use of occupants of the premises
and their guests and shall not be operated as a commercial
venture. No tennis court shall encroach within the front yard
setback.
§ 189.07.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.020
001:583
P. Fences.
(1) The following fence height and setback regulations apply in all
residential zones:
A. Front yard. For purposes of these fence requirements for lots
with two or more front yards, 189.070.20(2)(a), the established
front yard of a residential structure shall be defined as the
space between the street and the front/main entrance of the
principal building. In addition, the following standards shall
apply:
(a) Fences located in the established front yard shall have a
maximum height of three feet, a minimum of 50% of the
fence open to the air, and a minimum setback of five feet
from the property line.
(b) Fences located in the secondary front yard shall have a
maximum height of four feet; shall have a minimum
setback of five feet from the property line; and may be
solid in construction.
(c) A fence in excess of four feet but not to exceed six feet in
height shall be permitted in the secondary front yard
provided the fence has a minimum setback of the required
front yard setback for the zone in which the site is located
or the fence has a setback at the prevailing building
setback and runs parallel to the street right-of-way.
(d) As of the date of passage of this amendment, fences that
have received formal approval either from the Building
Department or the appropriate Township Board, that are
in excess of four feet, but not greater than six feet, are
permitted. Replacement of said fences is permitted, at
their present location or at a five-foot setback from the
property line, whichever is greater. All other fence
requirements are applicable.
B. Rear or side yard. Fences with a maximum height of six feet
shall be permitted in all residential zones. No setback for
fences shall be required, provided that any fence, which is
installed, shall be entirely on the property of the party who
installs the fence and must be maintainable from that property.
(2) Measurement of fence height. In determining the height of fences
for the purpose of compliance, the following shall apply:
(a) For fences that are not uniform in height along the top of the
fence, the height shall be measured to the highest point of the
fence, except as provided otherwise below.
§ 189.07.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.020
001:584
(b) Notwithstanding the maximum height limitations applicable to
fences above, fence posts may exceed the maximum permitted
fence height by up to one foot.
(c) For fences located on sloping ground, the height shall be
measured from the grade directly below the point of
measurement.
(d) Fence height shall be measured from normal grade. Normal
grade shall be construed to be the newly established grade
after construction, exclusive of any filling, beaming, mounding,
excavating or curbing which alters the grade at the base of the
fence from the grade in the general vicinity of the fence.
(3) Fence orientation. Fences shall be constructed in such a manner
that the dressed side of the fence, where applicable, shall face the
adjacent property or the public right-of-way excluding railroad
property. All supports for the fence shall be on the interior of the
fence and property. This provision shall not preclude the
construction and maintenance of a shadowbox type fence, provided
that the dressed side of the fence material shall face the adjacent
property or public right-of-way and shall be of the same texture,
material, and color.
(4) Fence composition. No electrified fences or other fences consisting
of or incorporating similar hazards shall be permitted in a
residential zone. Barbed wire fences are permissible when used to
contain horses and cattle, as regulated by this chapter, on the
property.
Q. Accessory buildings.
(1) No accessory building in a residential district shall be located
closer than five feet to any property line when such accessory
building does not exceed 15 feet. An accessory building that has a
height of 15 feet to 18 feet shall not be closer than 10 feet to any
property line.
(2) Accessory buildings in residential zones may occupy the required
rear yard up to a height of 18 feet, as long as they are 10 feet away
from the principal building on the same lot. The height of the
accessory building shall be defined as the vertical distance of the
structure derived from the grade plane to the highest point of the
structure. The rear yard area occupied by such an accessory
building shall, however, be included in computing the maximum
percentage of the lot which may be built upon in any given case.
(3) In the case of an interior lot fronting upon only one street, no
accessory building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach
upon that half of the lot depth nearest the street. In the case of an
interior lot fronting upon two or more streets, no accessory
§ 189.07.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.020
001:585
building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach upon that
fourth of the lot depth nearest each and every street.
(4) In the case of a corner lot fronting upon two streets, no accessory
building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach upon that
area between each respective street and a line drawn parallel to
such street in a manner to divide the lot into two equal parts. In the
case of a corner lot fronting on three or more streets, no accessory
building shall be erected or altered so as to encroach upon that
fourth of the lot depth nearest each and every street.
(5) The limitations imposed by this subsection upon the location of an
accessory building shall be waived when the accessory building is
incorporated as an integral part of or enclosed by the same closing
walls as the building to which it is an accessory.
(6) There shall be no more than one such structure on any lot in the
R-9, R-11, R-15 and R-22 exclusive of a detached garage or two
such structures on any lot in the R-45 and R-87, exclusive of a
detached garage.
(7) An accessory structure shall not be utilized for the storage of
flammable or hazardous material or for materials utilized in
conjunction with a home occupation.
(8) Accessory structures in addition to sheds shall include detached
garages, personal/decorative greenhouses, personal/decorative
gazebos.
(9) Decorative and/or personal greenhouses shall be permitted as
accessory structures in all single family residential districts. Such
greenhouses shall not exceed 900 square feet, shall be located in
the rear yard and shall meet all accessory structure setback
requirements.
R. Design of dwellings.
(1) No more than one building permit shall hereafter be issued for any
dwelling to be erected in a subdivision consisting of two or more
houses if it is substantially alike in exterior design and appearance
with any neighboring dwelling situated on the same or opposite
side of the street within 300 feet of said proposed dwelling.
(2) Houses within such specified distance from each other shall be
considered uniform in exterior design and appearance if they have
any one or more of the following characteristics:
(a) The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without
substantial differentiation of one or more exterior elevations.
(b) The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without
substantial change in orientation of the house on the lot.
§ 189.07.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.020
001:586
(c) The height and design of the roofs are without substantial
change in design and appearance.
(d) The appearance and arrangement of the windows and other
openings in the front elevation, including the appearance and
arrangement of the porch and garage, are not substantially
different from adjoining dwellings.
S. The intent of this section of the ordinance is to recognize existing
conditions, footprints and established general setbacks of residential
neighborhoods throughout the Township. This would permit the
expansion of existing residential structures to meet the needs of today's
households without requiring variances. Therefore, notwithstanding
any other provisions of this ordinance, in a residential district for
residential uses where a dwelling unit is considered nonconforming due
to a front and/or side yard setback a variance is not required if the
following conditions are met:
(1) The proposed addition or expansion relates to the front and/or side
yards.
(2) The limits of the proposed addition or expansion are less than equal
to the existing setback conditions footprint or the proposed
setbacks are consistent with the average setbacks on the block
with the height not to exceed 35 feet.
(3) In no case shall the side yard be permitted to be less than five feet,
including architectural projections, without variance relief.
(4) The property has not been the subject of any previous action of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
T. Central air conditioning equipment/unit and generators.
(1) Central air conditioning equipment/unit and generators shall be
permitted in the front, side and rear yards.
(2) Such air conditioning equipment and generators shall not extend
more than four feet from the building foundation and meet the front
and side yard setback requirements of the District in which the site
is located.
(3) Such equipment/unit and/or generator shall be properly screened
with an evergreen hedge, at a minimum, equal to the height of the
proposed equipment/unit and/or generators and shall consist of two
staggered rows of evergreen shrubs.
U. Pool Equipment. All pool equipment shall be located in the rear yard or
side yard and shall be no closer than 10 feet from the property line.
V. Temporary Storage Units.
(1) Definitions.
§ 189.07.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.020
001:587
TEMPORARY STORAGE UNIT — A unit greater than three feet
in length by three feet in width by three feet in height rented or
owned or for use by the property owner for storage of personal,
business or commercial items or used for the packing or storage
of items for permanently moving to or from the residence or
temporarily storing items during a renovation of the main
residence.
(2) Application Required. No temporary storage unit shall be placed on
or at a residential property without obtaining a Zoning Department
permit. To obtain a permit, the property owner(s) or property
manager, in the case of rental units, shall obtain approval from the
Zoning Officer. Applications shall include the following:
(a) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner or
manager of the property on or at which the temporary storage
unit is to be placed.
(b) The names and addresses and telephone numbers of the
individual company which owns the temporary storage unit.
(c) A copy of a survey.
(d) The required fees.
(e) Copy of the Building Department permit, where applicable.
(f) Any other information the Zoning Office may require to
determine the full compliance with other applicable ordinances
of the Township.
In the case of a tenant or property owner using the same temporary
storage unit for the purposes of moving between properties within the
Township, only one permit will be required, however, a survey shall be
submitted for both locations.
(3) Size of Temporary Storage Unit. Temporary storage units shall be
no greater than eight feet in height, 18 feet in length and eight feet
in width or no greater than a total of 1,200 cubic feet.
(4) Number of Temporary Storage Units. One temporary storage unit
shall be permitted per residential property.
(5) Location of Temporary Storage Units. The placement of temporary
storage units shall meet all of the following provisions:
(a) The storage unit shall be placed either in the driveway or in an
approved paved parking area at the furthest accessible point
from the street at least 10 feet from the curb.
(b) The storage unit shall not be placed within any public right-ofway
or roadway including sidewalks.
§ 189.07.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.020
001:588
(c) In a multifamily residential complex, the storage unit shall be
placed as close as possible to the dwelling utilizing the storage
unit.
(d) At the discretion of the Zoning Officer, the storage unit may be
placed in an alternative location provided that the alternative
location does not create an unsafe location.
(6) Duration.
(a) During any twelve-month period commencing from the date of
issuance of a permit, one temporary storage unit may be
placed on or at a residential property for a period not to exceed
30 total days to load and 30 days total days to unload. The
temporary storage unit must be removed within 14 days of the
issuance of any final Certificate of Occupancy related to any
Building Permit, or one month whichever is less.
(b) During any twelve-month period commencing from the date of
issuance of a permit, one temporary storage unit may be
placed on or at a residential property for up to one month for
interior renovations/construction that do not require any
building permit from the Building Department.
(c) Properties subject to flood elevation shall be exempt from the
durational limitations during the period in which elevation
construction is being conducted but shall not exceed eight
months from delivery date of the temporary storage unit.
(7) Fees.
(a) The fee for a temporary storage unit permit shall be $50.
(b) The Township of Pequannock shall not pro-rate the temporary
storage unit fee if the unit is removed prior to the end of the fee
period.
(8) Guidelines.
(a) No temporary storage unit shall be used to store solid waste,
construction debris, demolition materials, recyclable
materials, business inventory, commercial goods or goods for
property other than at the residential property where the
storage is located.
(b) Storage of hazardous materials within the temporary storage
unit is prohibited.
(c) Temporary storage units shall be locked and secured by the
property owner, tenant or property manager at all times when
loading or unloading is not taking place.
§ 189.07.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.020
001:589
§ 189.07.030. Regulations pertaining to nonresidential districts.
[Amended 11-24-1998 by Ord. No. 98-23; 5-27-2003 by Ord. No.
2003-22; 10-24-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-30; 3-24-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-2; 5-25-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-3]
The following regulations shall apply to all nonresidential districts and,
where stated, shall constitute the conditions under which conditional use
approval may be granted.
(d) The property owner, tenant or property manager or user of the
temporary storage unit must secure it in a manner that does
not endanger the safety of person or property in the vicinity of
the temporary storage unit. In the event of severe weather
conditions in which the unit may become a physical danger to
persons or property, the Township of Pequannock may require
the removal of the storage unit.
(9) Occupancy of Container Prohibited. No human or animal shall
occupy the temporary storage unit except for the express purpose
of loading or unloading the container. No heat or electric source of
any kind shall be placed in a container.
(10) Separate Violations. Each and every day that a temporary storage
unit remains on the property beyond the applicable permitted time
shall be considered as a new and separate violation. Each and
every temporary storage unit more than the quantity of one located
on the property shall be considered a new and separate violation.
(11) Violations and Penalties. Any person who shall violate any provision
of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by fine not to
exceed $200 for each violation or by imprisonment for not more
than 90 days, or by an order to perform community service, or a
combination thereof, in the discretion of the Municipal Judge.
W. Decks.
(1) Decks will not be counted toward building coverage if the following
conditions are met:
(a) The deck is less than or equal to six feet in height as measured
from its lowest corner;
(b) The deck area is less than or equal to 15% of the footprint of
the residence or 400 square feet whichever is less and does not
conflict with (a) above.
(c) Any deck that is greater than six feet in height shall be counted
toward building coverage.
(d) The area of the deck that is greater than 15% or 400 square
feet and does not meet the requirements of (a) above shall be
counted toward building coverage.
§ 189.07.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.030
001:590
A. Performance standards. No nonresidential use shall be permitted
unless the applicant shall conform to all of the applicable Township
health ordinances.
B. Multifamily dwelling units. Multifamily dwelling units shall be
permitted in the C-1 Zone as a conditional use, provided that all of the
following conditions are met:
(1) Maximum density: 12 units per acre.
(2) Minimum lot size: 2.5 acres.
(3) Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard depth: 50 feet, not including parking area.
(5) Minimum side yard depth: 35 feet, not including parking area or
driveways.
(6) Minimum rear yard depth: 35 feet, not including parking area or
driveways.
(7) Minimum buffer: a buffer at least 10 feet in width shall be planted
along side and rear property lines. This buffer shall be planted and
maintained in a manner acceptable to the Planning Board.
(8) Minimum open space: 25 square feet of usable open space per
dwelling unit in addition to required front, side and rear yards.
(9) Maximum building coverage: 20%.
(10) Maximum coverage by impervious surfaces: 70%.
(11) Parking requirements.
(a) Dwelling units under 650 square feet in size: 1 1/2 spaces per
unit.
(b) Dwelling units over 650 square feet: two spaces per unit.
(12) Maximum building height: 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is
less.
(13) Maximum number of units per building: eight.
(14) Minimum number of units per building: four.
(15) All exterior walls of all buildings shall have windows.
(16) Minimum distance between buildings: 50 feet.
C. In the C-1 Zone, two-family houses shall be permitted as a conditional
use, provided that all the bulk regulations for the R-15 Zone shall be
met, and further provided that no home occupation or other use shall be
permitted on the lot.
§ 189.07.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.030
001:591
D. Restaurants. Restaurants shall be permitted in the C-1 and C-2 zones as
a conditional use provided that the following specific zone conditions
shall be met:
(1) C-1 zone conditions:
(a) It must be demonstrated, based on a seating plan and a site
plan, that sufficient parking is available. The Planning Board in
making this determination shall consider the following
standards:
- 1 space for every 3 seats
- 1 space for every employee at maximum shift
- 1 space for every 200 square feet of retail space
(b) Trash facilities shall be located so as not to present a nuisance
to nearby residents or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic. Trash receptacles shall be screened and the area shall
be landscaped.
(c) All exhaust fans from restaurant kitchens shall be vented
externally above the roof of the building to which the vent is
attached.
(d) Areas void of impervious cover shall be landscaped to the
greatest extent feasible respecting access and visibility
constraints.
(e) Site plan approval shall be required to insure parking, trash
disposal, access, lighting, signage and landscaping are
adequate and properly designed.
(f) Hours of operation shall be subject to Planning Board review
and approval.
(g) All restaurants are subject to State and local health codes and
these codes shall be a condition of approval.
(2) C-2 Zone Conditions.
(a) No restaurant shall be of the drive-in type, and no curb service
shall be provided, nor shall any food be distributed through an
open door or window.
(b) Site plan approval shall be required to insure that parking
areas, access, trash disposal, lighting, signage, and
landscaping are adequate and properly designed.
(c) No fumes or other odors shall be allowed to migrate off site.
E. Clubs, lodges and similar establishments. Clubs, lodges and similar
establishments shall be permitted as a conditional use in the C-1, C-2,
C-3 and C-4 Zones, provided that they shall:
§ 189.07.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.030
001:592
(1) Have off-street parking in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
(2) Show to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that they shall not
create a nuisance by reason of noise, traffic or other characteristics
which will be a detriment to the surrounding properties.
F. Commercial recreation uses. No commercial recreational uses
involving operation of motorized vehicles, discharge of firearms or the
keeping of animals shall be permitted. Amusement parks and arcades
are prohibited. Commercial recreational uses are permitted as
conditional uses and following conditions shall apply:
(1) A buffer of 50 feet shall be required between any outdoor activity
and the nearest residentially zoned or used property or public
parkland.
(2) The requirements of all health ordinances particularly related to
noise and glare shall be complied with.
(3) Parking requirements shall be determined by the Planning Board
relative to the proposed uses.
(4) Commercial recreational uses in the C-2 zone shall only be
permitted south of Jackson Avenue adjacent to Route 23.
(5) The following commercial recreational uses are permitted along
Route 23 in the C-2 zone south of Jackson Avenue and in the C-3
and C-4 zones.
(1) Pools.
(2) Indoor tennis courts.
(3) Indoor racquetball.
(4) Indoor paddleball.
(5) Skateboard parks.
(6) Miniature golf.
(7) Driving ranges.
(8) Golf courses.
(9) Spas or health and exercise clubs.
(10) Boat/canoe rentals.
(11) Pay and fish.
(12) Skating rinks (roller and ice).
(13) Theaters.
(14) Movies.
(15) Bowling.
(16) Trampolines.
§ 189.07.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.030
001:593
(17) Bicycle trails.
(18) Gymnasiums.
(19) Planetariums.
(20) Picnic grounds.
(21) Model boat sailing.
(22) Scuba rentals.
(23) Shuffleboard.
(24) Bocce courts.
(25) Indoor/outdoor soccer fields and customary accessory
uses such as, but not limited to, field houses, locker
rooms, dressing rooms, licensed physical therapy/
rehabilitation facilities and offices in accordance with
Township Ordinances. No indoor/outdoor soccer field
shall be located closer than 150 feet from existing
residence or residential district.
(26) Indoor ice hockey and customary accessory uses such as,
but not limited to, field houses, locker rooms, dressing
rooms, licensed physical therapy/rehabilitation facilities
and offices in accordance with Township Ordinances.
(27) Outdoor soccer fields may be artificially lighted as
follows:
(a) No lightning fixtures may be located closer than 150
feet from any existing residence.
(b) Hours of operation shall be 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
Monday through Saturday.
(c) Height of the lighting fixtures shall not exceed 60
feet.
(28) Where an outdoor field abuts an existing residence or
residential zone a planted buffer of 50 feet in width shall
be required. Such buffer shall include, as a minimum,
a bermed double staggered row, 10 feet on center, of
evergreen trees. The minimum tree planting height shall
be 8 feet, exclusive of the required berm. In addition,
perimeter fencing, at the discretion of the Planning
Board, may be required. In the event berms are not
permitted the height of trees shall be 12 feet.
(29) No sound amplification systems may be utilized at the
outdoor fields.
G. Building materials. The sale of building materials is permitted as a
conditional use in the C-3 Zone, provided that all materials shall be
stored indoors, and provided that all yard areas shall be paved of a
material and in a manner so as to reduce or eliminate dust, noise or
other obnoxious characteristics.
§ 189.07.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.030
001:594
H. Commercial vehicle storage.
(1) The storage and maintenance of commercial vehicles as a primary
use shall be permitted as a conditional use in the I-1 Zone, provided
that the following criteria are met:
(a) All maintenance of vehicles shall take place within a
completely enclosed building.
(b) All parking and storage of vehicles shall take place within a
completely enclosed building.
(c) A plan, approved by the Township Engineer, for the filtration of
grease, oil, detergent and all other noxious substances from
entering the groundwater or drainage system shall be
required.
(2) "Commercial vehicles" are defined, for terms of this section, as
buses, vans, limousines, ambulances, trucks and similar vehicles.
I. Parking of commercial vehicles.
(1) Commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, buses, ambulances,
vans, limousines, trucks and construction equipment and similar
vehicles shall not be permitted to be stored in any nonresidential
district unless owned by the occupant of a permitted use in the
zoning district and used as an integral part of the business. No
vehicle shall be used for the permanent or temporary storage of
materials in connection with a permitted use.
(2) The only exception to the above shall be that a license may be
granted by the Zoning Officer for the parking of commercial
vehicles in a gasoline service station in the C-2, and C-3 Zones,
provided that a fee of $25 shall be paid annually, on July 1 of each
year, for each vehicle to be so parked or stored, and provided that
the following conditions are met:
(a) No more than five vehicles shall be parked or stored on any one
lot.
(b) Parking and storage area shall not be permitted to encroach or
replace areas required for side yard, rear yard or buffer areas.
(c) Parking shall not be permitted within 25 feet of a residential
district or parkland.
(d) Parking and storage areas shall not detract from required
parking and loading areas.
(e) Paving or other surfacing of the parking area shall be required
so as to render the area dust-free and free of potholes.
§ 189.07.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.030
001:595
J. Outdoor display or storage. Outdoor display or storage shall be
prohibited in all commercial or industrially zoned or used property
unless otherwise permitted.
K. Nurseries and garden centers. Nurseries and garden centers shall be
permitted as a conditional use in the C-3 Zones under the following
conditions:
(1) Outdoor storage of live plant material shall be permitted, provided
that it is kept within an enclosed area in a manner acceptable to the
Planning Board.
(2) Outdoor storage of fertilizer, chemicals, pesticides and other
hazardous materials shall be prohibited.
(3) Outdoor storage of all merchandise other than plant material or
structural stone is strictly prohibited.
L. Gasoline service stations.
(1) A "gasoline service station," for purposes of this chapter, shall be
defined as a building and premises used for the retail sale or
dispensing of gasoline and other fuels and oil and other lubricants
for the operation of motor vehicles and minor servicing of such
vehicles. Such stations may include the sale of accessories for
motor vehicles.
(2) Gasoline service stations shall be permitted as a conditional use in
the C-2 and C-3 Zones under the following conditions:
(a) All repairs and service to motor vehicles other than minor
items, such as changing tires and the sale of gas and oil, shall
be conducted within a fully enclosed building.
(b) No coin-operated or commercial car wash business shall be
permitted on the premises of a gasoline service station.
(c) No outdoor display or storage of any merchandise, including
rental vehicles or trailers, motor vehicles for sale or lease,
house trailers, recreational vehicles, tires and like items, shall
be permitted, except for oil racks containing oil for the
servicing of vehicles. This restriction shall not include vehicles
parked in conformance with the section of this chapter
regulating the parking of commercial vehicles.
(d) In the C-2 and C-3 Zones, there shall be a total of no more than
six service stations, no more than three of which may be
located on the easterly side of Route 23 and no more than three
of which shall be located on the westerly side of Route 23. No
service station shall be located closer than 2,500 feet to
another service station on the same side of Route 23.
§ 189.07.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.030
001:596
(e) Towing service may be provided by gasoline service stations,
but no more than five disabled vehicles shall be permitted on
the premises of a gasoline service station at any one time, and
all such vehicles shall remain on the premises a maximum of 30
days. Said vehicles shall not be stored within 25 feet of a
residentially zoned or used property or parkland.
(f) No auto body repair work shall take place on the premises of a
gasoline service station.
M. Business providing service, repair or the installation of automobile
parts. Businesses which provide for the service or installation of
automobile parts, exclusive of gasoline service stations regulated by
this section, shall be permitted as a conditional use in the C-2 and C-3
Zones, provided that they meet the following conditions:
(1) All aspects of the business shall be carried on within a fully
enclosed structure.
(2) Storage of parts, both new and used, as well as parts which are
removed to be discarded, shall be inside a fully enclosed building.
(3) No vehicles shall be parked on the premises overnight, unless they
are kept within a fully enclosed structure.
(4) No auto body repair work shall be permitted.
(5) No unlicensed vehicles may be kept for parts.
N. Motor vehicle sales. Automobile and motor vehicle sales shall be
permitted in the C-3 Zone under the following conditions:
(1) Used vehicle sales shall be permitted as an accessory to the
permitted new vehicle sales use.
(2) No more than 25% of the outdoor display shall be devoted to used
vehicles.
(3) A minimum building size of 5,000 square feet shall be required.
(4) At least 20% of said building shall be devoted to new car display.
(5) The area devoted to outdoor display of both new and used vehicles
shall not exceed 1 1/2 times the area of the building.
(6) All outdoor display and service areas, including driveways, shall be
paved in a dust-free manner acceptable to the Planning Board.
(7) Display lighting shall be shielded and located and maintained so as
not to reflect glare onto surrounding or neighboring properties or
public roads. Strings of exposed lights and lights of intermittent
intensity are prohibited.
§ 189.07.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.030
001:597
(8) Vehicle service, excluding body work, shall be permitted as an
accessory use and shall be located entirely within a structure.
O. Motorcycle sales. Motorcycle and moped sales shall be permitted in the
C-3 Zone under the following conditions:
(1) Outdoor display of the vehicles is permitted in a manner and
location acceptable to the Planning Board.
(2) Vehicle service shall be permitted as an accessory use and shall be
located entirely within a structure.
P. Retail sales. Within the I-1 and I-2 Zones, retail sales facilities for the
sale of products manufactured, assembled or warehoused on the same
premises shall be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) The area devoted to retail sales shall not be more than 10% of the
floor area of the structure or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less.
(2) Adequate provision for traffic flow and parking as required by this
chapter shall be provided.
Q. Lighting.
(1) Lighting of the exterior of all properties in all nonresidential zones
shall be provided so as to ensure visibility and public safety.
(2) No light in the C-1 and C-2 Zones shall be mounted higher than 12
feet from the ground elevation. Lights shall be shielded to prevent
glare onto adjacent residential zones and parklands and so as to
provide no more than 0.25 footcandle of illumination at the
property line.
(3) In the C-3 and C-4 Zones and the I-1 and I-2 Zones, any light within
100 feet of a residential district or parkland shall be mounted no
higher than 12 feet from the ground elevation. No more than 0.25
footcandle of illumination shall exist at the residential or parkland
property line. Any light further than 100 feet from parkland or
residentially used or zoned property shall be mounted no higher
than 20 feet above the ground level, and no illumination greater
than 0.5 footcandle at the property line shall be permitted.
R. Fences. In any nonresidential district, no fence shall be erected or
installed which is greater than eight feet in height. No barbed wire,
electrified fence or other similar material shall be permitted.
S. Apartment units above Commercial Uses. Within the C-1 Zone, living
and sleeping accommodations for households in conjunction with a
permitted use shall be permitted under the following conditions:
(1) The property must front on the Newark - Pompton Turnpike.
§ 189.07.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.030
001:598
(2) Parking requirements shall be determined by the Planning Board
relative to the number of units and the hours of operation of the
commercial use.
(3) The residential portion shall have a separate and direct entrance
upon a street via an unobstructed passageway.
(4) The residential use is incidental to the business use, is located
within the principal building and is only available above the ground
floor of the permitted commercial use.
(5) Landscaping and buffers shall be provided.
(a) A landscaped area comprising at least 10% of the site or an
area the size of which is approved by the Planning Board shall
be installed to:
[i] Provide landscaping that is associated with the entrance to
the residential use or uses on the second story,
[ii] Screen solid waste storage areas, and
[iii] Buffer the parking and commercial use from any adjacent
residential uses.
(b) The approved landscaping plan or an approved equivalent shall
be maintained in perpetuity.
T. Outside display of merchandise. Outside display, except display
associated with motor vehicle sales or garden centers regulated below
shall be permitted where the following conditions are met.
1. Outside display of merchandise must be in conjunction with an
enclosed retail use.
2. The area devoted to outside display shall not exceed 5% of the area
of the enclosed retail use, however, the Planning Board may further
limit the amount of display space permitted where site size and
conditions create particular constraints.
3. This area shall be contiguous with an outside wall of the enclosed
retail space unless the Planning Board finds that an alternative
location is appropriate.
4. The display shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular access,
visibility and safety.
5. The Planning Board may require fencing and landscaping to
promote security and to buffer visual impacts.
U. Outdoor Go-kart track. Outdoor Go-kart tracks shall be permitted
where the following conditions are met:
(1) The minimum property setback shall be 20 feet.
§ 189.07.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.030
001:599
§ 189.07.040. Regulations pertaining to all districts. [Amended
10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-21; 3-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-2]
(2) There shall be a minimum of 10 feet of landscape buffer between
the go-kart track and the property boundaries.
(3) The use shall be no closer than 500 feet from a residential zone.
(4) The Go-karts must be electric.
(5) The setback from Route 23 for the Go-kart track shall be 500 feet.
A. Soil removal. No person, firm or corporation shall strip, excavate or
mine soil, sand or gravel in any zone for sale or for use other than on the
premises from which the same shall be taken, except in connection with
the construction or alteration of a building on such premises and
excavation or grading incidental thereto, and only in accordance with
an ordinance entitled "An Ordinance to Regulate the Removal of Soil,
etc.," as amended.
B. Locations on an improved street. No building permit shall be issued
unless the lot fronts on an improved and accepted public street.
C. Flood regulations.
(1) All provisions of the Floodplain Ordinance and amendments thereto
shall be complied with.
D. Drainage regulations. No cellar or basement or other structure to be
located wholly or partially below the finished grade line shall be
permitted on any lot where the water table is within six feet of the
proposed lowest level of such structure, unless the applicant for such
structure shall certify, in writing, to the Construction Official that the
structure will be so constructed to be waterproof. No lot shall be filled
or graded so as to create a ponding condition. All provisions of the
Stormwater Management, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Ordinance and amendments thereto shall be complied with.
E. Front yards.
(1) Alterations and reconstructions that are behind the prevailing
setback line on the same side of the street within the same block,
although in the front of the front yard setback line as established by
district regulations for the zone shall be permitted. The prevailing
setbacks on the block shall be established by utilizing one existing
principal structure on either side of the subject site, on the same
side of the street. The front yard setback for corner lots shall be
that setback associated with the main front entrance to that
structure.
(2) The limits of the proposed addition or expansion are less than or
equal to the existing setback conditions footprint or the proposed
setbacks are consistent with the prevailing setbacks on the block
§ 189.07.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.040
001:600
with the height not to exceed 35 feet. The prevailing setbacks on
the block shall be established by averaging the existing home on
either side of the residence, on the same side of the street. The
front yard setback for corner lots shall be that setback associated
with the main front entrance to the residence.
(3) Where there is no existing building on a side of a street within a
block, no new building shall be erected with its street wall, walls or
covered porches nearer the street line than the minimum depth of
the front yard indicated for each respective zone in the district
regulations.
(4) In applying the foregoing requirements, any block which is
improved to an extent of less than 20% of its frontage shall, for the
purposes of this section, be considered as if it were entirely
unimproved.
F. Corner lots. The front yard setback on a corner lot shall be measured
from all streets on which the property abuts. On corner lots, the
principal building may be placed diagonally, and yards shall then be
located and measured as follows:
(1) The front yard shall be all that space between the street and the
front line of the principal building extended to intersect the street
line. The front setback shall be as set forth in the zone regulations,
measured from the outside front corners along perpendicular to the
street lines.
(2) The rear yard shall be all that space between the rear line of the
principal building extended to intersect the lot lines and said lot
lines. The rear yard shall be as set forth in the zone regulations and
shall be the distance between the rear line of the principal building
and the lot lines, measured along the side lines of the building
extended.
(3) The side yard shall be all that space adjoining the side of the
principal building and between the front and rear yards. At no point
shall such building be closer to the lot lines than the minimum
width set forth in the zone regulations which shall be measured
along a line perpendicular to the lot line from the nearest point of
said building.
(4) An attached garage shall be considered an integral part of the
principal building, and the above setbacks shall be maintained from
the outside corners of said garage.
G. Through lot. The front yard setback on a through lot shall be measured
from all streets on which the property abuts.
H. Distance from a river or water body.
§ 189.07.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.040
001:601
(1) To preserve natural areas that contribute to the quality of
stormwater entering streams, no structure shall be built and no fill
shall be placed within the following distances of the nearest bank of
the various watercourses within the Township:
(a) Pompton, Pequannock and Ramapo Rivers: 100 feet.
(b) East ditch: 75 feet.
(c) West ditch: 50 feet.
(d) All other streams, ditches and watercourses: 50 feet.
(e) Hidden Cove Lake, Woodland Lake, P.V. Park, Crestmere Lake
and MacDonald's Lake: 50 feet.
(2) These distances shall be minimums. Any state standards in excess
of these distances shall be complied with.
I. Vision obstruction. On any corner lot, no wall, fence or other structure
shall be erected and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be
maintained at a height in excess of 2 1/2 feet, measured from the height
the gutter line or base of curb of the adjacent streets, within the
triangular area formed by lines along the street in accordance with
1990 AASHTO street standards and as indicated by Exhibit A attached
hereto.
J. Environmental impact ordinance. For all development, except for oneand/
or two-family homes and structures accessory thereto, an
environmental impact report may be required in accordance with
Chapter 73, as amended, and in accordance with any guidelines or
other criteria which may be set forth by the Planning Board, the Board
of Adjustment or any other person, board or agency which has the
authority to require an environmental impact report in accordance with
good engineering and planning practice.
K. Mobile homes. No mobile home shall be permitted in the Township of
Pequannock except for a six-month interim period that can be extended
administratively in situations created by the destruction of a residential
structure.
L. Decks.
(1) All decks shall be permitted in the side and rear yards. No deck
shall be permitted in the front yard.
(2) Attached and detached decks shall meet all required side and rear
yard setback of the district within which they are located. However,
decks associated with pools may have a minimum side and rear
yard setback of 10 feet.
(3) A deck shall be defined as a level surfaced area, generally
constructed of wood, directly adjacent or separated from the
§ 189.07.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.040
001:602
§ 189.07.050. Affordability control.
principal building at 30 inches or more above finished grade. Such
structure, if attached to the principal structure shall be considered
part of the principal structure.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that low- and
moderate-income housing units constructed pursuant to set-aside
regulations in the Zoning Ordinance remain a low- and moderateincome
housing resource and to provide affordability control
procedures and implementing mechanisms.
B. Definitions.
AFFORDABLE —
ASSOCIATION — An organization for the private ownership and
maintenance of any open space, community buildings, amenities and
improvements, including utilities, for the benefit of owners or residents
of the development, whether or not such organization shall be
controlled by the developer or homeowners.
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS MODEL — A financial analysis of housing cost
components and development costs, modeling the effect of set-asides
and other inclusionary zoning devices, upon the delivery of affordable
(low- to moderate income) housing:
INTEREST RATE (for the purpose of calculating affordability) — The
average of the national mortgage contract rate blend of fixed and
Ownership expenses for principal, interest, taxes and insurance
and condominium fees, if any, excluding, however, maintenance,
heating and utility costs, shall not exceed (without the express
written consent of the New Jersey Office of Public Interest
Advocacy) 25% of the upper income limit for low- or moderateincome
households, as the case may be. In determining ownership
expenses in terms of qualifying household size:
(a) One-bedroom equals a two-person household.
(b) Two-bedroom equals a four-person household.
(c) Three-bedroom equals a six-person household.
(1)
Rental expenses for monthly contract rent, excluding utility
charges, if any, shall not exceed 25% of the upper income limit for
low- or moderate-income households, as the case may be.
(2)
(1) In developments where mandatory set-aside regulations apply.
Where a developer seeks a density bonus or other inclusionary
relief.
(2)
Where a developer seeks a density bonus or other inclusionary
relief by means of a zoning variance.
(3)
§ 189.07.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.050
001:603
adjusted mortgages and the federal mortgage bank published averages,
not to currently exceed a mortgage interest rate of 10%, but subject to
subsequent annual adjustment by the Fair Housing committee, based
upon a survey of prevailing mortgage interest rates.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS — Those whose income falls below 50%
of the area's median household income, adjusted for household size, as
established periodically by H.U.D.
MANDATORY SET-ASIDE — An inclusionary zoning device providing
internally subsidized dwelling units for low- and moderate-income
households for rent or sale as part of a development proposal.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLDS — Those whose income falls
between 50% to 80% of the area's median household income, adjusted
for household size, as established periodically by H.U.D.
SALES PRICE — A stabilized sale price for low-to moderate-income
units, fixed as a condition of final development approval and thereafter
adjusted with the written approval of the Fair Housing Committee,
based on changes in the consumer price index subsequent to the date
of final approval.
C. Fair Housing Committee.
(1) A Fair Housing Committee (FHC) is hereby established, consisting
of five regular members, citizens of the Township, and shall also
have two alternate members, citizens of the Township, to be
appointed by the Township Council. The regular members shall
serve for initial, staggered terms as follows: two members for one
year, two members for two years and one member for three years.
Thereafter, each member shall serve for a three-year term.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of their
appointment as Alternate No. 1 and Alternate No. 2. The term of
each alternate member shall be two years. Alternate members may
participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not vote
except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A
vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote
instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be
made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote.
(2) The FHC shall be charged with the following responsibilities:
(a) To assist the developer, owner or tenant association in
establishing procedures and standards, in accordance with this
section, for implementing the affordability control mechanism.
(b) To monitor affordability control compliance by developers,
owners or tenant associations, fee owners and other parties in
interest, including compliance with deed restrictions and
disposition covenants.
§ 189.07.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.050
001:604
(c) In connection with the first and subsequent occupancy of all
set-aside sale and rental units, to review and amend the
approved price stabilization plan, to review implementation of
affordability control standards and procedures and, in its sole
discretion, to make biding recommendations for changes in
procedures or to exercise the right to disapprove occupancy
for any and all set-aside sale or rental units in instances where
eligibility is in question.
(d) Thereafter, to review and approve annual set-aside occupancy
reports prepared and filed by the developer, association or any
party in interest as may be required by its practices and
procedures or as contained in its rules and regulations.
(e) To promulgate rules and regulations subject to approval by the
Township Council and implementation in ordinance form.
(f) To file periodic reports with the Township Council concerning
the discharge of its responsibilities and immediately report
noncompliance with affordability control standards and
procedures for such action as the Council may deem
appropriate.
(g) To monitor all governmental subsidy programs and make
recommendations to the Township Council and the Planning
Board in connection therewith.
D. Affordability control standards. Deed restrictions or disposition
covenants in recordable form, satisfactory to the Township Attorney,
shall restrict fee or leasehold disposition of all set-aside units for a term
of 30 years. Restrictions or covenants shall provide that sale price or
rent may not exceed original price or rent as inflated by 75% of the
consumer price index, plus documented capital improvements, unless
the owner or landlord can demonstrate to a court of law that such
limitations are confiscatory with respect to the income stream for the
entire project.
E. Economic analysis. Each development application in any zoning district
having low- and moderate-income set-aside units shall provide an
economic analysis of the effect of the proposed number of set-aside
units upon the economic feasibility of the development. The economic
analysis shall provide the information required and shall otherwise be
generally in accordance with the sample project development models
hereto annexed as Schedule A.
F. Application procedures.
(1) Fair marketing program. The Fair Housing Committee shall
establish procedures in connection with the initial sales or rentals
of all set-aside units, and the developer shall be required to submit
to the Fair Housing Committee, for its approval, an approved
§ 189.07.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.050
001:605
affirmative fair marketing program in accordance with the such
established procedures.
(2) Forms. Application forms and procedures for initial or first
occupancy shall be subject to the approval of the FHC, provided
that the same shall be submitted to the FHC for its review not later
than 120 days in advance of the estimated first occupancy date of
any unit within a project. Applications shall provide information
respecting the applicants' most recent federal income tax return
for the immediate past two annual filing periods and data as to
family size and age and a certification as to income from any other
source.
(3) Review-summary report.
(a) The developer shall review all applications for set-aside
dwelling unit occupancy in accordance with the standards and
procedures in this section. The developer shall file with the
FHC a summary report containing a compilation of data taken
from application forms for all units' occupants and pending and
rejected applicants, together with the reason for any rejection.
Action on all applications shall, at all times, comply with the
applicable fair housing law and practices. The names and
addresses of applicants shall not be divulged in summary
reports, provided that the FHC may, under appropriate
safeguards so as to avoid public disclosure, require production
of such information.
(b) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the FHC, in its discretion, shall
have the right to disapprove occupancy as provided in
Subsection C(2)(c).
(4) Certification. Each developer shall certify to the FHC the eligibility
of all applicants for sale and rental units not less than 10 days after
execution of a sales contract or binder or lease application or
agreement; however, not less than 30 days prior to occupancy. The
certification shall provide information respecting applicant's
compliance with all applicable affordability control standards,
including a statement that price or rent shall not exceed original or
amended price or rent as annually inflated by 75% of the consumer
price index, plus documented capital improvements. Certification
shall be made in affidavit form, subject to penalty for perjury, and
personally signed by the developer or, in the case of a partnership,
the general or principal partner. Association certification shall be
made by the President or Chairman of the Board of Trustees.
Rental occupants shall be periodically recertified, provided that all
certifications shall lapse within the period of three years.
(5) Low-to-moderate ratio. In acting upon applications, the Fair
Housing Committee shall maintain a one-to-one low-to-moderate
§ 189.07.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.050
001:606
income ratio within each development project and through the
Township.
(6) Phasing schedule. The developer shall submit a phasing schedule
for the construction of the low- and moderate-income units. The
developer may construct the first 20% of the development without
constructing any low- or moderate-income units. Not more than
40% of the units in the development shall be constructed until at
least 20% of the low- and moderate-income units shall have been
constructed and sold to or reserved for eligible purchasers. Not
more than 60% of the units in the development shall be constructed
until at least 45% of the low- and moderate-income units shall have
been constructed and sold to or reserved for eligible persons. Not
more than 80% of the units in the development shall be occupied
until at least 70% of the low- and moderate-income units shall be
issued for a unit other than units affordable to low- or moderateincome
households until all low- and moderate-income units in the
previous phase have been completed.
G. Resale and rental controls.
(1) Sales.
(a) The developer shall submit a plan for resale or rental controls
to ensure that the units remain affordable to low- and
moderate-income households for at least 30 years. Where a
low- and moderate-income unit remains unsold for a period of
six months, the developer shall be at liberty to rent such unit
for a period not to exceed one year, and, thereupon, the resale
limitations in this section shall automatically reapply. The
purchaser of a unit shall be entitled to resell the unit for:
[1] The original sales price, plus the original sales price
multiplied by 75% of the increase in the consumer price
index between the date of purchase and the date of resale.
[2] Reimbursement of documented monetary outlays for
reasonable improvements.
[3] Any reasonable costs incurred in selling the unit.
(b) The low-income units, upon resale, may be sold only to lowincome
persons, and the moderate-income units may be sold to
low- or moderate-income purchasers. If, however, no lowincome
purchaser is found within six months, the low-income
unit may be sold to a moderate-income purchaser or, if none is
available, to any interested purchaser. If no moderate-income
purchaser is found for a moderate-income unit within six
months, the unit may be sold to any purchaser. Regardless of
the income of the purchaser, the resale controls shall remain in
effect for subsequent resales.
§ 189.07.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.050
001:607
(2) Rentals. Where unit are offered as rental units, they shall continue
to be offered as rental units for 15 years. After 15 years, they may
be sold at prices affordable to moderate-income households,
subject to such resale price controls as may be necessary to ensure
that the units continue to be affordable to moderate-income
households for the remainder of the thirty-year period commencing
from the date of initial rental.
H. Other inclusionary relief.
(1) To the extent that a developer may prove, by an economic
feasibility study (economic analysis), that additional inclusionary
relief may be required so as to develop a project with the required
20% low- to moderate-income housing, then such developer may
request the Planning Board of the Township Council to further
increase unit density, to waive condominium fees for set-aside units
or to modify cost generating ordinance standards or to grant tax
abatement to qualifying units, where authorized by law.
(2) Additionally, following satisfaction of the Township's Mount Laurel
obligations on a community-wide basis, the developer may request
the Planning Board or the Township Council to further increase fair
market unit density and allow set-aside unit apportionment at a
ratio of two moderate units for one low unit.
I. Rules and regulations.
(1) The FHC shall be authorized to adopt bylaws and other rules and
procedures and to hire a Secretary or to provide clerical assistance
and legal counsel, as may be required, subject to budgetary
limitations. The FHC shall also provide a mechanism for ensuring
that waiting lists of certified eligible occupants shall not be less
than 10% of the total number of set-aside units in the Township.
(2) All FHC bylaws and other rules and procedures shall be subject to
the prior approval of the Township Council, by resolution or
ordinance, as may be appropriate.
J. Penalty.
(1) Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association violating
the provisions of any subsection of this section or any rule,
regulation or order promulgated pursuant hereto shall be punished
by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The
violation of this section or any rule, regulation or order
promulgated pursuant hereto shall constitute a separate offense
during each day that it continues, unless otherwise provided.
(2) Whenever any such fine is imposed, such fine and costs and
charges incident thereto may be collected in an action of debt or in
such manner as may be provided by law.
§ 189.07.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.060
001:608
§ 189.07.060. Regulations for wireless communication towers and
antennas. [Added 3-25-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-04; amended
2-24-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-1]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted
on a tower, building or structure, and used in communications that
radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analogue
signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless
telecommunications signals or other communication signals.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment of the Township of Pequannock.
COLLOCATION — The use of a common wireless telecommunications
tower or a common structure for more than one antenna or the
placement of a wireless telecommunication tower or antenna on a
structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity.
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or lawful structure shall mean
the distance measured from the lowest existing grade within 10 feet of
the tower to the highest point on the tower or any antennas attached to
the tower, whichever is higher. The height of the tower shall not include
a lightning rod.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower
or antenna for which a building permit has been properly issued prior
to the effective date of this section, including permitted towers or
antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval
is current and not expired.
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Artificial trees, clock towers, bell steeples,
flagpoles, light poles and similar alternative design-mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY ("FACILITY") — All the
structures or equipment serving the wireless telecommunications site,
such as towers, equipment sheds, telecommunications antennas and
fences.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE ("SITE") — The enclosed
area in which a tower, facility and its appurtenances are located.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER ("TOWER") — A
freestanding vertical structure designed to support one or more
wireless telecommunications antennas. When utilized, this term shall
also include any antennas attached to the tower.
B. Prohibited Uses in residential zone or use. Wireless telecommunication
towers, antennas and related facilities are prohibited uses within all
residential zones or adjacent to a residential use.
§ 189.07.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.060
001:609
C. Wireless telecommunication towers, antennas and facilities. Wireless
telecommunication towers, antennas and facilities are conditional uses
and are only permitted in zoned districts as described in the following
Subsection C(2) and where they meet the following requirements
described in the following Subsection C(1), (3) and (4):
(1) The applicant must demonstrate the following:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is a significant gap in
the availability of wireless service for all carriers which the
proposed new tower will satisfy; and
(b) The applicant demonstrates that the existing significant gap
described in Subsection C(1)(a) above cannot be satisfied
through the utilization of existing towers, antennas or
structures.
(c) Sites for wireless telecommunications facilities must
demonstrate that they provide the least visual impact on
residential areas and public ways. All potential visual impacts
must be analyzed to illustrate that the selected site provides
the best opportunity to minimize the visual impact of the
proposed facility.
[1] Wireless telecommunications equipment facilities should
be located to avoid being visually solitary or prominent
when viewed from residential areas and the public way.
The facility should be obscured by vegetation, tree cover,
topographic features and/or other structures to the
maximum extent feasible.
[2] Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be placed to
ensure that historically significant structures, viewscapes,
streetscapes and landscapes are protected. The views
from architecturally and/or historically significant
structures should not be impaired or diminished by the
placement of telecommunications facilities.
(2) Locations permitted. Where a proposed tower meets the
requirements set forth in Subsection C(1), said tower, antennas and
related facilities shall only be permitted on properties or in the
following zone districts according to their location priority. If a
wireless telecommunications provider seeks to place a wireless
telecommunications facility on a lot that is located in a priority level
other than the first priority location, the provider must establish
that the location prioritized ahead of the location in which the
building or lot is located is either not available or not suitable for
the provision of adequate wireless telecommunications services
within the Township as provided in the Telecommunications Act of
1996 (47 U.S.C. § 332). The priority of the locations is as follows:
(a) First priority on existing wireless communication towers;
§ 189.07.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.060
001:610
(b) Second priority, properties located in the C-3 and C-4 zone
districts;
(c) Third priority, land and/or structures owned by the Township of
Pequannock with the consent of the Township Council prior to
hearing by a Board.
(d) Fourth priority, properties located in the I-2 and I-3 zone
district; and I-1 zone district as follows: Block 4402, Lots 6, 7,
8, 9 and 10. These specific properties provide adequate
setback from residential properties that make them reasonable
and viable candidates for future cell tower construction.
(3) Bulk area and setback requirements applicable to property owned
by the Township of Pequannock or located in the C-3 and C-4, I-1,
I-2 and/or I-3 Zone Districts. Where the proposed use has met all
the requirements described in Subsection C(1) and (2) above, the
following additional requirements shall apply:
(a) Location of tower on property shall be approved by the
approving authority so as to minimize the aesthetic impact
after a review of those locations on the property which will
satisfy the applicant's reasonable communication needs,
however, the minimum requirements are as follows:
[1] Minimum front yard setback: 50 feet or adjacent or behind
the existing use and away from any residential use or zone
to the greatest extent possible.
[2] Minimum rear yard setback: 50 feet or away from any
residential use or zone to the greatest extent possible.
[3] Minimum side yard setback: 50 feet or away from any
residential use or zone to the greatest extent possible.
[4] Maximum height of structure: The structure shall not be
any higher than the applicant demonstrates is necessary to
meet reasonable communication needs and in no event
shall the tower be higher than 100 feet, except where
greater height is necessary because more than one set of
commercial transmitting/receiving antennas are
collocated on a tower, the total height of the tower shall
not be greater than 130 feet inclusive of antennas as
measured to the top of the antennas.
[5] Distance of tower, antennas and facility from residential
zone or use: No tower, antennas or facility shall be located
within 200 feet of a residential zone or use except as
otherwise permitted under this section.
(4) Requirements applicable to all towers:
§ 189.07.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.060
001:611
(a) Fencing. All towers, antennas and related facilities shall be
suitably secured and enclosed within chain link security
fencing, said fence to be six feet in height and enclosing the
tower, antennas and the facilities in a maximum enclosed area
of 1,500 square feet for each carrier located on the tower. (A
carrier is a telecommunication company with an antenna on
the tower.) The perimeter of the enclosure shall be landscaped
with evergreen shrubs. The shrub plantings shall have a
minimum height of five feet and be three feet on center. Such
landscaping shall be provided where appropriate as
determined by the approving agency.
(b) Access roadways. Any access to the facility shall be by
utilization of existing roadways without the creation of any
additional curb cuts.
(c) Equipment/Generator. Any equipment and/or generator
located on the site shall be located within an existing structure
to the extent feasible. If this is not feasible, the applicant shall
demonstrate the lack of feasibility. If feasibility is
demonstrated, the equipment shall be located within an
attractively designed structure which is the minimal size
necessary to accommodate said equipment. This structure
should be designed to be neutral in color, complement the
existing use and/or aesthetically benign to any adjacent
residential uses or zones.
(d) Site clearing. Site clearing shall be minimized to preclude the
removal of vegetation beyond that necessary to install and
maintain the facility. Removal of any trees of a caliper of eight
inches or greater will require replacement with as many trees
as needed to replace the sum of the caliper lost.
(e) Collocation. All applicants must agree to allow the collocation
of additional antennas on the tower where it is demonstrated
that these antennas are necessary to satisfy a reasonable
communication need subject to reasonable lease terms. In the
event that there is a reasonable additional communication
need for a proposed antenna, it shall be considered a structure
and may not be erected until a site plan has been submitted to
the approving authority and a determination has been made by
the approving authority that it meets all of the requirements of
this chapter.
(f) Monopole and stealth construction. Whenever the approving
authority concludes that stealth construction will minimize
aesthetic detriment to surrounding properties it shall require
it. All towers shall provide verification of structural integrity
and be of monopole construction, unless stealth or camouflage
towers are required by the approving authority. Lattice type
structures and/or guy wires are prohibited.
§ 189.07.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.060
001:612
(g) Noise level. Noise levels at any property line shall not be more
than 20 decibels.
(h) Abandonment. In the event a wireless telecommunications
facility proposes to abandon its facility, it shall notify the
Township, in writing, at least 90 days before the planned
abandonment. Once the telecommunications facility is
abandoned or not operated for the use as approved for a period
of 120 days, the same shall be removed at the sole expense of
the operator and/or property owner. A demolition/removal
permit shall be required from the Township Building
Department. In no event may a wireless telecommunications
facility be used for a purpose other than its initial approved
use.
(i) Signs. No signs shall be permitted on any tower, equipment or
related facilities, except for those signs required by law or are
safety related, such as owner contact information, warnings,
equipment information and safety instructions. These signs
shall not exceed two square feet in total area. Commercial
signs shall be prohibited on all wireless telecommunications
towers, facilities and equipment.
(j) Lighting. There shall be no lighting associated with the cell
tower except to the extent that regulatory lights are required
by federal regulations; where emergency temporary lighting is
required it shall be oriented inward and downward to minimize
off-site impact and shall at a minimum meet the requirements
of all other lighting ordinances applicable in residential zones.
(k) RF radiation. The applicant shall comply with the New Jersey
Radiation Protection Act20 and regulations and any other
federal or local regulations or laws which are applicable. The
applicant shall demonstrate compliance with such standards
through the presentation of reports or certifications from an
appropriate electrical engineer.
(l) Multiple uses. Any prohibition contained in any ordinance
restricting the number of principal uses per lot shall not apply
to the construction of wireless telecommunications towers,
facilities and equipment when the conditions contained in this
chapter are met. The minimum setback distance between
structures shall not apply to wireless telecommunications
towers, facilities and equipment.
(m) Site location analysis. In order for the approving authority to
determine that the proposed tower and facilities are required
because of an existing gap in service as described herein and
to determine the minimum height necessary to meet
20.Editor's Note:See N.J.S.A. 26:2D-1 et seq.
§ 189.07.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.07.060
001:613
reasonable communications requirements, every applicant for
a wireless telecommunications tower, facility or equipment
shall include a site location alternative analysis. The analysis
shall address the following issues:
[1] How the proposed location of the wireless
telecommunications tower, facility or equipment will
accomplish the objective of providing full wireless
communications services within the Township of
Pequannock.
[2] The applicant shall provide testimony and documentation
demonstrating that a search of all of the locations
according to the priority listing identified and how the
determination as to how the proposed site is either the
best suited or only available site to satisfy the reasonable
communication needs of the applicant or in the event there
is more than one site available, that the proposed site is
the site best suited to minimize the impacts to the
residential neighbors, aesthetic or environmental damage
caused by the erection of the proposed tower.
[3] How the proposed location of the wireless
telecommunications tower, facilities or equipment relates
to the anticipated needs for additional towers, facilities or
equipment within and near the Pequannock area by the
applicant and by other providers.
(n) Site plan approval. All wireless telecommunication towers and
facilities must receive site plan approval from the appropriate
municipal boards. In addition to the applicable documentation
and information required for major site plans in this chapter,
the following additional documentation and information shall
be required as part of any personal wireless
telecommunications facility application:
[1] A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), adjacent roadways, proposed means
of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings
of the proposed tower and any other structures,
topography, parking and other information deemed
necessary to assess compliance with this chapter.
[2] The setback between the proposed facility and the nearest
residential unit.
[3] Documentation by a qualified expert regarding the
capacity for and type of additional future antennas.
§ 189.07.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.07.060
001:614
§ 189.08. Nonconforming Uses, Buildings and Lots.
§ 189.08.010. Applicability.
The provisions of this section shall apply to all buildings and uses existing
on the effective date of this chapter which do not conform to the
requirements set forth in this chapter and to all buildings and uses that
become nonconforming by reason of any subsequent amendment to this
chapter or any variance granted from this chapter.
[4] Documentation by a qualified expert demonstrating the
need for the facility.
[5] Documentation by a qualified expert that any proposed
tower will have sufficient structural integrity to support
the proposed antennas and the anticipated future
collocated antennas and that the structural standards
developed for antennas by the Electronic Industries
Association and the Telecommunications Industry
Association have been met.
[6] A letter of intent by the applicant, in a form acceptable to
the Township Council, indicating that the applicant will
share the use of any tower with other approved wireless
telecommunications services subject to reasonable lease
terms.
[7] A visual sight distance analysis, graphically simulating the
appearance of any proposed tower and indicating its view
from at least five locations around and within one mile of
the proposed tower where the tower will be most visible.
[8] Applicant will demonstrate that the tower does not
constitute a risk for individuals near the facility from
falling ice or other debris.
(o) Experts. The approving authority reserves the right to retain,
at the applicant's expense, any technical consultants as it
deems necessary to provide assistance in the review of site
location alternatives analysis and specifications. By submitting
an application for a personal wireless telecommunications
tower, facility or equipment, the applicant is aware of this
procedure.
(p) Off-street parking. The applicant shall demonstrate that
adequate parking exists for both the existing use as well as the
location of equipment or vehicles serving said tower so as to
not obstruct traffic or interfere with ingress, egress or use on
the property.
§ 189.07.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.08.020
001:615
§ 189.08.020. Continuation. [Amended 7-29-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-15]
Any nonconforming use of buildings or open land and any nonconforming
buildings may be continued indefinitely, but:
§ 189.08.030. Reduction of lot size.
No lot shall be so reduced that the area of the lot or any of the dimensions
of the yards and open space shall be smaller than herein prescribed.
§ 189.09. Off-Street Parking and Loading.
§ 189.09.010. Spaces required.
In all zones, there shall be provided, at the time any building or structure
is erected, enlarged, increased in capacity or changed in use, off-street
parking spaces and loading and unloading areas in accordance with the
requirements set forth herein in this section. Such facilities shall be
completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
§ 189.09.020. Design standards for off-street parking areas.
A. Shall not be enlarged, altered, extended, reconstructed or restored or
placed on a different portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by
such use on the effective date of this chapter. An alteration may be
permitted to a nonconforming building if the alteration does not enlarge
or expand the nonconformance or in any way violate any other sections
of the Zoning Ordinance.
B. Shall not be reestablished if such use has been discontinued for any
reason for a period of one year or more or has been changed to or
replaced by a conforming use.
C. Shall require site plan approval prior to being restored or repaired in
the event of partial destruction.
A. Size. Each off-street parking space shall measure not less than nine feet
by 18 feet, exclusive of access drives and aisles, unless carts for
transporting merchandise are to be utilized within the parking area, in
which case each parking space shall measure not less than 10 feet by
18 feet, and, except that parallel curb parking spaces shall be eight feet
by 23 feet. When this chapter requires more than 50 parking spaces for
any use or combination of uses in single and separate ownership, the
design standard established in "D" below shall be met.
B. Access, aisles and driveways.
(1) Different zone. No access drive, driveway, pathway or other means
of egress or ingress shall be located in any residential zone to
provide access to uses other than those permitted in any such
residential zone.
§ 189.08.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.09.020
001:616
(2) Crossing sidewalks. All driveways shall cross sidewalk areas at
grade.
(3) Distance from intersection. No driveway to or from a parking area
shall be located closer than 25 feet to the nearest right-of-way line
of any intersecting street.
(4) Driveway widths. Driveways shall have a minimum width of 14 feet
for one-way traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic.
(5) Aisle widths. Aisles from which cars directly enter or leave parking
spaces shall not be less than:
(a) Twenty-four feet wide for perpendicular parking or two-way
aisles.
(b) Eighteen feet wide for angle parking of 60°.
(c) Fourteen feet wide for angle parking of 30° and 45°.
C. Sidewalks and curbing. Sidewalks with a minimum width of four feet
shall be provided in all parking areas for four or more vehicles between
parking areas and principal structures. Sidewalks must be raised six
inches above the adjacent paved area, except where crossing streets or
driveways, and shall be curbed as a protection to pedestrians using the
walks. Sidewalks and parking areas must be arranged to prevent cars
from overhanging or extending over the required four-foot sidewalk
area. Use of wheel bumpers is prohibited. No asphalt curbing shall be
used.
D. General standards for parking areas. The following design and
maintenance standards shall apply to all accessory commercial parking
facilities.
(1) There shall be an adequate, safe, and convenient arrangement of
pedestrian circulation facilities, roadways, driveways, off-street
parking, and loading space.
(2) Roadways, pedestrian walks, and handicapped areas shall be
designed as integral parts of an overall site design. They shall be
properly related to existing and proposed buildings and the public
right-of-way.
(3) Buildings, vehicular circulation, and pedestrian walks shall be
arranged so that pedestrians moving between buildings are not
unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic.
(4) The lines of the most intense use, particularly from building
entrances to streets, parking areas, and adjacent buildings.
(5) Ramps and parking spaces specially designed for the handicapped
person using wheelchairs shall be provided, giving access from
§ 189.09.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.09.020
001:617
parking areas to the building served in accordance with N.J.S.A.
39:4-187, 39:4-187.5 and 39:4-138.
(6) All open off-street parking areas, except those accessory to one- or
two-family dwellings, should be improved with a compacted select
gravel base surfaced with an all-weather, dustless material suitably
designed for the intended use to a standard approved by the
Township Engineer. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided
with adequate stormwater drainage facilities to prevent damage or
inconvenience to abutting property and/or public streets and
alleys. Parking and loading areas shall be maintained in a clean,
orderly, and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or
lessee. The retention of stormwater runoff shall be subject to
further regulations in accordance with Chapter 156, Stormwater
and Erosion Control.
(7) All parking spaces shall be marked by durable painted lines at least
four inches wide and extending the length of the space or by curbs
or other means to indicate individual spaces. Signs or markers
located on the surface within a parking lot shall be used as
necessary to ensure efficient and safe traffic operation of the lot.
(8) Lighting shall be provided to illuminate any off-street parking or
loading spaces to be used at night in accordance with Section
189.07.030Q. If provided, lighting shall be arranged and
maintained to deflect and focus lights away from adjacent
properties. The height, type, spacing and degree of cut-off of a light
standard may be further regulated by the Planning Board in
relation to specific site conditions or types of development.
(9) All parking and loading areas shall be properly screened and
landscaped as hereinafter set forth. It is the purpose and intent of
this section to require adequate protection for contiguous property
against any undesirable effects from the creation and operation of
parking or loading areas, to reduce the amount of reflected heat,
and to eliminate monotony and unsightliness due to concentrations
of parked cars.
(a) The landscaping shall include, to the extent necessary to
further the intent of this section, shrubs, bushes, hedges, trees,
decorative walls, or fencing as set forth below.
(b) The frontage along the entire parking or loading area adjacent
to any public or private street shall be provided with an eightfoot
wide landscaped area planted with shade or ornamental
trees and a hedge or wall so as to separate and screen any
parking area from the adjacent street or streets.
(c) Interior landscaping shall include landscaped strips between
rows of parking or parking islands to the extent that
landscaped areas amount to 5% of the total parking area. All
interior landscaped areas shall be raised and curbed or
§ 189.09.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.09.020
001:618
provided with alternative protection and delineation as
approved by the Township Engineer, and shall include
shrubbery, deciduous shade trees and ground cover as
approved by the Planning Board. All trees shall have a
minimum caliper of 2.5 inches measured four feet above the
ground The number of such trees shall be determined by the
application of the following formula: one tree for each five
parking spaces. Shrubs and hedging shall not be less than
three feet in height, except no shrub or hedge shall exceed 2.5
feet in height within a sight triangle.
(d) When off-street parking or loading areas are located adjacent
to a residential zone or residentially used property, a solid
fence or masonry wall shall be provided along the property
line. The fence or wall shall be a minimum of four feet high but
shall not exceed six feet in height, and shall be limited so as not
to obscure the vision of motorists entering the public right-ofway.
(e) All landscaping shall be permanently maintained in good
condition such that the same quality and quantity of
landscaping as initially approved is sustained.
(10) Joint facilities. Any two or more nonresidential establishments may
collectively join in providing required off-street parking spaces,
provided that it is within 400 feet of the entrance of the use or
structure requiring the parking, and the total of such parking
facilities shall equal the sum of the required parking for each
participating establishment. Cross-easements or cross-licensing
agreements shall be required. These shall be prepared by the
applicant and approved by the appropriate board attorney and
recorded in the Morris County Courthouse at the expense of the
applicant.
E. Location of parking facilities.
(1) Separate lot. Parking facilities shall be located on the same lot as
the principal structure, except that space for the required off-street
parking may be provided within 400 feet of the entrance of the use
or structure requiring the parking, provided that a legal agreement
ensuring that the parking will be available shall run with the land.
These agreements shall be prepared by the applicant and approved
by the appropriate board attorney and recorded in the Morris
County Courthouse at the expense of the applicant.
(2) Parking in rear. Whenever parking is provided in the rear of any
nonresidential structure or use, a suitable rear entrance to the
structure or use shall be provided and clearly marked by a sign
approved by the Planning Board.
(3) Enclosed facilities. Required parking may be constructed within or
under any portion of a main building or in an accessory structure
§ 189.09.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.09.020
001:619
§ 189.09.030. Responsibility of owner.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to maintain
all off-street parking, loading and unloading areas, driveways, aisles and
accessways in good condition, free of sagging conditions, potholes and
cracked pavement. All lighting, bumpers, marking, signs, drainage and
landscaping shall be similarly kept in workable, safe and good condition. If
the owner fails to undertake repairs, after proper notification by the Zoning
Officer, the governing body may authorize repairs to be made at the owner's
expense if, in the governing body's opinion, conditions constitute a hazard
to the safety and welfare of the Township residents and visitors. The costs
incurred by these repairs shall be added to the property owner's taxes and
shall be paid in the same manner.
§ 189.09.040. Off-street loading and unloading.
All commercial and industrial uses shall have provisions for off-street
loading and unloading adjacent to the building or as approved by the Board.
All such spaces shall be designed and planned in accordance with generally
accepted engineering principles and as required by the Township Engineer.
Each loading space shall be at least 10 feet in width and 35 feet in length
and shall have a minimum height clearance of 14 feet and may not occupy
the front yard. The equivalent of one loading space shall be provided for
each 12,000 square feet of gross area or part thereof.
§ 189.09.050. Minimum required off-street parking spaces.
[Amended 10-25-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-21; 10-24-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-30]
constructed for parking purposes, provided that the access
driveway does not, at any point, have a grade in excess of 10%.
(4) Parking in floodplain. Where parking is provided in a structure
within a flood hazard area, at least 30% of all parking spaces shall
be located at least one foot above the flood level.
(5) Parking in residential front yards. No parking facilities for
conditional uses permitted in residential zones may be established
within the front yard setback in the zone.
A. Except in the case of one-family houses, no parking areas shall be
established for fewer than four spaces.
B. Required spaces.
Nonresidential Land Uses
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces Per Indicated Area
Assembly operations 1 per 800 square feet GFA
Bar 1 per 2 seats
Bowling alley 4 per alley
§ 189.09.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.09.050
001:620
Nonresidential Land Uses
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces Per Indicated Area
Car wash 10 per washing lane
Church/Synagogue 1 per 3 seats
Dwellings
Up to 6 units 2 per unit
Over 6 units 1 1/2 per unit
Fiduciary institutions 1 per 300 square feet GFA
Finishing operations 1 per 800 square feet GFA
Hotel 7 per guest room plus 10 per
1,000 square feet GFA
Industrial 1 per 800 square feet GFA
Library 1 per 300 square feet GFA
Manufacturing 1 per 800 square feet GFA
Medical center 1 per 250 square feet GFA
Neighborhood convenience center
< 400,000 square feet GLA
4 per 1,000 square feet GLA
Nightclub 1 per 3 seats
Offices
Under 49,999 square feet GFA 4.5 per 1,000 GFA
50,000-99,999 square feet GFA 4 per 1,000 square feet GFA
100,000+ square feet GFA 3.5 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Receiving 1 per 5,000 square feet GFA
Research 1 per 1,000 square feet GFA
Restaurant 1 per 3 seats
Quick-food establishment 1 per 30 square feet GFA
Retail store 1 per 200 square feet GFA
Schools
Elementary 2 per classroom; but not less
than 1 per teacher and staff
Intermediate 1.5 per classroom, but not less
than 1 per teacher and staff
Secondary 2.5 per classroom, but not less
than 1 per teacher and staff
Service station 4 per bay and work area
Shipping 1 per 5,000 square feet GFA
Shopping center
§ 189.09.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.09.050
001:621
§ 189.10. Approval Procedures.
Nonresidential Land Uses
Required Off-Street Parking
Spaces Per Indicated Area
< 400,000 square feet GLA 4 per 1,000 square feet GLA
400,000-599,999 square feet
GLA
4.5 per 1,000 square feet GLA
600,000+ square feet GLA 5 per 1,000 square feet GLA
Storage areas 1 per 5,000 square feet GLA
Theater 1 per 3 seats
In shopping center 1 per 4 seats
Warehouse 1 per 5,000 square feet GFA
GFA = Gross floor area
C. In the event that the number of parking spaces results in a fraction of a
space, one more parking space shall be provided.
D. In cases of uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for offstreet
parking facilities of similar uses shall apply. If no use can be
described as similar to the proposed use, parking shall be required in
accordance with the judgement of the Planning Board or the Board of
Adjustment.
E. In the event of a mixed use, the required off-street parking shall be the
sum of the required off-street parking for each use.
F. The gross floor area shall mean the total floor area at all floors and
levels.
G. If the applicant can clearly demonstrate to the Planning Board or Board
of Adjustment that, because of the nature of the operation of the
permitted use, the above parking requirements are unnecessary and
excessive, the Board may approve parking plans showing less parking
area than required, in which event a landscaped area shall be reserved
than can readily be converted to off-street parking if the conditions for
allowing lesser parking ever change. If, in the opinion of the Board,
because of the unusual nature of the applicant's business, the set forth
parking standards are insufficient, the Board may require a greater
number of parking spaces.
H. Required spaces. Single family, two family and duplex residence shall
provide two spaces one of which must be provided in an enclosed
garage.
§ 189.09.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.10.010
001:622
§ 189.10.010. Intent.
The procedures as spelled out in this section and other sections of this
section shall be the procedures for the various approvals required by this
chapter and by applicable state law.
§ 189.10.020. General procedures.
A. Application required. When approval of a site plan, conditional use,
appeal of the decision of an administrative officer, use variance, bulk
variance, variance from floodplain elevation, statutory referral or
planned residential development is required by the terms of this
chapter or other applicable ordinances of the Township, application
shall be made to the administrative officer of the Township on forms
supplied by the administrative officer. The administrative officer shall
provide necessary guidance to the applicant in completing the forms,
but the applicant bears the responsibility for the contents of the
completed form.
B. Completeness of application.
(1) Within 45 days of the receipt of the forms and other required
materials by the administrative officer, the administrative officer
shall determine completeness of the application and shall notify the
applicant, in writing, as to whether the application is complete. No
application shall be deemed to be complete until the following
information has been submitted:
(a) All information requested on the form.
(b) The required prints of the site plan or other development
proposal.
(c) The required fees.
(d) Soil erosion, sediment control and stormwater management
plan.
(e) Environmental impact forms, if required.
(f) Any other data required by this chapter or other applicable
ordinances.
(2) If the administrative officer does not notify the applicant, in
writing, of the completeness of the application within 45 days of its
submission, the application shall be deemed to be complete on the
45th day from submission.
(3) The time period for determination of completeness of the
application may be extended by mutual consent of the
administrative officer and the applicant.
§ 189.10.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.10.020
001:623
C. Submission of application to state agencies. The applicant is
responsible for submitting the application to appropriate state agencies
as required by statute, including the Department of Community Affairs,
State and Regional Planning, where the application for development
exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwellings and the Department of
Environmental Protection for a stream encroachment permit.
D. Additional information. The Board may require such additional
information not specified in this chapter or any revisions in the
accompanying documents. The application shall not deemed incomplete
for lack of any such additional information or revisions. An application
shall be deemed complete immediately upon meeting all requirements
and shall be so certified by the administrative officer. The time period
for action by the Board shall begin upon his certification.
E. Combined applications.
(1) Applications which require more than one approval may be and are
encouraged to be made as one submission. In such case, the
information required and time periods to act shall be the maximum
of any single approval requested. The fees to be paid will be the
combination of the fees for all approvals requested.
(2) When a variance and site plan, conditional use or subdivision
approval are required, the Board which has jurisdiction over the
preliminary application by reason of other sections of this chapter
shall continue jurisdiction over the application for final approval
and any extension of preliminary or final approval as may be
requested by the applicant.
F. Payment of taxes. Every application submitted to the Planning Board,
the Board of Adjustment or the Zoning Officer for approval or for the
issuance of a permit shall require proof that all taxes or assessments for
local improvements have been paid to date.
G. Hearings required.
(1) Hearings shall be required by this chapter for preliminary and final
site plan approval, appeal from the decision of an administrative
officer, use variance, bulk variance, variance from floodplain
elevation, statutory referral, conditional use, planned residential
development and development permits for new-single family
detached dwelling units in the flood hazard zone. Hearings shall be
conducted in accordance with the applicable state laws, the
Pequannock Township Land Use Ordinance,* and any other
applicable local ordinances and bylaws of the relevant board.
(2) Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., notice shall
be served by the applicant as required by applicable statute.
§ 189.10.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.10.020
001:624
(3) In addition, all applicants for rezoning, subdivision approval, site
plan approval, use variances or conditional uses shall post in plain
view on the property which is the subject of such application a sign
six square feet in size detailing the date, time, place and general
subject matter of the hearing on said application. The sign shall be
posted at least 10 days before the hearing and shall be removed
within five days following the hearing.
H. List of property owners furnished. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12c, the Tax Assessment Clerk shall, within seven days after
receipt of a request therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of
$10, make and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names and
addresses of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice
pursuant to statute.
I. Period to act. The following shall be the periods available to the
Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment to act on an application
before them. Where two or more applications are combined, the longest
period to act shall prevail, except as otherwise provided. The tolling of
the time periods stated begins on the date that the application is
deemed by the administrative officer to be complete.
(1) Appeals from the decision of the administrative officer: 120 days.
(2) Preliminary site plan, 10 acres or 10 dwelling units or fewer: 45
days.
(3) Final site plan, 10 acres or 10 dwelling units or fewer: 45 days.
(4) Combined preliminary and final site plan, 10 acres or 10 dwelling
units or fewer: 45 days.
(5) Preliminary site plan, more than 10 acres or 10 dwelling units: 95
days.
(6) Final site plan, more than 10 acres or 10 dwelling units: 45 days.
(7) Combined preliminary and final site plan, more than 10 acres or 10
dwelling units: 95 days.
(8) Conditional use: 95 days.
(9) Board of Adjustment variances.
(a) Bulk: 120 days.
(b) Combined use and subdivision or site plan: 120 days.
(c) Separate use variance: 120 days.
(d) Separate subdivision, site plan or conditional use: as listed
above.
§ 189.10.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.10.020
001:625
§ 189.10.030. Site plan approval. [Amended 7-24-2001 by Ord. No.
2001-15]
(10) Planning Board combined variance and subdivision, site plan or
conditional use: 95 days.
(11) Planned residential development, preliminary: 95 days.
(12) Planned residential development, final: 45 days.
J. Decisions. Each decision on any application shall be reduced to writing
and shall be in the form of a resolution which shall include findings of
fact and legal conclusions based thereon. This resolution shall be
adopted pursuant to the time requirements specified in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq. A true copy of the aforesaid resolution shall be mailed
by the Board, within 10 days of the date of the adoption of the
resolution, to the applicant or to the applicant's attorney, without
charge. A true copy of the resolution shall also be mailed to those
persons who have requested and have paid the fee prescribed by the
Board for such service. A true copy of the resolution shall be filed in the
office of the Municipal Clerk and shall be available to the public.
K. Publication of decision. Within 10 days of the adoption of the resolution,
a brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by
the Municipal Clerk. The Municipal Clerk shall be provided with proof
of the publication of said notice at the expense of the applicant.
L. County Planning Board. Whenever review or approval of the application
by the County Planning Board is required, the Board shall condition any
approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report by the
County Planning Board or approval by that Board's failure to report
within the required time.
A. When required. Before any development or any land is cleared or
altered within the Township or before any watercourse is diverted or its
channel or floodplain dredged or filled or before any parking area for
four or more vehicles is constructed or approved or before any off-street
loading or unloading facilities are constructed or before any building
permit, certificate of occupancy or other required permit is issued, a
site plan shall be submitted to the administrative officer for review and
approval by the appropriate Board, except as follows:
(1) If the construction or alteration or change of occupancy or use of a
conforming use does not affect existing circulation, drainage,
relationship of buildings to each other, landscaping, buffering,
lighting and other considerations of site plan review and does not
increase the parking requirements, as determined by the Zoning
Officer, it shall not require site plan approval.
(2) Detached single-family dwellings, including accessory uses
permitted as of right under applicable zoning districts.
§ 189.10.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.10.030
001:626
(3) The one-time construction of a parking lot for three or fewer
vehicles.
B. Complete application. The following items and information as indicated
on the checklist must be submitted to the administrative office before
an application can be deemed complete.
(1) Two complete applications (once the application has been deemed
complete the applicant shall submit 18 additional copies of the
application).
(2) Two copies of the plat (an additional 18 copies will be required
once the application has been deemed complete).
(3) Payment of the administrative and escrow review deposits.
(4) Proof of payment of taxes signed by the Tax Collector.
(5) Names and addresses of:
(a) Holders of 10% or more stock in applicant and/or owner, if
either is a corporation; or
(b) Holders of 10% or more interest in applicant if partnership
(per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1).
(6) Surface water management plan acceptable to the Township
Engineer.
(7) Soil erosion and sediment control plan.
(8) Environmental impact study (when required by ordinance).
(9) Health Department approval of septic systems where sanitary
sewers are not available.
(10) Completed floodplain development application (when required by
ordinance).
(11) Proof of submission of a completed application form for Morris
County Soil Conservation District, if applicable.
(12) Receipt of completed application form and required fees for Morris
County Planning Board when required.
(13) Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less
than one inch equal to 100 feet and shall be submitted on one of the
two following standard sheet sizes: 24 inches by 36 inches or 30
inches by 42 inches.
(14) Traffic impact study for all applications involving the construction
of more than 20,000 square feet of building area.
§ 189.10.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.10.030
001:627
Once the application has been deemed complete the applicant
must provide 18 additional copies of all materials related to the
pending application. In addition, the following information shall
appear on all plans in order for them to be deemed complete:
(1) A key map showing the entire tract, the zone in which the
subject property and all property within a 200-foot radius
of the subject property, including the Tax Map block and lot
numbers and owner's name. Said map to be drawn at a scale
of 1 inch equal to 100 feet.
(2) Title block in accordance with the rules governing title
blocks for professional engineers (N.J.S.A. 45:8-36):
(a) Name of the development, Pequannock Township,
Morris County.
(b) Name, title, address and license number of the
professional(s) who prepared the plat or plan.
(c) Scale (written).
(d) Date of original preparation and of each subsequent
revision thereof and a list of the specific revisions
entered on each sheet.
(e) Existing block and lot numbers as they appear on the
Township Tax Map.
(3)
(a) North arrow.
(b) Name, title, address and telephone number of the
applicant.
(c) Name, title, and address of the owner(s) of the record.
(d) Graphic scale.
(4) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or his
properly authorized agent, or that the owner has given his
consent under an option agreement.
(5) Approval signature lines:
(a) Chairman.
(b) Secretary.
(6) Acreage to the nearest 1/100 of an acre and a computation of
the area of the tract to be disturbed.
(7) Identification of wetlands as per N.J. Freshwater Wetlands
Act (Affidavit of compliance required) or permit from Army
Corps of Engineers.
(8) Identification of the Flood Hazard Area as per FEMA maps
dated July 3, 1986 as revised or submission of a perfected
LOMA.
§ 189.10.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.10.030
001:628
(9) The location of all existing watercourses, easements, rightsof-
way, streets, roads, highways, freeways, railroads, rivers,
buildings, structures, or any other feature directly on the
tract or off-tract, if it is deemed that such feature has an
effect upon the use of subject property.
(10) The location of all ground area of each building, structure or
any other land use.
(11) The location, capacity and size of all proposed off-street
parking areas and loading and unloading facilities, including
but not limited to aisle widths, location of bays and barriers.
(12) The location and treatment of proposed entrances and exits
to the public right-of-way, including the possible utilization of
traffic signals, channelization, acceleration and deceleration
lane, additional width, and any other device necessary to
traffic safety and/or convenience.
(13) The location and identification of proposed open spaces,
parks, recreation areas, or land to be dedicated to the
Township or other public body.
(14) Design for method of soil erosion and sediment control and
location of same.
(15) The location, design, species, height and type of landscaping,
buffer areas, and screening devices.
(16) The location and details of sidewalks, walkways and all other
areas proposed to be devoted to pedestrian use.
(17) The location and details of all subsurface structures:
including storm sewers, sanitary sewers, telephone,
electrical, gas, water, manholes, valve boxes, hydrants and
other appurtenances; giving top and invert elevations,
direction of flow, size of appurtenances, ownership, capacity,
pressure leads, materials, type, and projected routes. The
location of existing structures such as water and sewer
mains, utility structures, gas transmission lines and hightension
power lines on the tract and within 200 feet of its
boundaries.
(18) The specific location and design and details of signs and
lighting fixtures including isolux diagrams for proposed
fixtures.
(19) All existing (as per Township Tax Map) and proposed lot
lines, setbacks, and yard dimensions as proposed, together
with a table listing the required bulk areas for the zone,
the proposed bulk dimensions and clearly identifying all
variances requested.
§ 189.10.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.10.030
001:629
(20) The entire property in question, even though only a portion
of said property is involved in the subdivision, provided
however where it is physically impossible to show the entire
tract on the required sheet, a key map is permitted.
(21) Existing and proposed spot elevations at all building corners,
all floor levels, center lines and ROW's of abutting roads, top
and bottom of curbs, property corners, gutters, and other
pertinent locations based on U.S. Coast and Geodetic Datum.
(22) Existing and proposed contours of the site at 1-foot intervals,
unless slopes are greater than 10%, in which case 2-foot
contours are permitted.
(23) In the event a facility is to be constructed in stages, a sketch
plan showing the entire facility shall be submitted in addition
to the site plan for the particular stage under consideration.
(24) Preliminary architectural plans for the proposed building or
structure, indicating typical floor plans, elevations, height
and general design or architectural styling.
(25) The location of all utilities, including heating and air
conditioning, which are external to the building and the
method of screening. This section shall include the location
of the trash removal area.
(26) If service for utilities (telephone, electric, water, sewer, etc.)
is to be provided by an existing utility company, a letter must
be submitted from the company stating that service will.
(27) Plans, typical cross sections and construction details,
horizontal and vertical alignments of the center line of all
proposed streets and of all existing streets at the point of
intersection with the proposed street.
C. Review of application. In reviewing the site plan, the Board shall
consider its conformity to the Master Plan and the other codes and
ordinances of the Township. Traffic flow, circulation and parking shall
be reviewed to ensure the safety of the public and of the users of the
facility and to ensure that there is no unreasonable interference with
traffic on surrounding streets. The Board shall consider the proposed
drainage plan and its impact on surface water runoff, flooding, soil
erosion and recharging the water table and the effect those factors may
have both on and off the site. Conservation features, aesthetics,
landscaping and impact on surrounding development, as well as on the
entire Township, shall be part of the Board's review. In its review, the
Board may request recommendations from any local, county, state or
federal agency which may have an interest in the particular
development for which site plan approval is being sought. In assessing
all of the above considerations, the Board shall be governed by the
needs of the public health, safety and welfare.
D. Preliminary site plan approval.
§ 189.10.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.10.030
001:630
(1) The applicant for site plan approval shall submit to the Board
preliminary site plans containing data listed in 189.10.020B.
(2) The administrative officer shall, within 45 days of submission of an
application, determine whether the application is complete and
shall notify the developer, in writing, of the deficiencies within such
time.
(3) Rights of applicant.
(a) Preliminary site plan approval shall confer upon the applicant,
for a three-year period from the date of approval, the following
rights:
[1] That the terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed.
[2] That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or
before the expiration date of preliminary approval, the
whole or a section or sections of the preliminary site plan.
[3] That the applicant may apply for and the Board may grant
no more than two one-year extensions of approval,
provided that, if design standards have been revised, such
revised standards may apply.
(b) In the case of a site plan of more than 50 acres, the Board may
grant the rights referred to in Subsection (a)[1], [2] and [3]
above for a longer period of time than three years.
E. Final site plan approval.
(1) Within the applicable time period or any extension thereof granted
by the Board, the application for final approval of a site plan. Said
application will contain detailed drawings and all information
required by Subsection B. The application for final approval shall
conform to the approved preliminary site plan and any conditions
placed upon that approval by the Board.
(2) Final approval shall be granted, granted conditionally or denied by
the Board within 45 days of the determination by the administrative
officer that the application is complete.
(3) Final approval shall confer upon the applicant the following rights:
(a) The terms and conditions upon which approval was granted
shall not be changed for a period of two years from the date of
final approval.
(b) The granting of final approval terminates the time period for
preliminary approval.
F. Combined preliminary and final site plan approval. Nothing in this
section shall prevent the applicant from seeking preliminary and final
§ 189.10.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.10.030
001:631
approval of a site plan at the same time, provided that the application,
all submissions and all other aspects of the application shall meet
the requirements for final site plan approval. Where two or more
applications for approval are combined, the longest period to act shall
prevail.
G. Issuance of building permit and certificate of occupancy. No building
permit shall be issued and no construction shall be started on a site
where site plan approval is required until after preliminary site plan
approval has been received. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
on a site where site plan approval is required until after final site plan
approval has been received.
H. Off-site and off-tract improvements. The Board may require that off-site
and off-tract improvements are made by the applicant as part of the site
work in order to upgrade adjacent facilities to Township standards
adopted by separate ordinance. This may be required for streets and
roads, sidewalks, curbs, drainage facilities, utilities and any other
publicly owned and/or operated utilities or facilities.
I. Site plan binding.
(1) The site plan, as approved by the Board, shall be binding upon the
applicant and his heirs, executors, successors or assigns.
(2) A deviation from an approved site plan or failure to adhere to the
conditions of approval shall be deemed as being in violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by this
chapter.
J. Performance guaranty. The Board may require that improvements and
landscaping be secured by performance and maintenance guaranties in
the same manner prescribed for such improvements in the Subdivision
Ordinance of Pequannock Township.
K. Official action.
(1) Waiver. The Planning Board may authorize the Township Planner to
waive the requirements for site plan review if the total amount of
construction or alteration is under $5,000 in value or if the site plan
disturbs less than 2,000 square feet of land area or if the nature or
extent of construction or alteration is considered part of normal
repair, maintenance or replacement and is not in conflict with any
existing ordinances.
(2) Temporary certificate of occupancy. The Construction Official may
grant a temporary certificate of occupancy, with approval of the
Township Planner, for a period of time not exceeding six months
from the date of issue if weather or other conditions beyond the
control of the applicant prevent complete compliance with the
conditions of site plan approval. The Township Planner shall notify
the Board of the issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy
§ 189.10.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.10.030
001:632
and the date of expiration. The Township shall receive a
performance guaranty equal to the amount of the uncompleted
work to be done as determined by the Township Engineer in
accordance with standard engineering practice.
(3) Site plan change. The Township Planner may authorize minor
changes in the site plan caused by field conditions following
consultation with appropriate agencies. The Board shall be
promptly notified of any such change. No minor change is
authorized unless the Township Planner finds that such change:
(a) Will not result in a violation of the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Will not conflict with the Master Plan.
(c) Will not lessen any of the standards or the conditions of
approval originally imposed by the Board.
L. Exceptions. The Board, when acting upon applications for preliminary
or final site plan approval, shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for site plan approval as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
for site plan review and approval where the literal enforcement of one
or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable or will exact undue
hardship. Exceptions shall be granted only upon notice by the applicant
to the property owners within 200 feet of the site in question in the
manner prescribed by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. and any amendments
thereto.
M. Conceptual review. At the request of the developer, the Planning Board
shall review a conceptual plan of the developer. There shall be no fee
for this review, and neither the developer nor the Planning Board shall
be bound by this review.
N. Minor site plan approval.
(1) The Board shall classify all site plans as either major or minor
according to the following criteria. If determined to be a minor site
plan, public notice and public hearing shall not be required.
Approval of a minor site plan shall be deemed final approval, and
such approval may, at the discretion of the Board, be conditioned
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In order to be classified as a
minor site plan, an application must meet all of the following
criteria:
(a) The proposed development does not involve a planned
residential development.
(b) The proposed development does not involve any new street or
any off-tract improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
(c) No more than 5,000 square feet of land will be disturbed.
§ 189.10.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.10.030
001:633
(d) The floor area of a proposed addition to a structure will not
exceed 20% of the floor area of the existing structure.
(e) No more than one lot is involved.
(f) None of the bulk or use requirements of the zone are violated.
(g) The runoff generated by the proposed change or
improvements:
[1] Does not require the installation of drainage structures
necessary for point discharge into a receiving course.
[2] The maximum expected discharge, as defined in 156-8I,
does not exceed 0.25 cubic foot per second.
(h) The application does not involve a nonconforming or
conditional use in a residential zone.
(i) No proposed improvements will be within the following
number of feet of a property line:
[1] In a C-1 or C-2 Zone: within 60 feet of a property abutting
a residentially zoned or used property and 30 feet from a
nonresidentially zoned property.
[2] In an I-1, I-2, C-3 or C-4 Zone: No improvements will be
closer than 60 feet or two times the required setback,
whichever is greater, to a residentially zoned or used
property and no improvement will be within 30 feet of the
required setback adjacent to a nonresidentially zoned
property.
(j) No more than four additional parking spaces are proposed to
be constructed.
(k) There are no substantial changes in traffic patterns which will
cause more than a 10% additional traffic flow in the areas
specified in Subsection N(1)(i). Additional traffic flow is to be
calculated utilizing methods approved by the International
Traffic Engineering Association, National Transportation
Research Board or other professionally accepted methods.
(2) Minor site plan approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days
of the date of submission of a complete application to the
administrative officer or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Board to act within
this period shall constitute minor site plan approval.
(3) The zoning requirements and the general terms and conditions,
whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan
approval was granted shall not be changed for a period of two years
after the date of minor site plan approval.
§ 189.10.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.10.030
001:634
§ 189.10.040. Conditional use approval.
(4) A complete application shall contain sufficient information so as to
allow the Board to determine whether the requirements for minor
site plan approval have been met. In addition, a complete minor
site plan application shall consist of those requirements set forth in
Subsection B(1) through (4), (6), (9) through (18) and (20) through
(23). All plans shall be drawn as specified in this section. The
administrative officer shall, within 45 days of submission of an
application, determine whether the application is complete and
shall notify the developer, in writing, of the deficiencies within such
time. The Planning Board may waive submission of any required
exhibits in appropriate cases and for specific site plans. Requests
for such waiver(s) shall accompany a site plan application, stating
the reasons why such waiver(s) is being requested.
A. When permitted as a conditional use within the use regulations of a
zoning district, application may be made to the Planning Board for the
use so permitted. Following a public hearing and within the time period
specified, the Planning Board shall make a decision to approve, approve
conditionally or deny the application. The Planning Board shall approve
the application if it complies with all requirements of applicable
portions of Section 189.07 of this chapter and meets all other
requirements of site plan approval as required. Any variation from the
requirements in Section 189.07 of this chapter for the conditional use
shall constitute a use variance.
B. The following information must be submitted before a conditional use
application may be deemed complete:
(1) Two copies of the application and the required fee.
(2) Fourteen copies of the plan, drawn by a professional engineer, land
surveyor, New Jersey licensed architect or planner, showing the
following:
(a) Name and title of applicant, owner and person preparing map.
(b) Place for signature of Board Chairman and Board Secretary.
(c) Tax Map lot and block number.
(d) Date, scale and North sign.
(e) Zone district of property and adjoining properties.
(f) All dimensions of the property.
(g) Existing and proposed buildings and accessory structures,
including dimensions and distance to property line.
(h) Rights-of-way, easements and dedications, if applicable.
§ 189.10.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.10.040
001:635
§ 189.10.050. Planned development approvals.
(i) All of the property in question.
(j) All abutting streets and property lines.
(k) Off-street parking, where provided.
(l) Floor plans and elevations, when applicable.
(m) Location of all major trees.
(n) All setback lines.
(o) If not sewered, location of septic system and whether field- or
tank-type of system.
(3) A key map or copy of the tax duplicate showing all lots within 200
feet and approximate location of structures on adjacent property.
(4) A statement on how the proposed use conforms to the conditions
required for the use in the zone.
(5) Affidavit of service to property owners within 200 feet of the
property.
(6) Affidavit of proof of publication in the official newspaper.
C. The administrative office shall, within 45 days of submission of an
application, determine whether the application is complete and shall
notify the developer, in writing, of the deficiencies within such time. The
Planning Board may waive submission of any required exhibits in
appropriate cases and for specific site plans. Request for such waiver(s)
shall accompany a site plan application, stating the reasons why such
waiver(s) is being requested.
A. Application for planned residential developments shall be made to the
Planning Board on forms provided by the administrative officer. The
information submitted shall consist of the same information required
for site plan approval. Where the application will involve subdivision of
land in addition to or as part of the planned residential development,
the relevant portions of the Subdivision Ordinance of the Township*
shall be complied with.
B. The submission for planned developments shall, in addition to the
information required above, detail the phasing of construction and shall
detail the source of water supply and the manner of treatment of
sewage.
C. Approval of planned developments shall consist of a preliminary and
final approval process the same as required for subdivision approval.
Approval shall convey the same rights and obligations as for a
subdivision approval, including the obligation to construct public
improvements prior to final approval.
§ 189.10.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.10.060
001:636
§ 189.10.060. Cluster approval.
When the cluster mechanism of development is preferred by the applicant
for subdivision, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Board as part
of the application for site plan or subdivision approval and on forms to be
supplied by the administrative officer the application for approval, including
a plan of the land as it could be developed under the existing zoning and
the plan of development under the cluster or open space mechanism of
development.
§ 189.10.070. Variances.
A variance may be granted as per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
A. Complete application. The following items and information as indicated
on the checklist must be submitted to the administrative office before
an application can be deemed complete.
(1) Two complete applications (once the application has been deemed
complete the applicant shall submit 18 additional copies of the
application).
(2) Two copies of the plat (an additional 18 copies will be required
once the application has been deemed complete).
(3) Payment of the administrative and escrow review deposits.
(4) Proof of payment of taxes signed by the Tax Collector.
(5) Names and addresses of:
(a) Holders of 10% or more stock in applicant and/or owner, if
either is a corporation; or
(b) Holders of 10% or more interest in applicant if partnership
(per N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1).
(6) In the case where a building or structure is to be built on a vacant
parcel of land, the applicant shall submit Health Department
approval of septic systems where sanitary sewers are not available.
(7) Completed floodplain development application (when required by
ordinance).
(8) Each submission shall be drawn at an appropriate scale not less
than one inch equal to 100 feet and shall be submitted on one of the
five following standard sheet sizes: 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches, 8 1/2
inches by 13 inches, 15 inches by 21 inches, 24 inches by 36 inches
or 30 inches by 42 inches.
(9) All use variance applications shall submit a report prepared by a
licensed professional planner indicating the special reasons, zoning
impacts and similar data under which the application is being
prepared. Once the application has been deemed complete the
§ 189.10.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.10.070
001:637
applicant must provide 18 additional copies of all materials relating
to the pending application. In addition, the following information
shall appear on all plans in order to be deemed complete:
(1) A key map showing the entire tract, the zone in which the
subject property and all property within a 200-foot radius
of the subject property, including the Tax Map block and lot
numbers and owner's name. Said map to be drawn at a scale
of one inch equal to 100 feet.
(2) Title block indicating the following information:
(a) Name, title, address and license number of the
professional(s) who prepared the plat or plan.
(b) Scale (both graphic and written).
(c) Date of the original preparation and of each
subsequent revision thereof and a list of the specific
revisions entered on each sheet.
(d) Existing block and lot numbers as they appear on the
Township Tax Map.
(3)
(a) North arrow.
(b) Name, title, address and telephone number of the
applicant.
(c) Name, title, and address of the owner(s) of the record.
(d) Graphic scale.
(4) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the land or
his properly authorized agent, or that the owner has given
his consent under an option agreement.
(5) Approval signature lines:
(a) Chairman.
(b) Secretary.
(6) Acreage to the nearest 1/100 of an acre and a computation
of the area of the tract to be disturbed.
(7) Identification of wetlands as per N.J. Freshwater Wetlands
Act (Affidavit of compliance required) or permit from Army
Corps of Engineers.
(8) Identification of the Flood Hazard Area as per FEMA maps
dated July 3, 1986 as revised or submission of a perfected
LOMA.
(9) The location of all existing watercourses, wooded area, and
major trees (trees with a 6 inch or greater caliper as
measured 3 feet above ground shall be individually
identified if they are to be disturbed during construction),
easements, rights-of-way, and streets.
§ 189.10.070 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.10.070
001:638
§ 189.11. Administration and Enforcement.
§ 189.11.010. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer of the Township of
Pequannock.
§ 189.11.020. Powers and duties of enforcement officers.
(10) All existing (as per Township Tax Map) and proposed lot
lines, setbacks, and yard dimensions as proposed, together
with a table listing the required bulk areas for the zone,
the proposed bulk dimensions and clearly identifying all
variances requested.
(11) Preliminary architectural plans for the proposed building of
structures, indicating typical floor plans, elevations, height
and general design or architectural styling.
(12) The location of the sanitary system if the structure is not
served by sanitary sewer.
(13) The location of all existing and proposed principal buildings
or structures and the location of all existing and proposed
accessory structures or buildings and the distance to the
nearest property line for each.
(14) The location, quantity and type of off-street parking where
provided.
B. In the case of bifurcated applications, the applicant shall submit the
appropriate site plan or subdivision plans to the Board for review
following the approval of a use variance. The site plan or subdivision
application shall be deemed complete once it is in conformance with the
appropriate checklist. Where the applicant is requesting simultaneous
review of the use variance and the site plan or subdivision, neither
application will be deemed complete until all items on the appropriate
checklist(s) are satisfied.
C. The administrative office shall, within 45 days of submission of an
application, determine whether the application is complete and shall
notify the developer, in writing, of the deficiencies within such time. The
Zoning Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board may waive
submission of any required exhibits in appropriate cases and for
specific site plans or subdivision. Request for such waiver(s) shall
accompany a site plan or subdivision application, stating the reasons
why such waiver(s) is/are being requested.
A. Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the Township
Manager. The Zoning Officer shall be authorized to delegate the
enforcement of any and all provisions of this chapter to the
Construction Official or other designated officials. It shall be the duty of
the Zoning Officer to:
§ 189.10.070 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.11.020
001:639
§ 189.11.030. Registration of nonconforming uses, buildings and
lots.
(1) Issue zoning permits required under the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Refuse, in writing, applications for approvals, permits or
certificates which are not in accord with the requirements of this
chapter.
(3) Issue written notice of violation to any person violating any
provision of this chapter, setting forth the particulars of such
violation.
(4) Make reports to the Township Manager, Township Council,
Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment as may be
required.
(5) Investigate and make a report to the Board of Adjustment on all
matters before the Board.
(6) Review this chapter on an annual basis and report to the Manager
any changes or amendments which are deemed to be necessary or
desirable.
(7) Keep records of applications, permits or certificates issued,
variances granted, inspections made, reports rendered and notices
or orders issued.
B. Administrative officer. It shall be the duty of the administrative officer
to:
(1) Receive all applications for permits and approvals required by this
chapter.
(2) Record and file all applications for permits and approvals with
accompanying plans and documents.
(3) Prescribe the form of all applications, permits and certificates
required under the terms of this chapter, and combine these with
other forms, permits and certificates required by other Township
ordinances where appropriate.
A. The Zoning Officer shall make a list of all uses, structures and lots in the
Township which are legally nonconforming to the provisions of this
chapter by reason of variance or by reason of such use being legal prior
to the adoption or amendment of this chapter.
B. Each property owner of a legal nonconforming use, structure or lot
shall be issued a certificate of nonconformance, a copy of which shall be
kept on file with the Township. This certificate shall detail the nature
and extent of the nonconformity and the reason for its existence, as well
as any other pertinent information.
§ 189.11.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.11.030
001:640
§ 189.11.040. Permits and certificates. [Amended 10-24-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-23; 2-23-2010 by Ord. No. 2010-5]
C. At least annually, the Zoning Officer shall update this list and shall issue
a certificate of nonconformance to all property owners who have legal
nonconforming uses and who have not yet been issued such a
certificate.
A. General permits.
(1) Applications for permits for operating home occupations, permits
for keeping animals in a residential district, permits for parking
commercial vehicles on the premises of a gasoline service station
and any other permits required by this chapter shall be made to the
Zoning Officer on forms provided by him. All other permits shall be
acted upon within 14 days of submission of a complete application.
Those permits which are to be renewed annually shall be
renewable on July 1 of each year.
(2) Appeals from a denial of any general permit shall be made to the
Board of Adjustment in the manner of a use variance.
B. Zoning permits.
(1) A zoning permit issued by the Zoning Officer shall be required for
the following activities:
(a) No person shall commence the construction, reconstruction,
demolition, alteration, conversion or installation of a fence, a
wall four feet or greater in height, a structure, a private
swimming pool or a building without first obtaining a zoning
permit.
(b) No person shall commence a use nor change an existing use of
property without first obtaining a zoning permit.
(c) A person desiring to obtain an official acknowledgement that
an existing building, lot or use meets the requirements of the
current Township Zoning Ordinance shall do so by obtaining a
zoning permit.
(d) A person desiring to obtain a certification pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-68 that a use or structure existed before the adoption
of the ordinance that rendered the use or structure
nonconforming may apply for a zoning permit. A zoning permit
under this section may be issued only if an application is made
within one year of the adoption of the ordinance that made the
structure or use nonconforming. After one year, application
shall be made to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68.
§ 189.11.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.11.040
001:641
(e) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a zoning permit
indicating whether the request meets with the provisions of
this chapter shall be issued.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall issue a zoning permit where it is
determined that at least one of the following conditions have been
met:
(a) The use is permitted as a permitted use in the proposed
location;
(b) The use is permitted as a conditional use in the proposed
location and all conditional use provisions are met;
(c) The use exists as a nonconforming use and/or nonconforming
structure; or
(d) The use is permitted by the terms of a variance and the
structure and lot meet all required zone criteria.
(3) The Administrative Officer shall have the authority to promulgate
any checklists and/or application forms necessary for the
administration of this section. At a minimum, the supporting exhibit
shall include a current, sealed survey showing, in addition to any
survey data required by statute or state administrative code, the
size of the subject property; bounding streets; size, type and
location of existing structures with distances to all property lines;
size, type and location of the proposed structures with distances to
all property lines.
(4) Zoning permit fees.
(a) Certificate of continued occupancy for nonresidential uses:
$200.
(b) Home occupation: $25.
(c) Zoning compliance letter for commercial use: $25.
(d) Residential additions: $50.
(e) New home: $75.
(f) Nonresidential uses and structures: $100.
(5) Appeal.
(a) The granting or denial of a zoning permit may be appealed to
the Zoning Board of Adjustment by any interested party
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a.
(b) A notice of appeal shall be filled within 20 days of the granting
or denial of the permit request.
§ 189.11.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.11.040
001:642
(c) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall reverse or affirm the
granting or denial of the zoning permit within 120 days of the
filing of the notice of appeal. The failure of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment to act within the period shall constitute a decision
favorable to the appellant.
C. Construction permit.
(1) Prior to construction, as regulated by the N.J.U.C.C. a construction
permit shall be required. Application for said permit shall be made
to the Construction Official, in writing, on forms to be provided by
the Construction Official.
(2) All requests for permits shall be in conformance with the N.J.U.C.C.
requirements for construction permit applications.
(3) In addition, the applicant shall supply to the Construction Official
any additional information required by him to determine
conformance to this chapter, the Building Code or any other
applicable ordinances. The Construction Official shall approve,
approve with conditions or deny the application for a building
permit in accordance with the applicable law establishing the
construction codes.
(4) No excavation or site preparation shall begin until a building
permit has been issued. No building permit shall be issued for any
land or structure for which a zoning permit, conditional use
approval, variance or site plan approval shall be required until such
approval has been granted and the Construction Official has been
so notified in writing.
(5) No construction permit shall be issued until a zoning permit has
been issued approving the use and location of the proposed
structure.
D. Certificate of occupancy.
(1) No person shall occupy or use any building or structure authorized
by a construction permit without first obtaining a certificate of
occupancy as required by the N.J.U.C.C.
(2) No certificate of occupancy required as per the N.J.U.C.C. shall be
issued until a zoning permit has been issued.
(3) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any use of land or
structure requiring conditional use approval or a variance or
requiring site plan approval as detailed in this chapter until such
approval or variance has been granted and the Construction
Official has been so notified in writing. In a case where a
conditional use, variance or site plan has been approved, the
certificate of occupancy shall detail any conditions of those
approvals.
§ 189.11.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.11.040
001:643
§ 189.11.050. Inspections.
The Zoning Officer and/or Construction Official is authorized and
empowered to cause any building, structure, place or premises to be
inspected and examined and to order, in writing, the remedying of any
condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any provision of
this chapter.
§ 189.11.060. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-25-2003 by Ord.
No. 2003-08]
E. Certificate of Continued Occupancy.
(1) No person shall occupy or use any portion of a nonresidential
building after such building or portion thereof has been vacated or
sold, or in which there has been a change in use or a change in
occupancy, until the landlord/owner shall have applied for and
secured a certificate of continued occupancy from the Construction
Official.
(2) Upon receipt by the Construction Official of an application for a
certificate of continued occupancy and payment of the required fee,
the Construction Office and/or Subcode Officials shall conduct an
inspection of the premises in question to insure compliance with
applicable building, safety and fire codes, regulations, ordinances
and statutes of the Township.
(3) No certificate of continued occupancy shall be issued for any
structure requiring conditional use approval, variance approval or
site plan approval as detailed in this chapter until such approval or
variance has been granted and the Construction Official has been
so notified in writing. In a case where a conditional use, variance or
site plan has been approved, the certificate of continued occupancy
shall detail all conditions of those approvals.
A. The owner or agent of a building or premises where a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall have been committed or shall exist, or the
agent, architect, builder, contractor, or any other person who shall
commit, take part in, or assist in any such violation, or who shall
maintain any building or premises in which any violation of this chapter
shall exist, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this section.
B. For a violation of any provision of this chapter or supplement or
addition thereto, the offender shall be subject to imprisonment in the
County Jail for a period not to exceed 90 days or to a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days, or to a fine of not less than
$100 nor exceeding $1,250, or any combination of penalty.
C. Any person who is convicted of violating a provision of this chapter
within one year of the date of a previous violation of this chapter and
who was fined for the previous violation, shall be sentenced by the
§ 189.11.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.11.060
001:644
§ 189.11.070. Approval binding. [Added 7-25-2000 by Ord. No.
2000-18]
An approval of any subdivision by the appropriate approving authority
under the provisions of this chapter and any conditions thereof shall be
binding upon the developer/applicant and upon any subsequent heirs and/
or assigns. Said approval shall not be amended or altered in any manner
without prior approval from the appropriate approving authority. Failure to
adhere to an approved subdivision plan or condition of approval contained
in a subdivision plan shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
§ 189.11.080. Affordable Housing Administration. [Added
11-28-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-31]
Court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine
imposed by the Court upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be
less than $100 nor more than $1,250 for a violation of any provision of
this chapter, but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed
for the violation of a provision of this chapter.
A. Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this section,
shall have the following meanings:
95/5 UNIT — A restricted ownership unit that is part of a housing
element that received substantive certification from COAH pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:93, before October 1, 2001.
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT — The entity responsible for administering
the affordability controls of this ordinance with respect to specific
restricted units, as designated pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14.
AFFORDABILITY AVERAGE — An average of the percentage of median
income at which restricted units in an affordable development are
affordable to low- and moderate-income households.
AFFORDABLE — In the case of an ownership unit, that the sales price
for the unit conforms to the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6
and, in the case of a rental unit, that the rent for the unit conforms to
the standards set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12.
AFFORDABLE DEVELOPMENT — A housing development all or a
portion of which consists of restricted units.
AGE-RESTRICTED UNIT — A housing unit designed to meet the needs
of, and exclusively for, the residents of an age-restricted segment of the
population where the head of the household is a minimum age of either
62 years, or 55 years and meets the provisions of the 42 U.S.C. § 3601
et seq., except that due to death, a remaining spouse of less than 55
years of age shall be permitted to continue to reside.
AGENCY — The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency
established by P.L. 1983, c. 530 (N.J.S.A. 55:14K-1 et seq.) and in, but
not of, the DCA.
§ 189.11.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.11.080
001:645
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE — A facility licensed by the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style
housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living
services are available when needed for four or more adult persons
unrelated to the proprietor and offer, at a minimum, one unfurnished
room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette and a lockable door on the unit
entrance.
BALANCED HOUSING — The Neighborhood Preservation Balanced
Housing Program of the DCA as set forth at N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320 and
N.J.A.C. 5:43.
CERTIFIED HOUSEHOLD — A household that has been certified by an
administrative agent as a low-income household or moderate-income
household.
COAH — The Council on Affordable Housing in, but not of, the DCA,
established under the New Jersey Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.
52:27D-301 et seq.).
DCA — The State of New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
FAIR SHARE ROUND — Any one of three periods in time during which
the Council established municipal obligations to provide affordable
housing and the first round was from 1987-1993 and the second period
was from 1993-1997 and the third is for 1999-2014.
HAS — The Housing Affordability Service, formerly known as the
"Affordable Housing Management Service," in the Department of
Community Affairs, Division of Housing.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross annual
household income equal to 50% or less of the median income.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a lowincome
household.
MEDIAN INCOME — The median income by household size for an
applicable county, as adopted annually by COAH.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with a total gross
annual household income in excess of 50% but less than 80% of the
median income.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — A restricted unit that is affordable to a
moderate-income household.
MONI — The Agency's Market Oriented Neighborhood Investment
Program, as it may be authorized from time to time by the Agency.
NON-EXEMPT SALE — Any sale or transfer of ownership other than
the transfer of ownership between husband and wife; the transfer of
ownership between former spouses ordered as a result of a judicial
decree of divorce or judicial separation, but not including sales to third
parties; the transfer of ownership between family members as a result
§ 189.11.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.11.080
001:646
of inheritance; the transfer of ownership through an executor's deed to
a class A beneficiary; and the transfer of ownership by court order.
RANDOM SELECTION PROCESS — A process by which currently
income-eligible households are selected for placement in affordable
housing units such that no preference is given to one applicant over
another except for purposes of matching household income and size
with an appropriately priced and sized affordable unit (e.g., by lottery).
REGIONAL ASSET LIMIT — The maximum housing value affordable to
a four-person household with an income at or above 80% of the regional
median as defined by the Council's annually adopted income limits.
RENT — The gross monthly cost of a rental unit to the tenant, including
the rent paid to the landlord, as well as an allowance for tenant-paid
utilities computed in accordance with allowances published by DCA
for its Section 8 program. In assisted living residences, rent does not
include charges for food and services.
RESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit, whether a rental unit or
ownership unit, that is subject to the affordability controls of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq., but does not include a market-rate unit financed
under UHORP or MONI.
UHORP — The Agency's Urban Homeownership Recovery Program.
B. Municipal Fair Share Obligation. The fair share obligation in the
Township consists of a zero unit rehabilitation obligation, a zero unit
prior round obligation and a growth share obligation that represents
one affordable unit for every eight market rate residential units
receiving a certificate of occupancy subsequent to January 1, 2004 plus
one affordable housing unit for every 25 jobs created through the
expansion or creation of nonresidential development in accordance
with the schedule determined by the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH).
C. Guidelines. The following general guidelines apply to any developments
that contain proposed low- and moderate-income units, and any future
developments that may occur including any low and moderate-income
units built as a result of the requirements of the Township's Growth
Share Ordinance.
1. Zoning. The Township has adopted 'growth share regulations' that
provide for the construction of one affordable unit for every eight
market rate units and for payment in lieu of development funds
where the obligation is for less than one affordable unit.
In instances where affordable housing units must be built, as
opposed to where there is an option to pay for units instead of
building, the following schedule shall be followed:
§ 189.11.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.11.080
001:647
Percentage of Market-Rate
Units Completed
Minimum Percentage of Lowand
Moderate-Income Units
Completed
25 0
25+1 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
2. New Construction.
A. Bedroom Distribution of affordable housing units:
1. The fair share obligation shall be divided equally
between low- and moderate-income households.
2. In each affordable development, at least 50% of the
restricted units within each bedroom distribution shall
be low-income units.
3. Affordable developments that are not age-restricted
shall be structured in conjunction with realistic market
demands such that:
i. The combined number of efficiency and 1-bedroom
units is no greater than 20% of the total low- and
moderate-income units;
ii. At least 30% of all low- and moderate-income units
are 2 bedroom units;
iii. At least 20% of all low- and moderate-income units
are 3 bedroom units; and
iv. The remainder may be allocated at the discretion
of the developer
v. Age-restricted low- and moderate-income units
may utilize a modified bedroom distribution and at
a minimum, the number of bedrooms shall equal
the number of age-restricted low- and moderateincome
units within the affordable development.
B. Accessible Townhouse Units. 10% of all affordable
townhouse units shall be accessible pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:23-7.5(b) and (c) in the Barrier Free Sub Code N.J.A.C.
5:23-7.
C. Design Standards. Affordable units shall be designed to
include all amenities, facade treatments and living area
found in comparable market-rate units located within the
same development.
D. Maximum Rents and Sales Prices
§ 189.11.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.11.080
001:648
1. The Township hereby establishes that the maximum rent
for affordable units within each affordable development
shall be affordable to households earning no more than
60% of median income and the average rent for low- and
moderate-income units shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 52% of median income.
2. The developers and/or municipal sponsors of restricted
rental units shall establish at least 1 rent for each
bedroom type for both low-income and moderate-income
units, provided that at least 10% of all low- and
moderate-income units shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 35% of median income.
3. The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units
within each affordable development shall be affordable
to households earning no more than 70% of median
income and each affordable development must achieve
an affordability average of 55% for restricted ownership
units and in achieving this affordability average,
moderate-income ownership units must be available for
at least 3 different prices for each bedroom type, and
low-income ownership units must be available for at
least 2 different prices for each bedroom type.
4. The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to
affordable developments financed under UHORP or
MONI or to assisted living residences, which shall
comply with applicable Agency policies, guidelines and
regulations.
E. Utilities.
1. Affordable units shall utilize the same type of heating
source as market units within the affordable
development.
2. Those tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility
allowance shall be so stated in the lease and shall be
consistent with the utility allowance approved by DCA
for its Section 8 program.
F. Occupancy Standards. Occupancy standards for affordable
housing units are pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4.
D. Control Periods for Ownership Units and Enforcement Mechanisms.
Control periods for ownership units are pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5
and each restricted ownership unit shall remain subject to the
requirements of this ordinance until the Township elects to release the
unit from such requirements pursuant to action taken in compliance
with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq. and prior to such an election, a restricted
ownership unit must remain subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.1 et seq. for at least 30 years.
§ 189.11.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.11.080
001:649
1. At the time of the first sale of the unit, the purchaser shall execute
and deliver to the administrative agent a recapture note obligating
the purchaser (as well as the purchaser's heirs, successors and
assigns) to repay, upon the first non-exempt sale after the unit's
release from the requirements of this ordinance, an amount equal
to the difference between the unit's non-restricted fair market
value and its restricted price and the recapture note shall be
secured by a recapture lien evidenced by a duly recorded mortgage
on the unit.
2. All conveyances of restricted ownership units shall be made by
deeds and restrictive covenants pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq. and each purchaser of a 95/5 unit, in addition, shall execute a
note and mortgage, incorporated herein by reference.
3. The affordability controls set forth in this ordinance shall remain in
effect despite the entry and enforcement of any judgment of
foreclosure with respect to restricted ownership units.
E. Price Restrictions for Ownership Units and Resale Prices. Price
restrictions for ownership units are pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et
seq., including;
1. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership unit shall be
approved by the administrative agent. The initial purchase price for
all restricted ownership units except those financed under UHORP
or MONI shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying costs of
the unit, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan
equal to 95% of the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15
rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees do not
exceed 28% of the eligible monthly income of an appropriate
household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4; provided,
however, that the price shall be subject to the affordability average
requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3.
2. The initial purchase price of a restricted ownership unit financed
under UHORP or MONI unit shall be calculated so that the monthly
carrying costs of the unit, including principal and interest (based
on a mortgage loan equal to 95% of the purchase price and the
Federal Reserve HR15 rate of interest), taxes, homeowner and
private mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly income
of a household whose income does not exceed 45% of median
income, in the case of a low-income unit, or 72% of median income,
in the case of a moderate-income unit, and that is of an appropriate
household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4.
3. The administrative agent shall approve all resale prices, in writing
and in advance of the resale, to assure compliance with the
foregoing standards.
§ 189.11.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.11.080
001:650
4. The master deeds of affordable developments shall provide no
distinction between the condominium or homeowner association
fees and special assessments paid by low- and moderate-income
purchasers and those paid by market purchasers, although
condominium units subject to a municipal ordinance adopted
before October 1, 2001, which provides for condominium or
homeowner association fees and/or assessments different from
those provided for in this subsection shall have such fees and
assessments governed by said ordinance.
5. The owners of ownership units may apply to the administrative
agent to increase the maximum sales price for the unit on the basis
of capital improvements. Eligible capital improvements shall be
those that render the unit suitable for a larger household or that
add an additional bathroom.
F. Buyer Income Eligibility. Buyer income eligibility for ownership units is
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.7, such that low-income ownership units
shall be reserved for households with a gross household income less
than or equal to 50% of median income and moderate income
ownership units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than 80% of median income.
1. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted ownership unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the estimated monthly housing cost for the unit (including
principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage
insurance and condominium or homeowner association fees as
applicable) does not exceed 33% of the household's eligible
monthly income.
2. A restricted ownership unit shall be required to obtain a Continuing
Certificate of Occupancy or a certified statement from the
municipal Building Inspector stating that the unit meets all code
standards upon the first transfer of title that follows the expiration
of the applicable minimum control period provided under N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.5(a).
G. Rental Units Control Period. Each restricted rental unit shall remain
subject to the requirements of this ordinance until the Township elects
to release the unit from such requirements, however, prior to such a
municipal election, a restricted rental unit must remain subject to the
requirements of this ordinance for a period of at least 30 years.
1. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall
contain deed restriction language. The deed restriction shall have
priority over all mortgages on the property and the deed restriction
shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of
the county and a copy of the filed document shall be provided to the
§ 189.11.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.11.080
001:651
administrative agent within 30 days of the receipt of a certificate of
occupancy.
2. A restricted rental unit shall remain subject to the affordability
controls of this ordinance, despite the occurrence of any of the
following events:
(a) Sublease or assignment of the lease of the unit;
(b) Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the unit;
or
(c) The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
H. Price Restrictions for Rental Units and Rent Increase. The initial rent
for a restricted rental unit shall be approved by the administrative
agent and shall be calculated so as not to exceed 30% of the eligible
monthly income of the appropriate household size as determined under
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.3.
1. Rents may be increased annually based on the Housing Consumer
Price Index for the United States, and these figures are published
annually by COAH. Rents may not be increased more than once a
year.
2. A written lease is required for all restricted rental units, except for
units in an assisted living residence and tenants are responsible for
security deposits and the full amount of the rent as stated on the
lease.
3. No additional fees or charges may be added to the approved rent
(except, in the case of units in an assisted living residence, for the
customary charges for food and services) without the express
written approval of the administrative agent and application fees
(including the charge for any credit check) may not exceed 5% of
the monthly rental of the applicable restricted unit and shall be
payable to the administrative agent to be applied to the costs of
administering the controls in this ordinance as applicable to the
unit.
I. Tenant Income Eligibility. Tenant income eligibility is pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.13 such that low-income rental units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 50%
of median income and moderate income rental units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than 80% of median
income.
1. The administrative agent shall certify a household as eligible for a
restricted rental unit when the household is a low-income
household or a moderate-income household, as applicable to the
unit, and the rent proposed for the unit does not exceed 35% (40%
§ 189.11.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.11.080
001:652
for age-restricted units) of the household's eligible monthly income
as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16; provided that this
limit maybe exceeded if one or more of the following circumstances
exists:
(a) The household currently pays more than 35% (40% of
households eligible for age-restricted units) of its gross
household income for rent and the proposed rent will reduce
its housing costs;
(b) The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for
households eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly
income for rent in the past and has proven its ability to pay;
(c) The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded
living conditions;
(d) The household documents the existence of assets, with which
the household proposes to supplement the rent payments;
(e) The household documents proposed third-party assistance
from an outside source such as a family member in a form
acceptable to the administrative agent and the owner of the
unit.
J. Administrative agent for the Township's affordable housing units. The
affordability controls set forth in this ordinance shall be administered
and enforced by the administrative agent. The primary responsibility of
the administrative agent shall be to ensure that the restricted units
under administration are sold or rented, as applicable, only to low and
moderate-income households.
1. The administrative agent shall create and shall publish in plain
English, and in such other languages as may be appropriate to
serving its client base, a written operating manual, as approved by
COAH, setting forth procedures for administering such
affordability controls, including procedures for long-term control of
restricted units; for enforcing the covenants of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18
and for releasing restricted units promptly at the conclusion of
applicable control periods. The administrative agent shall have
authority to take all actions necessary and appropriate to carrying
out its responsibilities hereunder. The operating manual shall have
a separate and distinct chapter or section setting forth the process
for identifying applicant households seeking certification to
restricted units, for reviewing applicant household eligibility, and
for certifying applicant households in accordance with the
household certification and referral requirements set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16.
2. The administrative agent shall establish and maintain a ready
database of applicant households as a referral source for
certifications to restricted units, and shall establish written
§ 189.11.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.11.080
001:653
procedures to ensure that selection among applicant households
be via the database, and in accordance with a uniformly applied
random selection process and all applicable State and Federal laws
relating to the confidentiality of applicant records.
3. Except in the case of restricted units receiving UHORP or MONI
funding, the Township shall select one or more administrative
agents for restricted units. The Township may elect to serve as the
administrative agent for some or all restricted units in the
Township, or the Township may select HAS or an experienced
private entity approved by the Division, the Agency or COAH to
serve as administrative agent for some or all restricted units in the
municipality. The foregoing approval by COAH or the Division is to
be based on the private entity's demonstration of the ability to
provide a continuing administrative responsibility for the length of
the control period for the restricted units. The Agency shall select
the administrative agents for restricted units receiving UHORP or
MONI funding.
4. The administrative agent shall have the authority to discharge and
release any or all instruments filed of record to establish
affordability controls.
K. Affirmative Marketing.
1. The Township is ultimately responsible for administering the
affordable housing program, including affordability controls and
the Affirmative Marketing Plan in accordance with the regulations
of the Council on Affordable Housing pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94 et
seq. and the New Jersey Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
2. The Township has delegated to the Municipal Liaison, this
responsibility for administering the affordable housing program,
including administering and enforcing the affordability controls
and the Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township in accordance
with the provisions of this section, the regulations of the Council on
Affordable Housing pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq. and the New
Jersey Uniform Housing Affordability Controls pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq.
3. Subject to approval of COAH, The Township may contract with one
or more administrative agents to administer some or all of the
affordability controls and/or the Affirmative Marketing Plan in
accordance with this section, the regulations of the Council on
Affordable Housing pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq. and the New
Jersey Uniform Housing Affordability Controls pursuant to N.J.A.C.
5:80-26 et seq. If the Township enters into such a contract, the
Municipal Liaison shall supervise the contracting administrative
agent(s) and shall serve as liaison to the contracting administrative
agent(s).
§ 189.11.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.11.080
001:654
4. Developers of low- and moderate-income units may assist in the
marketing of the affordable units in their respective developments
if so designated by the governing body of the Township.
5. Where the Township designates a developer to assist in the
marketing of the affordable units in the developer's development,
the Township shall enter into a contract with the developer to
administer some or all of the affordability controls and/or the
Affirmative Marketing Plan in accordance with this section, the
regulations of the Council on Affordable Housing pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:94 et seq. and the New Jersey Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26 et seq. If the
Township enters into such a contract, the Municipal Liaison shall
supervise the contracting developer's agent(s) and shall serve as
liaison to the developer's administrative agent(s).
6. Where the Township designates a developer to assist in the
marketing of the affordable units in the developer's development,
the costs of marketing the affordable units and administering the
affordability controls are to be the developer's responsibility, and
the requirement shall be a condition of the municipal Planning
Board or zoning board of approval.
L. Enforcement of Affordable Housing Regulations.
1. Administrative agent practices and procedures shall include, but
shall not necessarily be limited to, the following:
(a) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent.
(b) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates as set forth in
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made.
(d) Annual mailing to all owners of affordable dwelling units,
reminding them of the following notices and requirements:
[1] If the unit is owner-occupied, that the unit may be resold
only to a household that has been approved in advance and
in writing by the administrative agent.
§ 189.11.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.11.080
001:655
§ 189.12. Amendments.
[2] That no sale of the unit shall be lawful, unless approved in
advance and in writing by the administrative agent, and
that no sale shall be for a consideration greater than
regulated maximum permitted resale price, as determined
by the administrative agent.
[3] That no refinancing, equity loan, secured letter of credit,
or any other mortgage obligation or other debt secured by
the unit may be incurred except as approved in advance
and in writing by the administrative agent, and that at no
time will the administrative agent approve any debt, if
incurring the debt would make the total of all such debt
exceed 95% of the then applicable maximum permitted
resale price.
[4] That the owner of the unit shall at all times maintain the
unit as his or her principal place of residence, which shall
be defined as residing at the unit at least 260 days out of
each calendar year.
[5] That, except as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4vii, at no
time shall the owner of the unit lease or rent the unit to
any person or persons, except on a short-term hardship
basis, as approved in advance and in writing by the
administrative agent.
[6] That the maximum permitted rent chargeable to
affordable tenants is as stated in the notice required to be
posted in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)3, a copy
of which shall be enclosed, and that copies of all leases for
affordable rental units must be submitted annually to the
administrative agent.
2. Banks and other lending institutions are prohibited from issuing
any loan secured by owner-occupied real property subject to the
affordability controls set forth in this ordinance, if such loan would
be in excess of amounts permitted by the restriction documents
recorded in the deed or mortgage book in the county in which the
property is located.
M. Appeals. Appeals from all decisions of an administrative agent
appointed pursuant to this ordinance shall be filed in writing with the
Executive Director of the Agency.
N. Applicability of development regulations to developments containing
restricted units.
O. Unless otherwise specified herein, all other provisions and
requirements of Article VI Site Plan, and Article VII Subdivision, and of
this chapter, shall apply to all developments providing restricted units.
§ 189.11.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.12.010
001:656
§ 189.12.010. Power of Council.
The Township Council may, on its own motion, on a recommendation of the
Planning Board or on petition or other application, after public notice and
hearing, amend, supplement or change this chapter.
§ 189.12.020. Action by Planning Board.
All proposed changes of this chapter shall be referred by the Township
Council to the Planning Board for its recommendations. Failure of the
Planning Board to make its recommendations on any proposed change
within 35 days shall have the same effect as approval thereof.
§ 189.12.030. Effect of unfavorable report or protest.
In the event of an unfavorable report to the Township Council by the
Planning Board or of a protest petition filed with the Municipal Clerk and
signed by owners of 20% or more either of the area of the lots or land
included in the change or of the lots or land extending 200 feet in all
directions therefrom, inclusive of street space, such amendment shall not
become effective except by the favorable vote of 2/3 of all members of the
Township Council.
§ 189.13. Signs.
§ 189.13.010. Purpose. [Added 9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-26]
The following regulations are adopted to allow for the identification,
notification and advertisement of uses of property and of events within
the Township of Pequannock in a manner that provides information and
safe access for the pedestrian or the motoring public while eliminating
clutter and unreasonable distractions. These regulations seek to establish
an aesthetic approach to signage based on conformity, relationship to use,
location, and the structural context in which a sign is installed.
§ 189.13.020. Applicability. [Added 9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-26]
A. No temporary sign shall be installed unless in conformance with the
regulations and permit requirements established herein:
(1) Real estate and development signs. See Section 189.13.050.
(2) Building Construction signs. See Section 189.13.050.
(3) Temporary farm products for sale signs. See Section 189.13.050.
(4) Special sale, festivals and special event signs. See Section
189.13.050.
(5) Business promotional signs. See Section 189.13.050.
§ 189.12.010 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.13.020
001:657
B. No permanent sign, except as exempted specifically below, shall be
placed, painted, created, erected, or structurally modified unless in
conformance with the regulations and permit requirements established
herein.
(1) Permanent signs in residential zones associated with residences,
professions, and home occupations. See Section 189.13.060A.
(2) Permanent signs in business zones. See Section 189.13.060B.
(3) Permanent signs in industrial zones. See Section 189.13.060C.
(4) Permanent signs for institutional uses. See Section 189.13.060D.
(5) Permanent directional signs. See Section 189.13.060E.
C. The following kinds of signs are not regulated by this ordinance.
(1) Political signs, flags, emblems or insignia of a County, State or flag
of the United States provided that such flags shall not exceed 60
square feet and are not flown higher than 30 feet measured from
the ground.
(2) Official traffic control devices.
(3) Signs indicating the location of a court or public office, public park
or historic landmark.
(4) Signs required by law such as the posting of a license or permit.
(5) Directional signs indicating "entrance," "exit" or "one-way" that do
not exceed two square feet in area and are less than twenty-four
inches high.
(6) Decorative flags and balloons as defined herein.
D. Signs prohibited by this Ordinance.
(1) Billboards or signs posted off the premises of an activity are not
permitted in any zone of Pequannock Township, except where
permitted as a real estate directional sign or a special event sign.
(2) Flashing, intermittent intensity or revolving signs shall not be
permitted, nor shall any illumined sign of red, green, yellow, or any
light placed in a location or manner in which it could be mistaken
for a traffic signal or emergency vehicle.
(3) No person may erect a sign which is affixed to a fence, utility pole,
tree or natural object. No sign may be painted directly on the
exterior surface of a building or an accessory structure such as a
storage tank.
(4) All other non-defined signs and attention attracting devices, except
as permitted in Section 189.13.050J, which include streamers,
§ 189.13.020 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.13.020
001:658
§ 189.13.030. Definitions. [Added 9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-26]
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms and words set forth below shall
be defined as follows:
A-FRAME OR SANDWICH SIGN — An A-shaped temporary and easily
movable ground sign, usually two-sided, used for advertising commodities,
services or entertainment conducted upon the premises where the sign is
located.
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign no longer used for its original intent or a sign
on a vacant, unoccupied or abandoned property.
ADVERTISE — Giving, attempting to give, or intending to give any notice or
information, or any activity which gives, attempts to give, or intends to give
notice, information, or warning.
AIR DANCER — Sometimes called "Tube man," "Windy man," or "Fly guy"
is a man-like large inflatable device, having huge tube-like sleeves and used
to advertise a business.
ATTACHED SIGN — Any sign on or affixed to any exterior surface of
a building, provided such sign does not project beyond six inches from
strings of pennants, spinners, pinwheels, beacons, inflatables,
flashing signs or similar devices, are prohibited,
(5) No moveable signs shall be permitted except in conjunction with
Christmas Tree sales.
(6) It shall be unlawful to utilize a vehicle or trailer as a "structure" to
which a sign is attached or placed. Vehicles on which signs are
posted (placed, painted upon or erected) and which are parked
regularly in a conspicuous location are prohibited.
(7) Neon signs, that is, signs that are electric ignited neon gas signs
are prohibited.
(8) Electronic message centers/boards shall be prohibited in all
residential districts, all industrial districts and the C-1 Community
Business District.
(9) Window electronic message centers/boards shall be prohibited in
all districts within the Township.
(10) Sign illumination, using LED technology, shall be permitted as back
lighting when used as the light source for an electronic message
center/board, All other LED lightning shall be prohibited. Section
189.13.070 provides the regulations governing the use of LED
lighting.
(11) The use of neon or LED outlining of all signs is prohibited in all
districts within the Township.
§ 189.13.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.13.030
001:659
said exterior surface, and does not project past any exterior corner of the
building.
AWNING — A structure, either detached from or attached to and extending
from the enclosed portion of a building, and used principally to provide
shelter in connection with activities conducted in the principal building.
This definition includes but is not limited to fuel station, bank, office and
retail store canopies.
BALLOONS — Eighteen-inch individually displayed inflatables.
BANNER — Any temporary sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other
flexible material, with or without frames.
BILLBOARD SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location
other than the premises on which the sign is located.
BUILDING — Any permanent roofed enclosure including physically related
parts.
BUSINESS PROMOTIONAL DAYS — Specific days set apart during the
calendar year for business promotion activity.
CANOPY — A structure, either detached from or attached to and extending
from the enclosed portion of a building, and used principally to provide
shelter in connection with activities conducted in the principal building.
This definition includes but is not limited to fuel station, bank, office and
retail store canopies.
CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign, or portion of a sign, that is designed so that
characters, letters or illustrations can be changed or rearranged manually,
without altering the face or surface of the sign.
COMMERCIAL PROPERTY — The lot or land area associated with a
property that is used commercially or is commercially zoned.
DECORATIVE FLAG — An individual flag not exceeding 12 square feet that
is not a business sign and which displays no commercial message.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER/BOARD — An electronic or
electronically controlled message board, where scrolling or moving copy
changes are shown on the same message board or any sign which changes
the text of its copy electronically or by electronic control more than once
per hour.
ERECT — To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix and shall
also include the painting or lettering of any sign, insignia, or letters painted
or otherwise affixed to the outside wall of any building or structure or part
thereof.
FARM PRODUCTS — Any agricultural, horticultural, forest or other product
of the soil or water, but not limited to fruits, vegetables, eggs, dairy
products, meat and meat products, poultry and poultry products, fish and
fish products, grain and grain products, honey, nuts, maple products, apple
cider, fruit juices, ornamental or vegetable plants, and nursery products.
§ 189.13.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.13.030
001:660
FESTIVAL — It is an event that is held to celebrate a particular thing or
activity.
GLARE — Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to
reduce a viewer's ability to see, and in extreme cases causing momentary
blindness.
INFLATABLE — A large balloon or inflated material that is used to draw
attention to a commercial activity.
LUMEN — A unit of luminous flux. One footcandle is one lumen per square
foot. For the purposes of this chapter, the lumen-output value shall be the
initial lumen output ratings of a lamp.
LUMINAIRE — The complete lighting system, including the lamp, the
fixture and other parts.
ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY DAY PLAN — Business Promotion Plan that
sets forth a planned program for the installation of temporary business
signs.
PERMANENT SIGN — A sign intended to be used for a period which is
longer than 30 days.
SIGN — A structure or device which displays or intends to display any
name, identification, description, illustration or lettering, which is affixed
to, or painted on, or erected directly or indirectly upon a building, structure,
or piece or tract of land and which directs attention to an organization,
business, product, individual, or service.
SIGN AREA — The area of a sign shall be the entire display or total
gross advertising area within a single continuous rectangular perimeter
enclosing the extreme limit of such display space exclusive of any structural
or framing elements, provided however, and with the exception of a canopy,
the structural component surrounding the sign area shall not extend more
than one foot beyond any edge of the area permitted in the zone district.
The area of a sign with two faces that have no angle between shall be the
equivalent of the area of one of the faces.
SIGN FACE — The area or display surface used for the message.
SIGN HEIGHT — The height of any sign shall mean the distance between
the average grade of the site where the sign is located ground and the
highest structural component. Any change in a site's grade specifically
designed to increase the sign's height shall be included as part of the sign's
height.
SIGN, ANIMATED — Any sign which flashes, revolves, rotates or swings by
mechanical means or uses a change of lighting to depict action or to create
a special effect or scene.
SIGN, ATTACHED — An on premises sign that is attached to a building
wall or other surface. Awning signs, canopy signs, window signs, projecting
signs, suspended signs and wall signs shall be considered attached signage.
§ 189.13.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.13.030
001:661
SIGN, AWNING — A sign that is mounted to or painted on, or attached to
an awning, as defined in this chapter, that is otherwise permitted by this
chapter.
SIGN, AWNING (ON-PREMISES) — An on-premises attached sign
displayed, attached or incorporated into the surface of an architectural
projection from and supported by the exterior wall of a building and
composed of non-rigid material, and/or fabric or a supporting framework
that may be either permanent or retractable.
SIGN, BANNER — A temporary sign made of flexible material such as
canvas, sailcloth, plastic or waterproof paper.
SIGN, BILLBOARD — A sign which contains a commercial message and
which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered at a location other than the premises on which
the sign is located.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which specifically or directly calls attention
to a business or profession conducted or to a commodity, service or
entertainment sold or offered upon the premises where such a sign is
located, or to which it is affixed.
SIGN, CANOPY — A sign attached to a canopy, as defined in this chapter.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY — A sign or portion of a sign that is devoted
to and designed for manually or automatically changeable copy text and
graphics. Changeable copy signs do not include time, date and/or
temperature signs and electronic message signs as herein after defined.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION — A temporary sign erected on the premises on
which construction is taking place during the period of such construction,
indicating the names of architects, engineers, landscape architects,
contractors, or similar artisans and the owners, financial supporters,
sponsors and similar individuals, or firms having a role or interest with
respect to the structure or project.
SIGN, DEVELOPMENT — A temporary sign advertising the development,
lease or sale of property prior to development but subsequent to subdivision
or site plan approval by the appropriate Township Board,
SIGN, DIRECTORY — Signs listing the tenants or occupants of a building
or group of buildings, The respective professions or business activities may
also be included as part of the sign.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD — A sign, or portion of a sign, that
displays an electronic image and/or video, which may or may not include
text. Such signs include any sign, or portion of a sign, that uses changing
lights to form a sign message or messages or uses electronic means to
change the sign message. Electronic message boards include but are not
limited to signs known as Electronic Reader Boards, Electronic Message
Center Signs and commercial Electronic-Variable Message Signs. Electronic
Message signs are not considered flashing signs.
§ 189.13.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.13.030
001:662
SIGN, EMERGENCY, SAFETY, WARNING OR TRAFFIC — Any emergency,
safety, warning or traffic sign installed by or at the direction of a
governmental authority or with its approval.
SIGN, EXTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — A sign that features artificial
illumination from a light source which provides light directly onto the sign
face, or portion of the sign face, or its background, which light in then
reflected back to the viewer,
SIGN, FEATHER/TEARDROP — A banner sign, in the shape of a feather or
teardrop that is held taught by a spring tension and supported by a single
flexible pole.
SIGN, FLASHING — A sign in which the artificial light is not maintained
stationary and constant in intensity and/or color at all times.
SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION/HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — A sign
containing only the name and occupation or profession of a permitted home
occupation/home professional office.
SIGN, INFLATABLE — Any display or object capable of being expanded by
air or other gas and used on a temporary or permanent basis to advertise a
product or event.
SIGN, INFORMATION, DIRECTION AND IDENTIFICATION — A sign
containing information relating to direction and/or identification of a use
that is installed by or at the direction of a governmental authority or with
its approval. An Information, directional or Identification sign shall not
contain any commercial content other than a symbol, name or logo of the
establishment it serves.
SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED — A sign that features artificial
illumination from a light source located behind the sign face and which
transmits light through the sign face or portions of the sign face to the
viewer. Also known as backlit illumination. Use of exposed neon tubing and
similar lighting shall not be considered an internally illuminated sign.
SIGN, MENU BOARD — A sign with a changeable surface display area or
changeable message. It can also be in the form of an A frame sign.
SIGN, MOVABLE — A sign capable of being moved or relocated including
portable signs mounted on a chassis and wheels or on legs.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE — A sign which states the name or address, or both, of
the occupant of the premises where the sign is located.
SIGN, NEON — An illuminated sign containing a glass tube filled with neon
or phosphorus which is bent to form letters, symbols or other shapes.
SIGN, NON-CONFORMING — A legal sign existing at the effective date of
this ordinance which could no longer be constructed or installed under the
terms of this ordinance.
SIGN, POLITICAL — A temporary sign used in connection with a local, state
or national election or referendum.
§ 189.13.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.13.030
001:663
SIGN, PORTABLE — A sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, including only the following: A- frame signs and
sandwich board signs.
SIGN, PROFESSIONAL — A sign listing only the name, profession and/or
specialty of each practitioner.
SIGN, PROJECTING — A permanent sign which is affixed to a building at a
90° angle, and which extends not more than four feet beyond the surface to
which it is affixed.
SIGN, PUMP ISLAND CANOPY — A flush mounted sign on the vertical
surface and canopy, which is the ornamental or protective roof-like
structure erected above the pumps of a gasoline station.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — Any temporary sign displayed for the purpose of
offering for sale, lease or rent the property on which such sign is erected,
affixed or otherwise established.
SIGN, REPLACEMENT — A sign which replaces the message portion or
display area of a conforming sign but does alter the structural components.
This replacement does not require a sign permit.
SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD/A-FRAME — A single or double faced portable
sign that is intended to be used on a sidewalk or pedestrian way in front
of the business for which the commercial message is intended. Such a sign
shall have a maximum sign height of three feet with a maximum dimension
sign of two feet by three feet with a sign area not to exceed six square feet.
SIGN, SPECIAL EVENT — A sign advertising a public or quasi-public event
that is sponsored by a nonprofit or government agency.
SIGN, SPECIAL SALES AND EXHIBITIONS — A sign posted in conjunction
with a permitted special sale or exhibition.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign intended to be displayed for a short period of
time, as required by this chapter.
SIGN, VEHICLE — A sign affixed or painted on a vehicle or trailer and
parked at a specific location so that its primary purpose is as a commercial
message.
SIGN, WALL — An on-premises sign affixed to the wall of any building and
completely in contact with the building throughout its greatest dimension,
which does not extend beyond the main wall of the building more than 12
inches except in accordance with these regulations.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign which is affixed to the inside of any window or
glass portion of a door. Window signs occupying less than 50% of the glass
area are not regulated by this chapter.
STRUCTURE — Any building, edifice, construction, canopy, awning, device
or piece of work or other part thereof, or any combination of the related
parts.
USE — The occupation, activity, business operation, or industrial operation
maintained or engaged in by any person. Where a business or industrial
§ 189.13.030 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.13.030
001:664
building contains no partitions or dividing walls, the one or more uses
maintained or engaged therein shall be considered as one use. Where such
business or industrial building is divided by partitions or dividing walls, the
one or more uses maintained or engaged in, in each such division, shall each
be considered as one use.
WIND SOCK — A tapered, tubular cloth vane open at both ends and having
on the larger end a fixed ring pivoted to swing freely, to show the direction
of the wind and used to advertise a business.
§ 189.13.040. Procedures. [Added 9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-26]
It shall be unlawful for any person to create, erect, alter, place, or relocate
any sign as enumerated in Section 189.013.020A and 189.013.020B of this
chapter without obtaining a sign permit from the Planning Department and,
when required, a Construction Permit from the Construction Official.
A. Procedure for Temporary Signs. A temporary sign permit allowing the
posting of a temporary sign shall be issued by the Zoning Officer upon
demonstration that the sign will conform to the regulations enumerated
herein.
(1) Application. The application for a Temporary Sign Permit shall be
made on forms provided by the Planning Department and shall
contain the following information:
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and the
owner of the premises.
(b) Signature of owner granting permission to make application.
(c) Blueprints or ink drawings indicating the dimensions of the
sign.
(d) Drawing or description indicating where on the premises the
sign is to be installed.
(e) Adequate assurances that the Township will be held harmless
in the event that a temporary sign causes damages.
(f) The date on which a temporary sign will be installed or
removed or a 120 day plan indicating the installation and
removal of temporary signs for the current year.
(2) Fees.
(a) Political signs, farm product for sale signs, special event signs,
and real estate signs except for real estate "directional" signs
shall be assessed no fee for a temporary sign permit.
(b) Special sales signs and signs for festivals, exhibitions or shows
when permitted in conjunction with another permit or license
shall be assessed no additional fee.
§ 189.13.030 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.13.040
001:665
(c) The fee for a real estate open house directional sign permit
shall be $5.
(d) The fee for a temporary sign permit to install a new business
sign or promotional sign shall be $20.
(e) The fee for the filing of a one-hundred-twenty-day plan shall be
$50.
(3) The Zoning Officer shall issue a permit for conforming temporary
signs within seven business days of receiving a complete
application. The permit for a singular temporary sign installation
shall be valid for 30 days. The permit for the one-hundred-twentyday
plan permit shall be valid until December 31 of the year in
which the application is made.
B. Procedure for permanent signs. A sign permit allowing the erection of a
permanent attached sign or any alterations to the size, structural
components or the location of an existing attached sign is required and
shall be issued by the Zoning Officer, provided the sign size, structural
components, location and/or illumination meets the requirements of
this chapter.
A sign permit allowing the erection of a permanent freestanding sign or
any alterations to the size, structural components or the location of an
existing freestanding sign is required and shall be issued by the Zoning
Officer upon approval of a sign application by the Planning Board.
A sign permit allowing the erection of any permanent sign or any
alterations to the size, structural components or the location of an
existing sign, that does not meet the requirements of this chapter, is
required and shall be issued by the Zoning Officer, upon approval of a
sign application by the Planning Board.
(1) Application. The application for a sign permit for a permanent sign
shall be made upon forms provided by the Planning Department, in
duplicate, and shall contain or have attached the following material
or those from the list below as the Planning Director may require
for review:
(a) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and the
owner of the premises.
(b) Statement and signature of the Owner of the property
authorizing the application.
(c) Location of the premises where the sign is to be located.
(d) Blueprints or ink drawings indicating the dimensions of the
sign including framing and any structural components that will
be visible to the public.
§ 189.13.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.13.040
001:666
(e) A site plan indicating the location on the premises of any
proposed free standing sign and the distance to the roadway.
(f) A blueprint, photograph, or ink drawing drawn to scale
showing the proposed attached sign or canopy sign in relation
to the front facade of the building to which the sign will be
attached.
(g) A description of the color, construction techniques and
materials of the proposed sign.
(h) In the case of a new sign for a commercial property where
there are existing signs to remain, the applicant shall supply
sufficient information regarding the other signs and the
potential for additional tenants at the same location to make a
determination as to the conformity of the proposed sign.
(i) In the case of a new sign on a commercial property where
there are existing signs, the applicant shall provide
photographs showing that the proposed sign shall be
consistent with the existing signs.
(j) In the case of an application to erect a new free standing sign,
a sketch of the landscaping plan for the base of the sign is
required and shall include a listing of any species of plants
included on the plan.
(k) Upon approval of a sign permit, the applicant may be required
to make an additional application for a Construction Permit
and shall submit information, as needed, to insure compliance
with the relevant Construction Codes.
(l) Fees. An application for a Sign Permit for a permanent sign
shall include a fee calculated on the basis of $4 per square foot
of proposed signage plus $750 escrow fee, when Planning
Board approval is required.
(2) Review and determination.
(a) The Zoning Officer shall review an application for a proposed
sign to determine whether the application is complete and
whether the proposed sign will require any variances. After all
required application materials have been submitted, the
Zoning Officer will, within 30 days of having received a
complete application, schedule a hearing on the application
before the Planning Board or approve the sign if it is fully
compliant with the requirements of the Sign Ordinance.
(b) The Planning Board shall review and decide on applications for
new signs and sign variances and shall act on sign applications
within 45 days of the referral from the Zoning Officer. The
Planning Board shall apply the standards and guidelines
§ 189.13.040 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.13.040
001:667
§ 189.13.050. Sign regulations for temporary signs. [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-26]
established herein but may vary the standards in a case where,
because of an exceptional situation, strict application of the
standard would result in exceptional or practical difficulty.
(3) Appeal. An appeal from the decision of the Planning Board shall be
made directly to the court of competent jurisdiction. All appeals
shall be made in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
A. Real estate signs.
(1) "For sale/for lease/sold" signs -One sign per lot to advertise the sale
or rental of premises upon which the sign is located by the owner or
a real estate agent or broker. The sign is not to exceed an area of
six square feet in residential districts or 16 square feet in all other
districts. The sign shall be removed within seven days after
consummation of a sale or lease transaction.
(2) "Open house" sign - One sign, in addition to the "for sale/for lease/
sold" sign, may be placed on the subject property. The sign shall not
exceed six square feet in size in residential districts or 16 square
feet in all other districts.
(3) "Open house directional sign" - A maximum of two signs per open
house directional signs are permitted. Said directional signs must
be located within a Township right-of-way and are prohibited from
being located on private property.
(4) Realtors shall be required to obtain a yearly permit for placing "for
sale," "open house," and "open house directional" signs throughout
the Township of Pequannock. As properties are listed, throughout
the year, the Realtor is required to provide the Township Planning
Department with the locations of the open house and open house
directional signs. This information must be provided by Thursday,
12:00 noon, prior to the open house. For sale/for lease/sold signs
are exempt from Planning Department notification.
B. Land development signs - Signs advertising the sale of property or
structures in developments of two or more lots and signs advertising
the opening or construction of a new business shall be permitted for a
period of up to three months, or until the signing of the contract or
transaction of sale or lease of the last lot or structure in the
development, or until a Certificate of Occupancy is issued for a new
business, whichever event occurs last. Such signs are renewable for
cause, by the Construction Official. No such sign shall exceed 20 square
feet in size, and shall otherwise conform to the sign regulation of the
affected district. No such sign shall be permitted until subdivision and/
or site plan approval, as required, has been granted by the appropriate
Pequannock Township Board.
§ 189.13.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.13.050
001:668
C. "Building under construction" sign - One sign advertising a building
under construction that has received site plan approval and has been
issued a building permit. The sign shall be no larger than 12 square
feet. The sign shall be removed within five days after the issuance of the
Certificate of Occupancy or the installation of approved permanent
signs, whichever may be sooner.
D. A temporary farm products sale sign may be installed during the time
period that the products are for sale only. These signs shall not be
installed closer than 10 feet from the property line and shall not exceed
36 inches in height.
E. Festivals, Exhibitions or Show signs - One sign indicating the location of
a festival, exhibition or show is permitted at the location of the event,
one sign indicating the location of a festival, exhibition or show is
permitted off-site and one directional sign is permitted off site in
conjunction with a festival, exhibition or show license issued by the
Township Clerk. A festival, exhibition or show sign shall not exceed 12
square feet in area at locations that do not front on Route No. 23 or 24
square feet in area when posted along the highway. Any off-site sign
indicating the location of a festival, exhibition or show may be located
on an electronic message board in accordance with the LED
requirements of Section 189.13.070.
F. Special Sales - One sign is permitted in conjunction with a special sale.
This shall be a banner sign that is attached to a building and which does
not exceed 24 square feet in area.
G. An A-frame sign shall be permitted in conjunction with a Christmas
Tree sale provided that the area does not exceed 15 square feet (each
side), that it is placed five feet from the public right-of-way, and that it
does not obstruct visibility.
H. Special event signs - One sign per lot may be installed to announce any
educational, charitable, civic, religious or like event, for a consecutive
period not to exceed 30 days. No such sign shall exceed six square feet
in area, however special event signs posted along Route 23 shall be
limited in number to two signs, one on the northbound side and one on
the southbound side, and said signs shall not exceed 24 square feet.
Special event banners flown over the Turnpike shall not exceed 100
square feet. No special event sign shall be posted on any lot without
permission of the owner of that lot. The posting of these signs on Route
23 or the Turnpike requires the approval of the Planning Board.
I. Business Promotion Signs.
(1) Temporary business signs, wind socks, air dancers, feathers or
banners are permitted in the C-1 or downtown district. One banner
and one other temporary sign shall be permitted with the total area
of all temporary signs not to exceed 12 square feet. Temporary
business signs, wind socks, air dancers, feathers or banners are
permitted in the C-2, C-3 and C-4 Districts. One banner and one
§ 189.13.050 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.13.050
001:669
§ 189.13.060. Sign regulations for permanent signs. [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-26]
other temporary sign shall be permitted with the total area of all
temporary signs not to exceed 36 square feet.
(2) Banners and wind socks must be securely attached to the building
where the business being advertised is located. In the case of wind
socks, air dancers or feathers, these temporary signs must be
appropriately secured to the ground and located on the subject site
and not within the right-of-way of any roadway or within any sight
triangle.
(3) A temporary promotional business sign may be posted for a period
of 30 days unless it is part of an approved one-hundred-twenty-day
plan and, then, according to the plan.
(4) No business shall be permitted a temporary or promotional sign
installation for any time period in excess of 120 days in one year.
J. New Business Promotion - Strings of streamers or pennants, spinners,
wind socks, air dancers, feathers or similar devices are permitted to
advertise the opening of a new business. These devices may be
displayed for a period of 15 days beginning with the day of the opening.
In the case of wind socks, air dancers or feathers, these temporary
signs must be appropriately secured to the ground and located on the
subject site and not within the right-of-way of any roadway or within
any sight triangle.
A. Signs in Residential Districts.
(1) Permitted Signs: The following kinds of signs are permitted in
residential zone districts: a freestanding or attached sign
identifying the name of the occupant, an attached sign identifying a
permitted home occupation, an attached or free standing sign
identifying a professional use, and signs approved by the Planning
Board for a conditional use.
(2) No more than one permanent sign is permitted on any residentially
used lot.
(3) The maximum area for each kind of sign shall be as follows:
Name plate: two square feet.
Home occupation: two square feet.
Professional use: 12 square feet.
(4) A permanent sign in a residential zone, except a sign attached to a
mail box, shall not be closer than 10 feet to a property line and,
except for professional use signs, shall not exceed 36 inches in
§ 189.13.050 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.13.060
001:670
height. The height for a professional use sign shall not exceed 48
inches or four feet.
(5) Except for a conditional use, approved by the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment, no sign in residential areas shall be internally
lit.
B. Signs permitted in Business Zones.
(1) The C-1, or Downtown Business District.
(a) Signs permitted: free standing signs, projecting signs,
attached or awning signs, menu board signs, A frame or
sandwich signs, window signs and banners.
(b) Number of signs: Two signs, one of any category of sign listed
above, shall be permitted for each use. (Temporary signs and
window signs occupying less than 50% of the glass area are
exempt from this count.)
One permanent freestanding sign is permitted for each
commercial property and where there are many uses on said
property, the freestanding signage for each use must be
accommodated on one sign.
(c) Maximum area for each kind of sign:
[1] Freestanding: 15 square feet.
[2] Attached or awning: 24 square feet.
[3] Projecting: six square feet.
[4] Menu board: four square feet.
(d) No freestanding sign shall be closer than five feet from the
right-of-way or exceed a height of nine feet. A freestanding
sign shall be permitted only where there is a thirty-foot front
yard setback and where landscaping has been provided. The
determination as to adequate space and landscaping will be
made by the Planning Board during review of the sign
application.
(e) No attached sign or projecting sign shall be installed that
projects above the roof line of the structure, or facade to which
it is attached.
(f) With the exception of a sign advertising a business while it is
open, no sign shall be illuminated between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. Sign lighting shall not produce glare.
(g) One sandwich or A frame sign shall be permitted to be located
within the front yard setback or on the sidewalk immediately
adjacent to the corresponding commercial use, provided the
§ 189.13.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.13.060
001:671
sidewalk has a minimum width of five feet. Such a sign shall
have a maximum sign height of three feet with a maximum
dimension sign of two feet by three feet with a sign area not
to exceed six square feet. Such sign may be placed in the front
yard or on the sidewalk between 8:00 a.m. and dusk. Such
sign shall not be decorated with balloons, streamers, flags
or similar embellishments or be lighted with any electronic
devises.
(2) The C-2, C-3, C-4, or Highway Business Districts.
(a) The following kinds of signs are permitted in the Highway
Business Districts and the Regional Commercial Districts:
freestanding signs, attached or awning signs, electronic
message centers/board, and window signs and banners.
Electronic message boards are regulated by § 189.013.07 of
this Ordinance.
(b) One freestanding sign is permitted for each commercial
property and where there are many uses on said property, the
free-standing signage for each use must be accommodated on
one sign.
One attached sign or one awning sign is permitted for each
use. (Temporary signs and window signs up to 50% of the
window are not included in this count.)
(c) Sign Area.
[1] Freestanding signs.
Number of Uses Sign Area in Square Feet
1 to 4 50
5 or more 12 for each use provided
that no sign exceeds 144
square feet
[2] Attached or awning signs.
Area of Store Front
(square feet) Sign Area in Square Feet
0 to 600 40
601 to 1,000 50
1,001 to 2,000 50 or 5% of facade
whichever is larger
2,001 to 4,000 100 or 4% of facade
whichever is larger
§ 189.13.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.13.060
001:672
Area of Store Front
(square feet) Sign Area in Square Feet
4,001 to 6,000 160 or 3.5% of facade
whichever is larger
8,000 up 210
[3] Electronic message centers/boards are permitted in
conjunction with an attached or free standing sign but
must be accommodated so that the area of all signage does
not exceed the total area permitted. Electronic message
boards are regulated by § 189.013.07 of this Ordinance
and the following:
(i) The height of an electronic message center/board
shall not exceed three feet in height, nine feet in width
and
(ii) The area of the electronic message center/board shall
not exceed the permitted sign area or 18 square feet,
whichever is less.
(iii) The message center/board background shall be black
with light colored text, typically white, yellow or red.
(iv) If lighting is proposed, all freestanding signs shall be
internally illuminated. The minimum amount of light
required to allow the sign to be readable shall be used
and it shall be appropriate for the character of the site
and the surrounding land uses. The use of LED
lighting shall be in compliance with Section
189.13.070.
(d) The height of a free standing sign shall not exceed 24 feet and
the horizontal edge of the display area shall be a minimum of
seven feet from the ground. A free standing sign shall be set
back 10 feet from the public righ-of-way.
(e) The upper horizontal edge at an attached or awning sign shall
not be installed higher than the extent of the vertical wall to
which it is attached or 24 feet, whichever is less.
(f) Both internal and external sign lighting is permitted, however,
lighting shall not produce glare.
(3) Signs permitted at Gasoline Stations.
(a) The following kinds of signs are permitted at gas stations: freestanding
signs, attached or pump island canopy signs, signs
over entrance bays, customary lettering or other insignia
which are a structural part of the gasoline pump, a credit card
§ 189.13.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.13.060
001:673
sign, a sign indicating the location of a waste oil recycling
facility, and banner signs.
(b) The number of signs shall be limited as follows: one freestanding
sign, four attached signs, provided that three of these
are permitted only if attached to a pump island canopy, one
sign over each bay, one credit card sign, one oil recycling
facility sign and pump signs as required by law. Electronic
message boards are regulated by § 189.013.07 of this
Ordinance.
(c) The maximum size of signs permitted shall be limited as
follows:
[1] Free standing: 50 square feet.
[2] Attached: 20 square feet.
[3] Sign over bay: four square feet.
[4] Credit card: four square feet.
[5] Pump signs: as required by law.
[6] Oil recycling sign: four square feet.
(d) No free standing sign shall be located closer than five feet from
the right-of-way and no free standing sign shall exceed 24 feet
in height or shall have the lowest edge of the display area
closer than 10 feet from the ground.
(e) No attached sign shall be permitted that is higher than the
vertical wall to which it is attached.
(f) Internal and external lighting is permitted. LED lighting may
be used for the display of fuel prices in accordance with
Section 189.13.070.
(g) A credit card sign or a sign advertising the location of a waste
oil recycling facility may be attached to the building facade.
C. Signs permitted in Industrial Zone Districts.
(1) The following kinds of signs are permitted in Industrial Zone
Districts: free standing signs and attached signs.
(2) No more than one attached sign and one freestanding sign is
permitted for any use. No more than one freestanding sign is
permitted for each commercial property and where there is more
than one use on said property the freestanding signage for each
use must be accommodated on one sign.
(3) The area of signs in industrial districts shall be limited as follows:
(a) Freestanding: 40 square feet.
§ 189.13.060 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.13.060
001:674
(b) Attached sign: 40 square feet.
(4) No permanent sign shall be installed closer than 10 feet from the
property line or higher than the extent of the vertical wall.
(5) External and internal lighting is permitted in industrial zones,
however, no sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(6) Electronic message centers/boards are specifically prohibited.
D. Signs permitted for Institutional Uses.
(1) The kinds of signs that are permitted at schools and churches or at
other institutions of a public or quasi-public nature are as follows:
Free standing signs, attached signs, and changeable letter signs.
(2) The number of signs shall be limited as follows: One free standing
sign, and one changeable letter sign and one attached sign are
permitted on an institutional building.
(3) The size of signs permitted in conjunction with an institutional use
shall not exceed the following dimensions:
(a) Free standing: 20 square feet.
(b) Attached: 1% of building facade.
(c) A changeable letter sign shall not exceed nine square feet,
except if it is installed in conjunction with a free standing sign,
the total area of the free standing sign and changeable letter
sign shall not exceed 30 square feet.
(4) No freestanding signs shall exceed eight feet in height nor shall be
located closer than 20 feet to any property line. No attached sign
shall be installed such that the top edge is higher than 14 feet
measured from the ground.
(5) External and internal lighting is permitted, however, no sign shall
be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(6) Electronic message centers/boards are specifically prohibited.
E. Directional Signs.
(1) Signs that indicate the location of churches, schools or similar
institutional uses shall be allowed at a location other than that of
the institutional use provided that these signs are approved by the
Planning Board.
(2) A directional sign shall not exceed three square feet and shall not
be posted without permission of the owner of the property where
the sign will be installed.
§ 189.13.060 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.13.070
001:675
§ 189.13.070. Light Emitting Diode (LED) sign regulations. [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-26]
A. Movement, including flashing, scrolling or rotating so as to draw
attention, is prohibited.
B. The following regulations shall apply to an electronic message board:
(1) The background of the electronic message area shall be black.
(2) Electronic messages (text and logos) must be static or depicted for
a minimum of one hour.
(3) The electronic message area shall be restricted to the bottom
portion of the allowable sign.
(4) Electronic messages (text and logo) shall be of one color and shall
be red, green or amber in color.
(5) Animated signs, signs that change image signs, video signs or trivision
signs shall be prohibited.
(6) The maximum brightness levels for electronic message boards and
fuel price signs shall not exceed 0.2 foot-candles over ambient light
levels measured within 150 feet of the source.
(7) The owner/user shall reduce the level of brightness if determined
by the Township that the light level exceeds the levels specified.
(8) The electronic message area shall be programmed to dim and
brighten automatically in response to changes in ambient light.
(9) Prior to issuance of a permit for the sign, the applicant shall
provide written certification from the sign manufacturer or
installer that the light intensity has been preset to automatically
adjust the brightness to these levels or lower. Re-inspection and
recalibration may be periodically required by the Township in its
reasonable discretion, at the permittee's expense, to ensure that
the specified brightness levels are maintained at all times.
(10) The electronic message area shall be controlled electronically by a
computer or other similar device that has a manual override.
(11) The electronic message area, exclusive of the time and
temperature, shall be turned off at all times when the business or
use that it serves is closed. LED signs may remain on until 11:00
p.m. The display of time and temperature is exempt from this
requirement. LED signs that display fuel prices are exempt from
this requirement.
(12) The electronic message area shall either freeze or go blank in the
event of a malfunction.
§ 189.13.070 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.13.070
001:676
§ 189.13.080. Sign guidelines. [Added 9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-26]
(13)LED signs shall only be permitted in the C-2, C-3 and C-4 Zoning
Districts of the Township. LED signs in the C-1 District are only
permitted associated with the fuel pricing signs in accordance with
Section 189.13.070B(19).
(14)LED signs shall only be allowed as freestanding ground signs and
shall not be in addition to the number of permitted freestanding
signs.
(15) No LED sign shall be located within 100 feet of a residential use.
(16)LED signs shall only display promotional messages of a good or
service that is being offered at the place of business on the specific
site/lot that the sign is located, with the exception of
advertisements for community events and events for local
recreation and civic organizations.
(17) Only static messages may be provided on electronic message
centers/boards, exclusive of time and temperature which may
change as required. Such messages may only be changed every
hour.
(18) In all nonresidential districts, fuel prices on signs at gas stations
may be displayed in electronic numbers in lieu of changeable copy
numbers.
(19) Signs used to display fuel prices shall be for the exclusive use of the
display of fuel prices and not display any other type of message or
advertisement. Signs that display fuel prices may not change until a
change in the price of fuel has occurred. The fuel price displayed on
an electronic message board shall not scroll, move or flash and
must be static. The fuel prices shall not exceed 12 inches in height
in the C-2, C-3, and C-4 Districts and eight inches in the C-1
District. All fuel prices shall be either red or green in color.
A. Uniformity of signage on each lot.
B. Letters of adequate size to be legible at highway speeds.
C. Freestanding signs should be supported on a base designed to match
building materials and architectural design.
D. No more than two colors should be utilized on any one sign.
E. C-1 District Guidelines.
(a) Signs should be located at pedestrian level.
(b) Attached signs should be no more than 2 feet high and located
below the second floor level of the building.
§ 189.13.070 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.13.080
001:677
§ 189.13.090. Nonconforming signs and sign structures. [Added
9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-26]
§ 189.13.100. Sign maintenance. [Added 9-9-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-26]
If the Zoning Officer or Construction Official finds that a sign is in need of
repair due to graffiti, faded conditions, is without an insert or has broken
parts or because it is unsafe or insecure, the Zoning Officer or Construction
Official may cause sign maintenance or repair. In such instances, a notice
of violation will be mailed to the property owner, and where applicable, the
owner of the business. The responsible person will have 10 days to complete
the repair or such time as agreed to by the Zoning Officer and shall notify
the Zoning Officer as to when the repair has been accomplished. Failure to
complete the work or to notify the Zoning Officer within the specified time
frame will subject the responsible party to further legal action and fines as
described below.
§ 189.13.110. Enforcement. [Added 9-9-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-26]
(c) Wood and metal sign materials are recommended.
(d) External lighting is preferred as is a "colonial" style and colors.
(e) Replacement of nonconforming signs with conforming signs in
furtherance of improving the business district.
A. A sign that has been approved by the Planning Board and been issued a
building permit prior to the date of this Ordinance shall be a
nonconforming sign which may be repaired or replaced upon
demonstration to the Planning Director of such legal preexisting status.
B. A nonconforming sign or sign structure which is destroyed or damaged
by any casualty may be restored within three months after such
destruction or damage.
C. A nonconforming sign or sign structure shall be removed within 90 days
if the building containing the use to which the sign is accessory is
demolished or destroyed to an extent exceeding 50% of the building's
appraised value.
A. Permanent sign. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision
of the Sign Ordinance pertaining to Permanent Signs and failing to
abate said violation within the time frame agreed to by the Zoning
Officer is subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days at the discretion of the Court.
Every day that a violation continues after the expressed amount of time
provided to remedy the violation shall be deemed a separate offense.
B. Temporary signs. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating
any provision of this Sign Ordinance pertaining to Temporary Signs
shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500 nor less than $50 for the
§ 189.13.080 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.13.110
001:678
§ 189.14. Pipelines.
§ 189.14.010. Purpose. [Added 8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-13]
The purpose of this Ordinance is, to the extent permitted by State and
federal law, to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and
regulations for present and future pipelines related to the transportation of
oil and gas or other materials deemed hazardous by the Township through
the Township to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the
public; minimize the potential impact to property and persons; to the extent
permitted by law, provide for separation between residential uses and
incompatible pipeline uses; protect the quality of the environment; and
encourage the safe and orderly transport of oil and gas resources.
§ 189.14.020. Definitions. [Added 8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-13]
PIPELINE — All parts of those physical facilities which gas or oil move
in transportation, including but not limited to pipe, valves and other
appurtenance associated with the pipe, whether or not laid in public or
private easement or public or private right-of-way within the Township.
PIPELINE CORRIDOR — The pipeline pathway defined by rights-of-way and
easements in which the gas or oil pipelines are located, including rights-ofway
and easements over and through public or private property.
PIPELINE OPERATOR — Any person owning, operating or responsible for
operating a pipeline.
REGULATED PIPELINE — A pipeline that under federal and state rules
and regulations is not exempt from Township regulations and ordinances
regarding construction standards or reporting requirements.
UNREGULATED PIPELINE — A pipeline that under federal and state rules
and regulations is exempt from Township regulations and ordinances
regarding construction standards, safety standards or reporting
requirements.
§ 189.14.030. Pipeline information. [Added 8-22-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-13]
All pipeline construction shall require site plan approval from the
appropriate Township Board, in accordance with Section 189.10.030
entitled "Site plan approval." Site plan submission, as part of the required
landscape plan, shall include a revegetation and restoration plan.
first offense, $100 for the second offense, and $200 for the third and
any subsequent offense. Every day that a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate violation of this ordinance.
§ 189.13.110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.14.040
001:679
§ 189.14.040. Pipeline location. [Added 8-22-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-13]
A pipeline corridor shall be sited so as to avoid significant impacts to
resources (e.g., wetlands, floodplain, steep slopes/topography) to the
maximum extent feasible.
§ 189.14.050. Setback requirements. [Added 8-22-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-13]
§ 189.14.060. State and federal compliance. [Added 8-22-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-13]
The applicant shall comply with all applicable State and Federal regulations
and shall provide copies of the obtained State and/or Federal permits,
including proof of insurability, before initiating any work and maintain the
required permits throughout the duration of all operations. The applicant
shall notify the Township immediately of any suspension or revocation of the
required State and/or Federal permits. Upon notification of said suspension
or revocation the Township issued permits will hereby be deemed
suspended or revoked until State and/or Federal compliance.
§ 189.14.070. Emergency response plan. [Added 8-22-2017 by Ord.
No. 2017-13]
Prior to development, the applicant shall provide the Township Police
Department, Fire Department, Zoning Officer and Construction Official with
a copy of its Emergency Response Plan. Also, applicant/operator shall, at
its sole cost and expense, provide to the Township Police Department,
Fire Department, Zoning Officer and Construction Official, appropriate site
orientation with adequate information and yearly training on dealing with
any potential dangerous conditions that may result from development
activities.
§ 189.14.080. Pipeline corridor protection requirements. [Added
8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-13]
A. Pipeline corridor. No significant private land disturbance or
construction or expansion of structures is allowed within the pipeline
corridor.
1. The pipeline corridor shall be of sufficient width so as to provide,
within the pipeline, a thirty-foot setback from the edge of all
corridor boundaries.
2. The Zoning Officer and/or Construction Official may expand the
required setback when necessary due to site specific conditions
such as extraordinary land disturbance and topography.
3. Exemptions. Municipal rights-of-way.
§ 189.14.040 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.14.080
001:680
§ 189.14.090. Delivery hours. [Added 8-22-2017 by Ord. No.
2017-13]
Except in an emergency, materials, equipment, tools or pipes shall not be
delivered to or removed from a pipeline construction site through streets
within a residential zone between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
of the next day. Except in an emergency, materials, equipment, tools or
pipes shall not be delivered to or removed from a pipeline construction site
through streets within a residential zone on Saturday or Sunday.
§ 189.14.100. Post-installation requirements. [Added 8-22-2017 by
Ord. No. 2017-13]
After completion of back filling and compacting of the pipeline ditch, the
site shall be returned to grade where practical and the excess soil shall be
removed to an appropriate disposal site.
§ 189.14.110. Spills. [Added 8-22-2017 by Ord. No. 2017-13]
Where pipeline segments carrying hydrocarbon liquids pass through
sensitive resource areas (e.g., wetlands, floodplain, steep slopes/
topography) as identified by the project environmental impact statement,
provisions identified in the environmental impact statement shall be applied
to minimize the amount of liquids released into sensitive areas in the event
of a spill. The potential for damage in those areas shall be minimized by
considering spill volume, duration and trajectories in the selection of a
pipeline corridor. In addition, appropriate measures for spill containment
and clean up (e.g., catch basins to contain a spill) shall be included as part
of the required emergency response plan.
§ 189.14.120. Additional development standards. [Added 8-22-2017
by Ord. No. 2017-13]
A. The purpose of this section is to ensure that the pipeline pathway
defined by rights-of-way and easements is protected during
construction as required below:
1. No significant land disturbance or construction is allowed within
the defined right-of-way or easements transmission pipeline
corridors.
2. Pipeline corridors shall be identified and protected during
construction by placement of a temporary barricade and on-site
notices as approved by the Construction Official. Barricades and
on-site notices are subject to review by the Zoning Office and/or
Construction Official.
3. On sites that directly abut or are located within the pipeline
corridor, the Township shall verify that applicants and designees
have notified utilities before issuing development permits for land
disturbance or other significant work.
§ 189.14.080 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189.14.120
001:681
A. Performance bond. A two year performance bond shall be provided in
an amount sufficient to ensure completion of requirements of the
approved revegetation and restoration plan and shall be released upon
satisfactory completion and confirmation that the revegetation is
successful.
B. Inspection of Disturbed Areas. Disturbed areas shall be jointly
inspected by the applicant and Township representative 12 months
after completion of construction to assess the effectiveness of the
revegetation and restoration plan. This inspection shall continue on an
annual basis to monitor progress in returning the site to preconstruction
conditions or until additional monitoring is not deemed
necessary by the Township. Inspection results shall be submitted
annually to the Township and additional treatment of the site shall be
applied as deemed necessary by the Township.
C. Visual Compatibility. Above-ground sections of the pipeline and related
facilities, excepting those installed on a temporary basis for a testing
period not to exceed 12 months, shall be visually compatible with the
present and anticipated surroundings by use of any and all of the
following measures, where applicable: buffer strips; depressions,
natural and artificial; screen plantings and landscaping continually
maintained and camouflage and/or blending colors.
D. Noise. Proposed facilities shall be designed and housed so that the
noise generated by the facilities as measured at the property
boundaries, right-of-way or easement shall be equal to or below the
existing noise level of the surrounding area except under temporary
testing or emergency situations. Measures to reduce adverse impacts
(e.g. due to noise, vibration) to the maximum extent feasible shall be
used for facilities located adjacent to noise sensitive locations.
§ 189.14.120 PEQUANNOCK CODE § 189.14.120
001:682